Feud Between Top Dinkins Aides Is Seen Hurting Social Programs
A feud between two of the Dinkins administration's top officials has become so bitter that it has undermined the city's ability to forge coherent strategies on social issues like homelessness, say advocates for the poor, union leaders and some city officials.
The animosity between First Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel and Barbara J. Sabol, who heads the city's vast social services bureaucracy, has bubbled beneath the surface for more than a year.
But it recently erupted in a bitter exchange of memos, which were obtained by advocates for the homeless through a legally enforceable request under the Freedom of Information Act.


Looking Backward and Forward
Here it is, New Year's Day 1993.
A time to look backward and forward, which may be what your head feels like it's doing, simultaneously, right now.
A time to predict and prognosticate.
A time to dig out last year's predictions and prognostications.
Or, as David M. Kennedy, the Stanford University historian, was once quoted as saying, "It's a little like Jeane Dixon: Anything will come true someday, if only you wait long enough."


Art in Review
Peter Cain  Matthew Marks Gallery  980 Madison Avenue (near 78th Street)  Through Jan. 28
Peter Cain continues to cultivate his repertory of impeccably realistic, weirdly mutant automobiles, but to his detriment he has abandoned the profile view that dominated his first solo show two years ago in favor of the frontal approach.


Timothy S. Healy, 69, Dies; President of Public Library
The Rev.
Timothy S. Healy, a Jesuit priest who straddled the religious and secular life in a career that included the presidency of Georgetown University and finally leadership of the New York Public Library, died on Wednesday night after he collapsed at Newark International Airport.
He was 69.
Father Healy was returning from a vacation in Scottsdale, Ariz., when he was stricken.
He was taken to Elizabeth General Medical Center, where he was pronounced dead at 11:21 P.M.
His death was caused by a heart attack, said Nancy Donner, a spokeswoman for the library.


What's the Good of a Liberal Education Without Philosophy?
To the Editor:
Many New Yorkers will recall the stimulation and excitement they received from philosophy courses at City College, where philosophy has been a tradition.
The library of City College is named for Morris Raphael Cohen, the inspired philosophy teacher who taught generations of New Yorkers to use their powers of critical intelligence.


The Ball Drops and So Do Rangers
John Vanbiesbrouck's unsuccessful outings against the Buffalo Sabres reached a pinnacle tonight, when he allowed 5 goals on 12 shots and was pulled before the second period was 7 minutes old.
His uninspired performance set the stage for an 11-6 loss to the Sabres.


Year on Frozen Pond: Ch, Ch, Ch, Changes
In 1992, Eric Lindros refused to join the Quebec Nordiques, played in the Olympics for Canada, was traded to two teams on the same day, was the subject of lengthy arbitration dispute, signed with the Philadelphia Flyers for $3.5 million, got off to a good start, got heckled in Quebec by fans wearing baby diapers, suffered a knee injury, got accused of spitting beer at a woman in a bar called Koo-Koo Bananas, got arrested, got healthy and got injured again.
And he's not even the top candidate for Rookie of the Year in the National Hockey League.
That honor might go to Teemu Selanne, who came from Finland to play for Winnipeg, or to Joe Juneau, who came from the province of Quebec and the college of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute to play for the Boston Bruins.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.60
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.07
3.05
3.85
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.27
3.23
3.88
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.38
6.35
6.48
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.39
7.37
7.47
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.38
8.38
8.63
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.39
6.39
6.70
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


EMPIRE BLUE CROSS GRANTED HUGE RISE IN NEW YORK RATES
The Cuomo administration today granted a huge rate increase to Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the state's largest health insurer, presenting 1.4 million New Yorkers with rises in premiums that will average 25.5 percent.
The increases take effect immediately, although the official who announced them, the State Insurance Superintendent, Salvatore R. Curiale, said some portion might be rolled back if Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the State Legislature can agree on a state-financed bailout for Blue Cross.
The two have been negotiating for weeks without success.


A Disappointing 1992 for Many Global Investors
For most international investors, particularly those who placed their money in big, liquid foreign stock markets, 1992 promised much more than it delivered.
For the third straight year, home -- not East or West -- was mostly best for American investors.
Money was made overseas, of course, but the gains were confined to small markets whose currencies were either tied to the dollar, like Mexico's, or not tied to the German mark, like Switzerland's.


A Call for the Jurors to Take Bigger Roles in Trials
Jurors should be allowed to question witnesses and take notes, be kept better informed of trial developments and become much more active and appreciated participants in the legal process, according to a newly published study of the civil jury system.
According to the report, prepared by the Brookings Institution and the litigation section of the American Bar Association, the major problem with contemporary juries is not that they have been rendering irrational verdicts, or that their members are ill-equipped to hear complex cases, as some critics contend.
Instead, the study says, what is wrong is that juries are insufficiently respected and involved in the judicial system.


For Children Dulcie Leimbach
'Science Friday'  National Public Radio  (In New York, WNYC 820 AM and 93.9 FM)  Recommended ages: 6 and up  Today
Every Friday, National Public Radio presents an afternoon science program.
So if the children are home this first day of 1993, they could tune in and listen to a discussion of the top science stories of the last year.


Schott Asks for Time
Cincinnati Reds owner MARGE SCHOTT has asked baseball to give her until Jan. 25 to respond to preliminary findings in its investigation of the racial and ethnic slurs attributed to her, her lawyer said yesterday.


Sarajevans Jeer As U.N. Leader Urges Restraint
The United Nations Secretary General was jeered in the streets here today when he flew in to press his appeal to the Government not to open a military offensive to break the siege of Sarajevo.
Bystanders pounded their fists on the sides of the armored vehicle carrying the official, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and Cyrus R. Vance, the Secretary General's special envoy to the Balkans, as they drove through this city's shattered center.


The Giants Set Their Sights on Coughlin
The Giants have set no timetable, but they do know whom they want as their next head coach.
Tom Coughlin is the No. 1 candidate.
Dave Wannstedt is No. 2 and Bill Parcells is probably out of the picture.
The job became vacant Wednesday when General Manager George Young dismissed Ray Handley after two disappointing seasons.
Young said then that he had not decided on a successor, had not interviewed anyone and had not set up interviews with prospective coaches.
He also said he planned to interview more than one candidate.


Burtt Has Place to Play
Former N.B.A. guard STEVE BURTT, who played college ball at Iona, has joined the Oklahoma City Cavalry of the Continental Basketball Association after being banned for life from the Greek basketball league.
The Greek Basketball Association said Burtt was banned from the league after testing positive for use of cocaine and hashish. (AP)


Chronicle
Since he doesn't play golf or tennis, Senator WILLIAM S. COHEN, Republican of Maine, writes.
His eighth book and first mystery, "Murder in the Senate," published by Nan A. Talese/ Doubleday, appears today.
"Murder" is all about abuse of power, greed and cover-up on Capitol Hill.
Its co-author is THOMAS B. ALLEN, a former senior book editor for the National Geographic Society.


Fortunate in Hard Times, Many Remember Neediest
The recession that has clung to the New York area wrought some of the more disturbing images of 1992: the newly unemployed lining up at soup kitchens, children packed into homeless shelters, more mentally ill people wandering the streets because of cuts in government aid.
With the economy foundering, New York City often seemed to face one crisis after another, upsetting many people who draw strength from its dynamism.
Some reacted by committing themselves to helping the city through volunteer work or donations to charities like The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Monday about Smart Money magazine referred imprecisely to the attitude of Norman Pearlstine, an editorial director of the magazine, toward a competitor, Money magazine.
Mr.
Pearlstine said Smart Money, produced jointly by Dow Jones &amp; Company and the Hearst Corporation, did not intend to pursue the same audience as Money.


Corrections
Because of a production error, the television program listings scheduled for page B15 yesterday were omitted from some copies, and a duplicate of page D2 appeared in their place.
The Times regrets the inconvenience to readers.


Art in Review
'New Housing in Vienna' Parsons School of Design 2 West 13th Street Greenwich Village Through Jan. 15
Vienna lives -- and builds.
Contrary to popular belief, that city's cultural diet does not consist exclusively of walks around the Ring, visits to the Spanish Riding School and pilgrimages to the house of Freud.
Recent Viennese architecture offers an array of designs as rich as a display case at the Demel pastry shop, though the contents are far more wholesome.
No American city comes close to rivaling Vienna's recent achievement in the field of public housing, though to review this impressive record the visitor must quit the historic inner city and venture into the sprawling residential districts that extend in all directions outside the Ring.


New Year's Eve Stampede Kills 20 in Hong Kong


Judge Calls a Meeting to Try to Settle the N.F.L.'s Latest Labor Dispute
United States District Judge David Doty has asked representatives of the National Football League's owners and its players to meet with him Tuesday morning in Minneapolis in an attempt to settle the differences that have kept them from reaching a new labor agreement.
The league and the players have been without a collective bargaining pact since 1987, a season interrupted by a strike, and the primary obstacle to an accord has been the subject of free agency for the players.
Last week, the two sides appeared to have reached a tentative overall agreement, which stipulated that players would generally qualify for free agency after five years in the league.
But late Wednesday night, negotiations stalled over the amount of time a free agent would have in which to sign with a new team.


VANCE HEARTENED ON EVE OF PARLEY
As he prepared for the first full-scale conference since August of the belligerent parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cyrus R. Vance, a co-chairman of the international peace initiative based here, said he was heartened by several recent diplomatic developments, but he warned that the process "could blow up tomorrow."
Mr.
Vance, who is a special envoy representing the United Nations, and Lord Owen, representing the European Community, are convening a meeting here on Saturday of representatives of the factions involved in the Bosnian war.
The last such meeting, in London in August, established the Geneva mediation mechanism.


Barry M. Canterna, A Sculptor, Dies at 41
Barry Movsessian Canterna, a sculptor whose work has been shown at galleries in New York, San Francisco, Pittsburgh and Belgium, died on Wednesday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 41 years old.
Betty Lee Hunt, a friend, said he died of complications from AIDS.


And a Heck of an Engineer
Bobby Ross stores two items in his pocket: a rosary and scrap paper.
The rosary, which he will jingle in his palm like spare change, reminds him of the people he has lost.
And, on the paper, he will scribble notes to himself, either about a football nuance or whether to stop at an all-night convenience store for milk.
He is so serious, he scans the San Diego Chargers' practice field each afternoon for litter.
One day this week, he picked up three stray towels and an empty wrapper of chewing tobacco.
"I hate to see a trashy field, you see," he said.


On Stage, and Off
All in the Viewpoint
A tender family drama with a special appeal for Jewish audiences.
If you've seen Larry Kramer's play "The Destiny of Me," this may not be how you remember it.
If you haven't, however, this is how the Off Broadway grande dame, Lucille Lortel, wants you to think of it.


Books of The Times; A Novelist's Posthumous Meditation
The Furies By Janet Hobhouse 293 pages. Doubleday. $22.50.
Janet Hobhouse -- who died of cancer in 1991 at the age of 42 -- writes like a brilliant figure skater, carving long, looping, intricate patterns with her words, and dazzling the reader with her verbal spins and leaps.


Gates Orders a Revamping Of the C.I.A.'s File System
Robert M. Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, has ordered a sweeping overhaul of how the C.I.A. maintains its vast store of files, Government officials said today.
Mr.
Gates's order is a result of the embarrassment suffered by the Central Intelligence Agency over its role in the criminal investigation of an Atlanta branch of an Italian bank.
The Justice Department complained in the summer that the nation's prime intelligence and espionage agency failed to submit crucial information in the files about the bank, Banca Nazionale del Lavoro.


Clemency Given Jean Harris Leaves 3 Others Wondering
Like Jean S. Harris, Arlene Caris, a 64-year-old grandmother with white hair and pink cheeks, is a cooperative prisoner at the Bedford Hills Correctional Facility.
And like Mrs.
Harris, she was a hard worker with no criminal record until she shot and killed the man whose abuse she said she had endured for 14 years.
Unlike Mrs.
Harris, however, Mrs.
Caris did not receive clemency from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo this week.
She did not even get a hearing on her application for a commuted sentence. 'I'm Rehabilitated, Myself'
"I was glad for Jean," Mrs.
Caris said in a soft voice.
"But I was wondering when is it going to be my turn. Jean had an awful lot of publicity behind her, but the rest of us -- we're out of sight, out of mind."


The Art Market
Busy at the Guggenheim
The art world played hooky this week.
While museums and auction houses were officially open, their top brass was scattered from Colorado ski slopes to the Caribbean islands.
Many art galleries didn't even try to do business, finding it cheaper to close until the new year.
The Guggenheim is an exception.
Some of the museum's officials were working overtime, scrambling to find badly needed exhibition money while at the same time rearranging the exhibition schedule.


It's Time to Savor the First Tastes of Vintage '93; Art
In 1992, it was Jeff Koons's giant sculpture of a puppy made of flowers.
The front-runner for 1993 Art Pet of the Year may not be as flashy, but it's at least as charming: a 2,000-year-old granite crocodile from Egypt.
One of the latest acquisitions by the Metropolitan Museum of Art, it has been installed in a corner of the pool that surrounds the Temple of Dendur, as if floating on the water, waiting to chomp the wayward visitor.
The sculpture was made around the same time as the temple, which was dedicated to two young warriors who traditionally are thought to have drowned in the Nile River and may have been devoured by the crocodiles that populated it.
There's another connection between sculpture and architecture: in Ptolemaic and Roman Egypt, crocodiles were associated with Isis, to whom the temple is also dedicated.
The stone reptile has one pair of feet in the past and another in the future, stylistically speaking: the decorative patterns along its sides owe a debt to Pharoanic Egyptian art, while naturalistic touches like its bony spine, the furrows of flesh around its neck and its springy pose look forward to the realism of later Roman art.
Sculptures of crocodiles were commonplace in ancient Egypt, but this one is exceptionally large and handsomely carved.


American Students Trail Japanese and Taiwanese in Math Scores
A decade after American schools began efforts to improve math education in public schools, students still lag significantly behind their peers in Japan and Taiwan, according to a study in today's issue of Science magazine.
The results were distressing, the study said, given all the effort to make improvements in that field of study.
The results undoubtedly will heighten concern among corporations about American students' competitiveness with foreign students and the implications of mathematically deficient students on the nation's work force and global competitiveness.


METRO DIGEST
JEAN HARRIS IS ONE, BUT MANY REMAIN
While Governor Cuomo granted clemency to Jean Harris, who has served 12 years for the slaying of her lover, other women incarcerated for killing the men in their lives -- most of them in a single act of violence after years of brutal physical abuse -- remain behind bars.
In New York, as across the country, advocates for battered women are urging a re-evaluation of the harsh sentences usually given women who kill or assault the people who have abused them.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY EMPIRE GRANTED RATE INCREASE
The Cuomo administration granted a large rate increase to Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the state's largest health insurer, presenting 1.4 million New Yorkers -- many of whom cannot get coverage from commercial insurers -- with increases in premiums that will average 25.5 percent.
The increases are to take effect immediately, though hope of a state-financed bailout remains.
A1.
FEUD EXPLODES AT CITY HALL
A long simmering but little noted feud between two of the Dinkins administration's top officials -- First Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel and Barbara J. Sabol, who heads the city's vast social services bureaucracy -- has worsened.
Their relationship has become so bitter that it has undermined New York City's ability to forge strategies on social issues, advocates for the poor, union leaders and some city officials say.
A1.
FASTER ACTION ON POLICE COMPLAINTS
Raymond W. Kelly, the New York City Police Commissioner, announced that when civil lawsuits include charges of excessive force, false arrest, assault or other misconduct against the police, the Internal Affairs Bureau would immediately investigate.
B3.
HOUSING PROJECT TERRORIZED BY CRIMES
A series of crimes against women in a Brooklyn housing project have left residents fearful even to take out the garbage.
The police say that at least 11 women and girls in two buildings at the Sumner project in Bedford-Stuyvesant have been attacked by one to three men.
Six women were raped and sodomized, including three who were also robbed.
B3.
REGION HARSH QUESTIONS AFTER ABDUCTION
Almost a year before 9-year-old Katie Beers disappeared from the care of a family friend at a Long Island video arcade, her mother was warned by an official of the local Big Brothers organization that the friend's behavior sounded suspicious.
And amid other reports of the man's unfitness as a baby sitter, many of the divisions haunting the Beers family came to light.
B5.
PRIVATE AID BUFFERS STORM DAMAGE
Almost three weeks after a ferocious rainstorm swept into New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, Federal loans and grants have begun to trickle out to residents whose homes and property were damaged.
But the largest source of help so far has been private charity.
B5.
School for disabled students in a Hasidic community violates the constitutional separation of church and state, appeals court rules.
B5.
Our Towns by Kirk Johnson B5
Chronicle B4
Holiday Schedules B3
Parking Rules for 1993 B3
Neediest Cases B5


Parking in New York City; When the Rules Change in 1993
In addiiton to the days listed below, alternate-side rules are suspended every Wednesday and Saturday.
ALTERNATE-SIDE RULES SUSPENDED
Martin Luther King Jr.'s Birthday Mon., Jan. 18
Lincoln's Birthday Fri., Feb 12
Washington's Birthday Monday, Feb. 15
Eid al-Fitr, second and third days Thurs.-Fri., March 25-26
Passover, first day Tues., April 6
Holy Thursday Thursday, April 8
Good Friday Friday, April 9
Passover, seventh and eighth days Mon.-Tues., April 12-13
Holy Thursday (Orthodox) Thurs., April 15
Good Friday (Orthodox) Fri., April 16
Ascension Day Thurs., May 20
Shabuoth, second day Thurs., May 27
Eid al-Adha, second day Tues., June 1
Rosh ha-Shanah, first and second days Thurs.-Fri., Sept. 16-17
Succoth, first and second days Thur.-Fri., Sept. 30-Oct. 1
Shemini Atzereth Thurs., Oct. 7
Simchas Torah Fri., Oct. 8
Columbus Day (observed) Mon., Oct. 11
All Saints' Day Mon., Nov. 1
Election Day Tues., Nov. 2
Veterans Day Thurs., Nov. 11 SUNDAY PARKING RULES
New Year's Day Fri., Jan. 1
Memorial Day, Idul-Adha, first day Mon., May 31
Independence Day (observed) Mon., July 5
Labor Day Mon., Sept. 6
Thanksgiving Thurs., Nov. 25
Christmas Day (Observed) Fri., Dec. 24
Christmas Day Sat., Dec. 25


Here Come the Legends
CONNIE HAWKINS, a 1991 inductee into the Basketball Hall of Fame, will be among the big names participating in the fourth-annual Knicks Legends game, which will take place tomorrow afternoon at Madison Square Garden after the Knicks take on the Clippers.


Surgery for Jennings
World cross-country champion LYNN JENNINGS of the United States underwent emergency surgery yesterday in Durham, England, for removal of her appendix.


BUSH SEES VICTIMS OF SOMALI FAMINE
President Bush today had his first glimpse of the Somali famine that he has sent troops to ease when he visited a feeding center and toured a small hospital with sick and malnourished patients near the capital.
After seeing some of the needy and being briefed by aid workers as he walked through the center, Mr.
Bush said, "It's just very, very emotional for me to see it."


Review/Music; A Mournful but Thunderous Trombone Concerto
Christopher Rouse's Trombone Concerto, which received its world premiere in a performance by Leonard Slatkin leading the New York Philharmonic on Wednesday night in Avery Fisher Hall, is an obsessive work.
The trombone, an instrument typically associated with slides and energy and swing, with sudden moves and blasts, is here turned into an almost introspective isolate: lyrically mourning, then raging and mourning again.
At the beginning, it sings a low, two-note sigh that is almost a groan.
Slowly, as if through accumulated grief, that motif grows, supported by shimmers in the orchestra and given energy by roiling percussive thunder.
The work is distinctive, unsettling, yet structurally clear.
It was a Philharmonic commission for the orchestra's 150th anniversary and was given a stunningly virtuosic performance by Joseph Alessi, the principal trombonist.


A Single Market for Consumers Takes Effect Today in Europe
Today is the day a single market goes into effect in Western Europe, linking 345 million people in the 12 nations of the European Community by eliminating tariff and customs barriers.
Most steps to reach this goal have been taken gradually over the past five years, so it will be hard for most people to tell what has changed, and indeed, much has not changed.
Despite a European Parliament and an executive commission in Brussels, there is nothing resembling a European federal government, and a "United States of Europe" still seems a long way off.
What's Good for Business
The big benefit is to business.
Companies licensed to produce or sell financial services in one country can now do so in all the others; public-works contracts are to be offered to bidders in all countries, not just domestically.
But whether this works in practice remains to be seen.


It's Time to Savor the First Tastes of Vintage '93; Television
People planning to spend New Year's Day in bed, pondering resolutions already broken, might consider the advantages of the television remote.
Football fans, of course, can savor a year's worth of tackling fantasies.
Festivities get under way at 10 A.M. on CBS with a celebration of the Tournament of Roses Parade, which will then be carried on all three major networks at 11 A.M.
Bowl games running through the afternoon and into the evening include the Hall of Fame, Florida Citrus, Cotton, Blockbuster, Rose, Orange, Fiesta and the big one, on ABC at 8:30 P.M., Sugar.
All together now: Crunch!


INSIDE
Overwhelming Underwriting
Wall Street had by far its best year ever in 1992 in raising capital for corporations through new offerings of stock and debt securities.
Page D1.
Bail in 'Home Alone' Case
An Illinois couple, charged with abandonment after they went on vacation and left their children behind, were freed on bail.
Page A16.


Another Record Year for Wall St. Underwriters
The mergers were meager; the Dow Jones was dowdy; the trading was treacherous.
It was a mixed year for many parts of Wall Street.
Yet in its classic business of raising capital for companies, the underwritings were unbelievable.
Corporations sold a record $584.3 billion of securities in the United States' public markets in 1991.
And to Wall Street's surprise, the total for 1992 increased 45 percent, with $744.4 billion in debt and $101.6 billion in equity, according to data provided by the Securities Data Corporation.


It's Time to Savor the First Tastes of Vintage '93; Video
Can't find a cab?
Stay home and rent Jim Jarmusch's "Night on Earth" (newly released on video by New Line), a 1991 film of five droll, often hilarious vignettes set in and around taxis.
As these unconnected stories head east, from high-powered Los Angeles to frigid, boozy Helsinki, they display Mr.
Jarmusch's unmistakable wit, warmth and intelligence.
Winona Ryder is the least likely driver, a tiny woman with a dirt-smudged face who dreams of becoming a mechanic.
At a Los Angeles airport, she picks up an elegant agent, played by Gena Rowlands, and the two dish the dirt about problems with careers and men.
The fine acting is a treat that holds up throughout the film.


Chloethiel Woodard Smith, Architect, 82
Chloethiel Woodard Smith, a Washington architect who worked on the urban renewal of Southwest Washington and the creation of the new town of Reston, Va., in the 1960's, died on Wednesday at her home in Washington.
She was 82.
She died of cancer, said Sydney Kasper, a spokesman for the family.


Library President Dies


Saving on Dining
To the Editor:
In a time of concern about the economy, your Dec. 18 report on dining out in New York City on $50 a day misses two important tips for inexpensive quality dining.
The first is your Times card, which offers a 15 percent discount in establishments in the metropolitan area to prepaid subscribers to The Times.


Adele Bowers, Writer And a Publisher, 78
Adele Bowers, a short-story writer and publisher, died on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 78 years old.
She died of cancer, said her husband, Richard Bowers.


Czechoslovakia Breaks in Two, To Wide Regret
Against the wishes of many of its 15 million citizens, Czechoslovakia today split into two countries: Slovakia and the Czech Republic.
A multi-ethnic nation born at the end of World War I in the glow of pan-Slavic brotherhood, Czechoslovakia survived dismemberment by the Nazis and more than four decades of Communist rule only to fall apart after just three years of democracy.


Through the Fog to Scrape the Sky


Chinese Opera Troupe
The Wei Hai-ming Chinese Theater Troupe will perform as part of Lincoln Center and Con Edison's Community Holiday Festival tomorrow at 7:30 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall.
The troupe, accompanied by the Renaissance and Wen Chow Chinese Opera Societies, will present "Farewell to the King," a traditional Chinese opera based on the overthrow of the tyrannical Emperor Chin at the end of the Chin Dynasty (221-206 B. C.).
The performance is free but tickets are required.
Information: (212) 431-9740.


It's Time to Savor the First Tastes of Vintage '93; Architecture
New Year's Eve is for old acquaintance.
For New Year's Day, toast the shock of the new.
Startle yourself.
Pop a cork on the unfamiliar.
Cross a line.
Go to a part of New York City you've never visited before.
Spread out a subway map, close your eyes and point.
Take any bus to the end of the line.
Pretend you're going to the Cloisters in Fort Tryon Park for a cultural experience; then go to Inwood or Washington Heights and have a real one.
Finally take a ride on the Roosevelt Island tramway.
Buy a round-trip ticket to Newark just for the pleasure of gazing from the train window at a remarkable landscape: a De-Central Park of factories, cranes and highways rusting gracefully in New Jersey's corroded industrial wetlands.


Today's TV Listings And Dining Reviews
Some features ordinarily found in Weekend appear today in section A. Restaurant reviews and advertising are on pages A22-23.
Television listings are on page A28.


Constance Carpenter, 87, Actress In 'The King and I' on Broadway
Constance Carpenter, an actress whose roles included a starring performance opposite Yul Brynner in the original Broadway production of "The King and I," died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 87 and lived in Manhattan.
Miss Carpenter died of a stroke, said a friend, Rudy Toronto.


A Sort of Neighbor Remembers Shawn
To the Editor:
"William Shawn, 85, Is Dead; New Yorker's Gentle Despot" (front page, Dec. 9) reminded me of the time in 1972 that I noticed Mr.
Shawn's entry just above mine in Who's Who.


Chronicle
The names on QUEEN ELIZABETH II's New Year's Honor List are familiar in many necks of the woods.
Among them: the Oscar-winning actor ANTHONY HOPKINS, the political interviewer DAVID FROST and SHIRLEY WILLIAMS, a former Labor Party cabinet minister.
"It's so exciting, the most wonderful surprise that I have ever had," Mr.
Frost, 53, said by telephone from Yorkshire.
He had been awarded an O.B.E., Officer of the British Empire, at age 30, "and I never expected knighthood."


Talent, Mouth and Tradition, Not to Mention No. 1 and No. 2
Surrounded by the futuristic setting of the Louisiana Superdome, the two highest-ranked college football teams in the nation will attempt to win an unofficial national championship Friday night.
Their outlooks will be fashioned by old-style defensive priorities, but they will execute plays with the speed and complexity of the modern game.
The top-ranked Miami Hurricanes (11-0) and the second-ranked Crimson Tide of Alabama (12-0) will meet in the 59th Sugar Bowl Friday night with the Hurricanes hoping to complete an unprecedented achievement in college football.


'Now, Coach Coughlin, About the Bowl Game'
When Boston College defeated Penn State on Oct. 17, it was only the second victory by the Eagles in the two schools' 19-game series and thus a milestone in their ambitious program.
The Eagles' coach, Tom Coughlin, was asked at the time if this was the most significant triumph of his career, and everyone expected him to answer yes.
He was midway through his second season as B.C.'s coach and his overall record was just 8-7-1.


Sports of The Times; Funky Jacket Holds Hurricane Traditions
THE green jacket is back in Miami, no doubt offending all the other clothing in the closet with its aroma of six years' worth of defensive end.
"It's pretty funky," admitted Mark Caesar, the current custodian of the green jacket, which has been passed on since 1986 from Jerome Brown, who died this past summer, to a series of imposing Miami Hurricane defensive ends.


Laura Dubman Fratti, Pianist, Is Dead at 69
Laura Dubman Fratti, a child prodigy whose expertise as a classical pianist won her critical acclaim in the 1930's and 40's in San Francisco, New York and Paris, died on Wednesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 69.
Her husband, Mario Fratti, a playwright and a professor of Italian at Hunter College, said she died after kidney failure.
Mrs.
Fratti had cancer.


It's Time to Savor the First Tastes of Vintage '93; Dance
In dance lovers' minds, there is no substitute for live performance.
But at least one unusual exhibition can bring back fond memories about the dancegoing experience and also offer special insights into the field.
This is the last weekend that the Brooklyn Public Library in Park Slope will present "Cookie's Harlem," an illuminating look at the career of the tap-dancing star Charles (Cookie) Cook.
The current comeback of tap owes much to masters like Mr.
Cook, who taught both audiences and students through his virtuosity and artistry.
Slides and videotapes from the dancer's collection as well as photographs and other material relate the heyday of Harlem's great hoofers from 1925 to 1949.


Sounds Around Town
Caribbean Female Power
Riske, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at West Houston Street, SoHo, (212) 243-4940.
There's an old African saying familiar to Americans from a Talking Heads song: "The world moves on a woman's hips." Riske turns that metaphor into a musical reality with a French Caribbean beat.
Ten women command the stage, with three singers and two dancers, who also play conga, up front.
The group borrows from the sunny dance styles of compa and compa zouk, adding some Haitian "new generation" influences for spice.
Originally from Haiti, Riske is now based in Queens, but rarely plays clubs.
Don't wait until the next Caribbean street festival to catch this wave of female power.
Tickets: $16 at the door, with shows today at 11 P.M. and 1 A.M.
The Beret Type
Anna Domino, Fez, under the Time Cafe at 380 Lafayette Street, at Great Jones Street, East Village, (212) 533-2680.
Some people really seem at home wearing berets, especially French actresses, existential philosophers and chanteuses.
Anna Domino is a bit of all these things.
Having released several pensive recordings of modern rock balladry back in the new-wave era, when women were allowed to be weird, Ms.
Domino never reached the stardom some thought she would attain.
Her performance Saturday night should show if a few years' more world-weariness has enriched her talent.
Tickets: $6.
Doors open at 9 P.M.
Shows are at 9:30 and 11 P.M.
Chick Corea, Intensely
Chick Corea Akoustic Band + 2, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
Chick Corea can drift off into previously uncharted realms of pretentiousness, but this innovative pianist also revels in one of jazz's more intense performance styles.
Where he'll take his audience depends on his mood, but it's guaranteed to be new territory.
His companions for this weekend's musical journeys are John Patitucci, Bob Berg, Wallace Roney and Vinnie Colaiuta.
Tickets: $40 with a $5 miniumum at a table, or $25 with a one-drink minimum at the bar.
Shows at 9 P.M., 11:30 P.M. and 1:30 A.M. today and tomorrow; 9 and 11:30 P.M. on Sunday.


Guns vs. Talk: U.N. Is Pressing for Talks in Bosnia
By rejecting insistent Bosnian demands today that the United Nations either send soldiers to defend Sarajevo or let the Muslims there buy arms freely to do the job themselves, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali has upped the stakes for his organization in its efforts to resolve the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Throughout a long and difficult day of constant heckling by Sarajevo's residents, the Secretary General insisted over and over again that the only way forward was through negotiation and dialogue, not guns and fighting, and that the omens were good.


Corrections
A television review on Wednesday about that evening's CBS telecast of "The Kennedy Center Honors" misidentified the Broadway musical in which one a participant, Jodi Benson, appears.
It is "Crazy for You."


It's Time to Savor the First Tastes of Vintage '93; Pop and Jazz
Strumming guitars and pouring out their hearts, songwriters who sing haven't changed that much since the 1960's.
Or have they?
The newer guitar-strumming songwriters don't think earnestness is its own reward; they bring humor, ferocity and a touch of post-punk irony to their work.
A concert tomorrow night to benefit Projected Images, a Hudson County film archive, will include some performers who have been knocking around New York's club circuit while they hone their songs.
Freedy Johnston has made two superb albums; shifting Neil Young's three-chord bluntness to his own purposes, he sings in a high, lonesome voice about trying to find honesty in a disorienting world.
Jeff Buckley sings in a liquid tenor that recalls the sound of his father, Tim Buckley; whether he's singing old gospel or his own material, he pours on intensity.
And Bianca Miller, who gives herself middle names like Flystrip, takes the point of view of a sweetly savvy downtowner who has laughed off a lot of heartache and flimflam.
The concert begins at 8 P.M. at Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
Tickets: $8.


German Violence Worries Investors
The wave of violence against foreigners in Germany is beginning to affect the economy, scaring away investors and tourists and endangering Berlin's bid to attract the Olympic Games in 2000, business leaders say.
They are urging the Government to take stronger measures to combat the violence, which they say threatens efforts to pull Germany out of its recession.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CAMPBELL SOUP CO.  cleared a hurdle in its takeover bid for Arnotts Ltd. yesterday when a court in Australia decided against limiting its voting power in that country's largest cookie maker.


Loans Trickle to Residents After Heavy Storm Damage
Almost three weeks after a ferocious rainstorm swept the region, Federal loans and grants have begun to trickle out to residents whose homes and property were damaged.
But the largest source of help so far has been private charity.
As of Wednesday, 9,143 residents of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut had applied for some form of Federal help, Federal relief officials said.
The Small Business Administration had approved 21 low-interest loans, totaling $333,000, but it has disbursed only a part of the money, said Becky Brantley, a spokeswoman for the agency.
The agency had issued 5,274 applications in all and received back 402.


Abroad at Home; New Year Resolution
American policy toward Yugoslavia has taken a crucial turn.
As reported this week by David Binder of The New York Times, President Bush has warned Serbian leaders that if they extend their Bosnian onslaught to the mainly Albanian province of Kosovo, the United States will intervene.
"In the event of conflict in Kosovo caused by Serbian action," a message to President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia said, "the United States will be prepared to employ military force against the Serbs in Kosovo and in Serbia proper."


No Harm, No Foul? Oakley Is Fined $10,000
A $10,000 fine was levied yesterday against Charles Oakley by the National Basketball Association, infuriating Dave Checketts, the Knicks' president, who contended that the fine was unwarranted and unfair and suggested that the league was out to get Oakley.
The Knicks believe their reputation as an aggressive, physical team has caused the league office to scrutinize their players unfairly.
Checketts cited the fine, which the Knicks plan to appeal, as the latest example, especially since no foul was called by the officials on the play that led to yesterday's fine.


Finding an Economic System for a New Century
To the Editor:
Gar Alperovitz is correct that for nearly a century United States economic success has been associated with war or preparation for war (Op-Ed, Dec. 16).
This country has yet to prove it can sustain long-term economic success without depending on a permanent war industry.


Review/Art; Homelessness Explored At El Museo del Barrio
"House of Fire," 1 of the 12 installations by the Puerto Rican artist Antonio Martorell currently at El Museo del Barrio, is a skeletal structure of half-burned furniture parts and wooden planks charred black.
The nearby "White House" is fashioned entirely from sheets of pristine Japanese paper decorated with cut-out patterns that suggest both the lace of a communion dress and a popular childhood handicraft raised to a level of grandeur.
These two works embody the double-sided theme of homelessness and shelter at the heart of "A House for Us All," as Mr.
Martorell has titled his remarkable show, and they constitute popular art in the richest sense of that term.
Collaborative in nature, materially alluring, specific in their references but expansive in their implications, they have the kinds of complexity and vitality that the installation format was invented for, but that it has rarely achieved in New York in the last few years.





A Midlife Run Into a Roadblock
Happy New Year, Bonnie Frankel. This could be your decade.
In 1962, a 17-year-old daughter of the 50's, then Bonnie Levitt, seemingly sexy, dumb and uptight, enrolled at the junior college in Santa Monica, Calif.
She pulled straight D's and quit after three semesters.
But the five-year athletic eligibility clock had started ticking.


It's Time to Savor the First Tastes of Vintage '93; Film
"The Distinguished Gentleman" has a lot more credibility than most fish-out-of-water comedies, since it actually bothers to explain how a con man could find his way to Congress.
The facts add up, and they're funny, too.
Brisk direction by Jonathan Lynn and a savvy screenplay by Marty Kaplan give this a lot more snap than the average cookie-cutter comedy.
What's more, Eddie Murphy is back at the top of his form, and he's not being raw, either.
This film has some mildly raunchy moments, but by and large it's a holiday comedy that works for both adults and children.
"Leap of Faith" is worth recommending for a fine, intricate performance by Steve Martin in a non-comic role, and for other equally chancy touches, like a plot hinging on the question of religious faith.
As a fraudulent faith healer, Mr.
Martin holds this interestingly offbeat drama together until it quite literally reaches the point of no return.
Two bonuses: a jaunty performance by Debra Winger as the faith healer's jaded manager, and a glorious gospel score.


Holiday Storms Bring Hope of Drought Relief in Northern California
The Northern California mountains were blanketed with large amounts of snow again today, the second of two major winter storms in a week that have stranded thousands of holiday travelers and brought some hope of drought relief to California's usually grim water officials.
The Pacific storm system, expected to drop three to five feet of snow in the Sierra Nevada by Saturday afternoon, began to sweep in from the coast early today.
It followed an Alaskan storm system that caused blizzard conditions in the area earlier this week and shut down parts of Interstate 80 and Highway 50 for almost two days.
Snowfalls ranged up to eight feet in that storm.


New Year's Day
NEW YORK GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickups, recycling or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses, subways and Long Island Rail Road on Sunday schedules; Metro-North on holiday schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION N.J. Transit on Sunday schedule. CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on holiday schedule.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Named Davey Johnson, major league consultant and Bobby Valentine, advance scout and advisor for player personnel.
Basketball National Basketball Association  ATLANTA HAWKS -- Waived Morlon Wiley, guard.
Signed Alex Stivrins, forward.
CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Placed John Williams, center-forward, on the injured list.
Activated Jay Guidinger, center-forward, from the injured list.
Football  National Football League  HOUSTON OILERS -- Activated Doug Smith, defensive tackle, from the injured reserve list.
Released Joe Campbell, running back, from the practice squad.
Hockey  National Hockey League  HARTFORD WHALERS -- Recalled Joe Day, center, and Mario Gosselin, goaltender, from Springfield of the American Hockey League.


The Spoken Word
POETRY READING, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
A reading by the Downtown Divas, a group of 12 poets.
Tonight at 10.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.
SLIDE SHOW AND WALKING TOURS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street.
"How We Lived: Life in a New York City Tenement," a lecture and tour of a museum exhibition, Sunday at 11 A.M.; "Peddler's Pack," a walking tour of the Lower East Side, led by a costumed actor, at noon; "Searching for Your Roots?," a workshop in documenting family history, at 1 P.M.; "The Streets Where We Lived: A Multi-Ethnic Heritage Tour," at 2 P.M., and "House of Heritage," a slide show and lecture about the museum's history, at 3 P.M.
Slide shows and lectures: $4.
Walking tours: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Workshop: $10.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street.
"Images of Artists in the Studio: 17th- to 19th-Century Europe," by Jane Becker, tomorrow at 11 A.M.; "Arms and Armor," by Shirley Glubok, Sunday at 11 A.M.; "The Making of an Emperor: The Image of Caesar Augustus," by Susan Walker, Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $6; $3 for children and the elderly.
Information: (212) 535-7710.
GALLERY TALKS, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"Jean-Michel Basquiat," by Leslie Heiner, tomorrow at 2 P.M.; "The Geometric Tradition in American Art, 1930-1990," by Ms.
Heiner, tomorrow at 3:30 P.M.; "Photography: Expanding the Collection," by Ms.
Heiner, Sunday at 2 P.M.; "Agnes Martin," by Ms.
Heiner, Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3611.


A Benefit 'Barber'
The soprano Patricia Sayre Gray will sing the role of Rosina in the Amato Opera Theater's production of Rossini's "Barber of Seville" tomorrow at 2:30 P.M. at the company's theater, 319 Bowery, at Second Street, East Village.
The performance is a benefit for the Children's Organ Transplant Association, and proceeds will help cover the expenses of a heart transplant for Ms.
Gray's 9-month-old son, who was born with cardiac defects.
Tickets are $20 and are tax deductible.
The opera will also be performed tomorrow at 7:30 P.M. and Sunday at 2:30 P.M.
Tickets to regular performances are $16.
Information: (212) 228-8200.


Pair Who Left Children Home Alone Are Freed
The suburban couple who left their young children home alone while they vacationed in Mexico were released from jail today, and their lawyer met with reporters but offered no clues to explain their startling behavior.
David and Sharon Schoo, who were arrested Tuesday at O'Hare Airport as they returned from Acapulco, were released from Kane County Jail on bond of $5,000 apiece that was raised by Mrs.
Schoo's father, Joseph Kuzma.


It's Time to Savor the First Tastes of Vintage '93; Restaurants
Having survived the monthlong gastronomic gantlet, punctuated by a surfeit of bubbly and a shortage of sleep, you may seek a meal this weekend that is as soothing and restorative as an hourlong massage.
One dish that always brings me back to life is shepherd's pie, an Irish concoction that combines many of nature's most effective balms: mashed potatoes, ground meat (beef or lamb) and root vegetables.
Steaming hot, snow-capped with gratineed potatoes and requiring little masticatory effort, it is quintessential mom food.
When I need such nurturing there are three places I frequent.
One is Chelsea Central, the handsome publike restaurant on 10th Avenue and 23d Street in Chelsea; (212) 620-0230.
The chef, Paul Zweben, prefers braised lamb shanks as a base for his pie, rather than beef.
A nice touch is the addition of garlic to the mashed-potato crust sprinkled with Parmigiano Reggiano and chives ($18).


William H. Oldendorf, 67, Dies; Developed X-Ray Imaging Device
Dr.
William H. Oldendorf, a medical researcher whose work helped lead to the development of the CAT scan and magnetic resonance imaging technology, died in a Los Angeles hospital on Dec. 14.
He was 67 and lived in Los Angeles.
Dr.
Oldendorf, who was a professor of neurology and psychiatry at the Medical School of the University of California at Los Angeles and a senior medical investigator for the West Los Angeles Veterans Affairs Medical Center, died of complications of heart disease, said his wife, Stella.


Now Bowing Out, a Busy, Busy Bush
After 1,450 seamless days of state dinners, brush-fire wars, telephone diplomacy and global jet excursions, George Bush's Presidency is now rapidly winding down.
The same cannot be said of George Bush.
Just 20 days remain until Bill Clinton takes the inaugural oath and his Oval Office desk, a period at which most lame ducks have stopped governing and begun untangling their fishing reels.


Robert S. Lundberg, Architect, 77
Robert S. Lundberg, a partner in the New York City architectural and engineering firm of Haines Lundberg Wachler, died on Tuesday at Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 77 and lived in Bronxville.
Mr. Lundberg died of heart failure, said his son Guy.


Europe's Road to Unity
A "single market" takes effect in Western Europe today, linking 345 million people in the European Community's 12 nations by eliminating tariff and customs barriers.


Review/Photography; Portraits of a People As Seen by Outsiders
What's most striking about "400 Years of Native-American Portraits," the richly informative show at the New York Public Library, is the sheer variety of pictures it includes.
Many of these are familiar, from the earliest published images of American Indians, by the 16th-century Flemish engraver Johann Theodor de Bry, to the photographs made by Edward S. Curtis in the early years of this century.
Taken together, they offer an opportunity to trace how the popular image of Indians has changed over the years.
Artists and photographers have depicted American Indians with attitudes ranging from fascination and admiration to incomprehension.
In this they have reflected their audiences.
At different times, Indians have been seen as the rightful owners of the American land, actual or potential enemies, or proud and noble tribal people; often they have been regarded as all three at once.


Here Comes Conway
CURTIS CONWAY, a wide receiver and kick returner for Southern Cal, will forgo his senior year to make himself available for the National Football League draft. (AP)


Diner's Journal
A Village Bistro Reopens
Upon walking into the recently reopened La Gauloise in Greenwich Village, you would never guess that it had been closed for a year.
The dining room still has a languid, Gallic atmosphere, with its handsome Belle Epoque bar and cozy dining room with polished wood trim, mirrored panels and soft lighting.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
It was a mixed year for many parts of Wall Street, with the mergers meager and the Dow Jones dowdy.
But in the classic business of raising capital for corporations, the underwritings set another record as companies replaced high-interest debt they accumulated in the 1980's with lower-rate debt and equity.  [ D1. ]
On overseas exchanges, "it was an entirely forgettable year," said one analyst, reflecting the view of many.
True, there was money made on some stocks abroad.
But the gains were confined to small markets whose currencies were either tied to the dollar or at least
not
tied to the German mark.
For the third straight year, staying home turned out to be the best bet.  [ D1. ]


Kotite Can Rest Easy
NORMAN BRAMAN, owner of the Philadelphia Eagles, isn't going to be impatient getting to what he calls the "next plateau" for his team.


Ukraine, Stumbling Block at End of Nuclear Race
As President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia prepare to sign a treaty cutting deep into their nuclear arsenals, Ukraine has been tugging at their sleeves with an awkward and unwelcome question: How much will it cost to get rid of weapons of mass destruction, and who is going to foot the bill?
The United States has pledged $800 million to help the states of the former Soviet Union cope with the enormous task of dismantling a vast arsenal of chemical, nuclear and biological weapons.
But diplomats here say the cost is likely to be considerably greater.
In Moscow this week, a Ukrainian diplomat told reporters that the cost to Ukraine alone will be more than $1.5 billion, a sum he called on the international community to pay.
Some experts say that Ukraine's hesitations about renouncing its nuclear status are already casting a pall over the new Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, known as Start II, even before it is signed in Moscow this weekend.
Lisbon Pacts Await Approval
Concerns about costs, but also about Ukrainian security, are the main reasons the Ukrainian Parliament has balked at ratification of arms-reduction agreements reached earlier this year in Lisbon.
There, all four of the Soviet Union's successor states with nuclear weapons -- Russia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus -- agreed to abide by Start I, which made the first step toward cutting nuclear stockpiles.
But only Russia and the United States have actually ratified the treaty.
The parliaments of the other three republics have so far held off not only formal approval of Start I, but also ratification of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Until its neighbors agree to these accords, Russia has made it clear it will not begin the slow and costly process of eliminating its own nuclear arsenal.
Of the three, Ukraine has protested the loudest, calling the attention of both Russia and the West to what it considers the inequities of the financial burden of disarmament.
At a news conference in Moscow this week, Ukraine's Ambassador to Russia, Vladimir Kryshanovsky, said the "very complicated, very difficult economic situation in the Ukraine" was one of the obstacles to the Parliament's ratification of Start I and the non-proliferation treaty.
Most observers see the Ukrainian inaction as a bargaining tactic, designed to wrest greater pledges from both the West and Russia for assistance in helping convert to a non-nuclear status.
But there is also a parliamentary minority that wants to take another look at Ukraine's commitment to renounce nuclear weapons, as a way both of keeping the West's attention and of protecting itself against Russia.
The longer Ukraine withholds final approval of Start I and the treaty to halt the spread of nuclear weapons, the longer the shadow it will cast over the agreements to be signed in Moscow this weekend.
"If the Ukrainians don't ratify, then it is a show-stopper for both agreements," said one Western diplomat, referring to Start I and Start II.
As it is, President Yeltsin is likely to face a tough debate in the Russian Parliament over the ratification of Start II, perceived by some here as favoring the United States.
With 176 intercontinental missiles and 16 long-range Backfire bombers based in Ukrainian territory, the republic's participation is crucial to the dismantling of the old Soviet nuclear system.
Under the terms of Start I, most of these weapons would be transferred to Russia over the next seven years.
The rest would be removed under the non-proliferation pact.
Security, Environment, Trade
In Kiev this week, Dmytro Pavlychko, head of the Parliament's foreign affairs commission, said he was certain the Parliament would ratify Start I, but not before February.
He said the Parliament had three main concerns -- a commitment by nuclear powers to defend Ukraine against aggression, guarantees against environmental damage and the ability to trade directly with buyers of the nuclear material taken from missiles.
As it watches Russia sell the plutonium used in nuclear weapons to the United States for cash, Ukraine is seeking compensation for the nuclear material inside the missiles on its territory, either by selling it to Russia, or to the United States directly, or trading it for fuel for nuclear power stations.
Given the unknowns surrounding the technology required to dismantle weapons of mass destruction, no hard estimate can be made on how much it will cost either Russia or the United States to neutralize the 18,000 nuclear warheads due to be eliminated under Start I and II.
But the sum is expected to be considerable, and the burden is likely to be carried mainly by the United States, diplomats said.
"The assumption of the Russians is that this is a continuous process, and clearly there is an American interest involved here in seeing them maintain it," said one Western diplomat.
"I think we will be stunned by the costs of taking apart the arsenals built up on both sides."
The first installment of the American aid, $165 million, has been earmarked for several specific disarmament projects, including $25 million for a center to monitor the dismantling, $25 million for the disposal of chemical weapons, $50 million for special containers to transport radioactive material and $20 million for special railway cars.
The Ukraine has been promised $175 million to help pay for removing and transferring weapons to Russia.
Teams of American specialists have already visited Russia several times as advisers on nuclear-dismantling techniques.
But several important decisions remain, including whether to build just one center for storage and dismantling, and where the center or centers should be located.
With 20 intercontinental missile bases and about 850 multiple-warhead missiles, Russia has by far the largest arsenal of the former Soviet republics.
But these bases are widely dispersed within Russia and, unlike American bases, they are not equipped with storage facilities for nuclear warheads.
So the removal of the warheads requires that they be transported, often over long distances, and then stored in specially constructed warehouses as they await destruction.
--------------------
Talks Set for Washington
WASHINGTON, Dec. 31 (Reuters) -- Ukraine is sending a top official to Washington for talks with the Bush Administration and President-elect Clinton's team.
Deputy Foreign Minister Boris Tarasyuk will be in the capital Jan. 5-7, a Ukrainian Embassy spokesman, Dimitro Markov, said today.
He described Mr.
Tarasyuk, chairman of the Ukrainian Government's National Disarmament Committee, as "our top expert on nuclear disarmament, the man authorized by the President to negotiate on all the issues."


To Help Celebrate the Bright New Year
Here is a sampling of holiday events, including seasonal music, this weekend in New York City.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted (churches accept donations).
New Year's Day
"EIGHTH BOAR'S HEAD AND YULE LOG FESTIVAL," The Cathedral of St.
John the Divine (Episcopal), Amsterdam Avenue and 112th Street, Morningside Heights.
A celebration with mime, juggling, music, dance and drama: choirs, Omega Liturgical Dance Company, Pipes and Drums of the New York State Courts, Bouwerie Boys Morris Dancers and Ralph Lee's Mettawee River Theater Company. 3:30 P.M.
Also tomorrow at 3:30 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12 and $18 general admission; students, children and the elderly, $6 and $9 general admission ($17.50 for reserved seats).
Information: (212) 662-2133.
19TH NEW YEAR'S DAY MARATHON READING, St.
Mark's Church in the Bowery, Second Avenue and 10th Street, East Village.
Readings and performances by poets, musicians, artists and dancers, among them Allen Ginsberg, Richard Foreman, Penny Arcade, Jim Carroll, Gregory Corso, Mabou Mines and Tuli Kupferberg.
Presented by the Poetry Project. 2 P.M. to midnight.
Admission: $15.
Information: (212) 674-0910.
NEW YORK COLISEUM ANTIQUES SHOW, Columbus Circle, 59th Street and Central Park West.
Featuring antique quilts, furniture, jewelry, clothing and other items. 1 to 7 P.M.
Also tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M., and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $10 (good for all three days.) Information: (201) 384-0010.
NOHO WALK, sponsored by Bernie's New York. 1 P.M.
Meets in front of the Puck Building, East Houston and Lafayette Streets, SoHo.
Fee: $5.
Information: (212) 655-1883.
CHURCH OF ST.
MARY THE VIRGIN (Episcopal), 145 West 46th Street.
Missa Cunctipotens Genitor Deus (Gregorian chant); Shaw's "Coventry Carol"; works by Pachelbel and Bonnett.
Kyler Brown, organist and director. 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 869-5830.
CHURCH OF THE HOLY FAMILY (Roman Catholic), 315 East 47th Street.
Faure's Messe Basse; Handel's "He Shall Feed His Flock"; female choir, Christopher Babcock, organist and director.
Noon.
Information: (212) 753-3401.
"THE GIFTS OF THE MAGI," Lambs Little Theater, 130 West 44th Street.
A musical based on the O. Henry story; music by Randy Courts; lyrics by Mark St.
Germain and Mr.
Courts; directed by Scott Harris. 8 P.M.
Also tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 997-1780.
"A CHRISTMAS CAROL," Broadhurst Theater, 235 West 44th Street.
A one-man adaptation of Dickens's classic by Patrick Stewart. 8 P.M.
Through Sunday.
Shows tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
All shows are sold out, but standing room tickets, at $15, are available on the day of the performance.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"THE CHORUS TREE," South Street Seaport Market Square, Fulton Street between Water and South Streets, lower Manhattan.
Holiday songs by the St.
Cecilia Chorus in a Christmas tree formation; David Randolph, conductor.
Performances: today through Sunday at 3 and 4 P.M.
Information: (212) 732-7678.
Tomorrow
"19th-CENTURY CHRISTMAS COTILLION," Historic Richmondtown, Third County Courthouse, 441 Clarke Avenue, Richmondtown, S.I.
Dancing, live music, refreshments.
Sponsored by the Staten Island Historical Society. 8 to 11 P.M.
Admission: $16; $12 for members of the society.
Reservations: (718) 351-1611.
NEW YEAR'S HIKE, Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A hike through the park, led by the Urban Park Rangers, to see how its inhabitants adapt to winter. 2 P.M.
Meets at the Prospect Park Boathouse; enter at Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue.
Information: (718) 287-3400.
Sunday
GLACIER WALK, High Rock Park, Staten Island.
A discussion of the ways in which glaciers shaped the city's landscape, led by the Urban Park Rangers. 2 P.M.
Information: (718) 667-6042.
CHURCH OF THE HOLY APOSTLES (Episcopal), at General Theological Seminary, 175 Ninth Avenue, at 20th Street, Chelsea.
A calypso work, "The Virgin Had a Baby Boy"; Thiman's "Donkey Plod and Mary Ride"; a chant, "Cum Jubilo"; works by Balbastre and Purvis.
Donald Joyce, director. 11 A.M.
Information: (212) 807-6799.
CHURCH OF THE HOLY FAMILY (Roman Catholic), 315 East 47th Street, Clinton.
Victoria's "O Magnum Mysterium"; Rorem's "Surge Illuminare"; Howells's "Here Is the Little Door." Choir; Christopher Babcock, organist and director.
Noon.
Information: (212) 753-3401.
CORPUS CHRISTI CHURCH (Roman Catholic), 529 West 121st Street, Morningside Heights.
A Festival of Lessons and Carols with works by William Byrd and Peter Maxwell Davies.
Choir; Louise Basbas, director. 4 P.M.
Information: (212) 666-0675.
ST.
THOMAS CHURCH (Episcopal), Fifth Avenue at 53d Street.
Victoria's "O Regem Coeli"; Tomkins's "Remember Me, O Lord." 11 A.M.
Morley's "Festal Evensong"; Batten's "Short Service for Men's Voices"; Handel's "Ante Luciferum Genitus." Choir; Gerre Hancock, organist and master of choristers. 4 P.M.
Information: (212) 757-7013.


Brazil's New President to Push Job Growth
Two days after assuming office, Brazil's new President, Itamar Franco, unveiled his economic program today, a package that probably will slow the country's move toward open, deregulated markets and an economy based on a low inflation rate.
Concern for Brazil's 60 million desperately poor by the 62-year-old President, who assumed office after corruption charges forced the resignation of Fernando Collor de Mello, came through loudly in the economic program.


It's Time to Savor the First Tastes of Vintage '93; Classical Music
If the new year can continue to offer performances of the quality of Leonie Rysanek's (she can be seen in Janacek's "Jenufa" at the Metropolitan Opera tomorrow night), it will be a rare year indeed.
Ms.
Rysanek gives the central role of the stepmother an empathetic grimness: she murders an infant; we feel compassion.
Her scenes with Gabriela Benackova as Jenufa turn the gargantuan hall of the Met into a chamber-opera theater.
In fact, if her performance were not so unusual I would have recommended something quite different for this weekend: that for once, in honor of the new year, we all stay home, take out our fiddles, open the piano keyboards, see if any reeds are still intact in those sealed instrument cases, and try to make music ourselves.


'93 Bowls: Divide and Sponsor
Tonight's game between Miami and Alabama for the putative national championship is the most significant Sugar Bowl since 1983, when second-ranked Penn State defeated top-ranked Georgia, 27-23.
Deciding whether Miami or Alabama will emerge as No. 1 is important, even crucial -- at least to plenty of folks in Miami and Tuscaloosa.


Charter Medical and Texas Settle a Case
The Charter Medical Corporation and the Attorney General of Texas disclosed a settlement yesterday growing out of a state investigation of practices in the private psychiatric hospital industry.
As part of the agreement, the company, based in Macon, Ga., agreed to pay $550,000 and provide $1.6 million in charity mental health services to the public.
The company also agreed to refrain from a series of activities including placing Charter counselors in public schools and admitting any patient without a prior evaluation by a psychiatrist.


The Islanders Go Meekly Into the Night
Blues 5, Islanders 1
ST.
LOUIS, Dec. 31 (AP) -- Brett Hull, stopped on a first-period penalty shot, still scored twice and Curtis Joseph stopped 40 shots tonight as the St.
Louis Blues beat the New York Islanders, 5-1.
The victory snapped a three-game home losing streak for the Blues, while the Islanders lost their second straight.


First-Time Jobless Claims Decline by 28,000
First-time claims for unemployment benefits tumbled 28,000 in the most recent four-week reporting period, Labor Department figures indicated today.
The average number of claims for the period fell to the lowest level since late 1989.
The unexpectedly sharp decline, which followed a week in which storms kept many workers from claims offices, was regarded by many as evidence that the economy's growing strength was spreading into the job market.


Back to the Farm to Seek a Future
MANY of Allyn Hurlburt Jr.'s memories of high school in rural Connecticut during World War II revolve around Clarke B. Wood: how Mr.
Wood took the vo-ag classes on field trips in his old car, barreling over the hills, and how he'd bring students home for dinner with his family.
Mr.
Wood built the vocational-agriculture department at Housatonic Valley Regional High School and influenced generations of farmers.


Art in Review
Frank Majore Holly Solomon Gallery 724 Fifth Avenue (near 57th Street) Through tomorrow
The mechanisms of glamour are at the heart of Frank Majore's photographs.
Mr.
Majore borrows props and lighting techniques from fashion photography, advertising and movies to create still lifes that evoke a kind of sophisticated stylishness.
In one picture here a cigarette is perched on the lip of a glass ashtray whose shape suggests 1950's biomorphic design; that is placed against a background of stylized blue shadows.
This show includes recent work of this sort, as well as pictures, from a decade ago, based on Egyptian themes like mummies, pyramids and the Sphinx.


Series of Crimes Brings Fear to Brooklyn Project
As Lucia Charles got into an elevator at the Sumner Housing project on a cold December morning, a man followed her.
Quickly, he put on a ski mask, took out a long knife and demanded money and jewelry.
She begged him not to kill her.
"I told him I would give him anything he wanted and asked him not to hurt me because I have two small children," said Mrs.
Charles.
"Thank God he didn't touch me. I don't know what I would have done."


Art in Review
Luis Gordillo  Malborough Gallery  40 West 57th Street  Manhattan Through tomorrow
This big, splashy but chilly show of paintings is the first American solo appearance for the 59-year-old Luis Gordillo, who has exhibited widely in his native Spain.
Thirty years ago he figured in the development of Spanish Pop art, and Pop, filtered through biomorphic Surrealism, remains at the fore in his current work.


No Headline
I was glad for Jean.
But I was wondering when is it going to be my turn.
Jean had an awful lot of publicity behind her, but the rest of us -- we're out of sight, out of mind. -- ARLENE CARIS, who, like Jean S. Harris, is in a New York prison for killing her lover.  [ A1:3. ]


Quixotic Grammarian
To the Editor:
Paul Roche, poet in residence at Centenary College in New Jersey, subject of a Dec. 18 feature article, is to be applauded for his efforts to defend English grammar against slovenliness and imprecision.
However, in insisting that "I shall" rather than "I will" is the only correct form of the future tense, he is fighting a battle lost centuries ago.


2 Men Arrested In Fatal Shooting Of Bronx Grocer
Two suspects were arrested last night in the fatal shooting of a bodega owner who was accosted in the lobby of his Bronx apartment house Dec. 22, then forced into his apartment where he was mortally wounded protecting his family and resisting a robbery, the police reported.
Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman, identified the suspects as Milton Alex Liriano, 17 years old, and Jose Alberto Gonzalez, 20, both natives of the Dominican Republic who live in Tremont, the Bronx.


TV Weekend; A 'Tosca' Performed On Actual Location
Opera is bigger than life.
It is lavish, if not excessive.
Doubters are urged to watch the PBS "Great Performances" presentation of Giacomo Puccini's "Tosca," which will be broadcast on Channel 13 this afternoon at 12:30 and Sunday at 10 P.M.
The production was conceived and produced by Andrea Andermann.
"Tosca" especially lends itself to sumptuousness, as Metropolitan Opera audiences keep discovering with the Franco Zeffirelli production that unfailingly evokes gasps either of admiration or horror, depending on your tolerance for sheer massiveness.
Coming out of the verism school of Italian directors, Mr.
Zeffirelli is a stickler for authentic detail.


U.S. Appeals Court Reverses Ruling in Law Firm Bias Case
A Federal appeals court ruled Wednesday that a Philadelephia law firm did not engage in sex discrimination when it denied partnership to a woman in 1989.
The decision by a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, in Philadelphia, reverses a 1990 ruling by Federal District Judge James McGirr Kelly, who found the firm of Wolf, Block, Schorr &amp; Solis-Cohen guilty of discrimination against Nancy O'Mara Ezold.
Ms.
Ezold was a litigation associate at the firm from 1983 to 1989.


Hundreds Block Greenwich Village Street
A group of holiday revelers estimated at between 200 and 300 people poured into the street in Greenwich Village early this morning, flinging bottles and blocking traffic in what police described as one of the few major disorderly incidents marking New Year's.
Two people were arrested for disorderly conduct, the police said, and parts of Bleecker Street were left covered in a sheet of shattered glass.
In the East Village, the police reported 11 arrests for disorderly conduct in Tompkins Square Park early this morning after a curfew was violated, but no other details were immediately available.


It's Time to Savor the First Tastes of Vintage '93; Recordings
Some compact-disk collectors find it odd, even unseemly, to tie up a CD player with recordings made in the days of 78-rpm shellacs.
If you are among those puzzled by others' fascination with old recordings, perhaps it's time to append a line to your New Year's resolution list.
Promising yourself a few hours to compare the relative merits of modern, mainstream performances, captured in pristine digital sound, with those of original, insightful and often audacious interpretations from decades past, however sonically tarnished they may seem.


Brasilia Journal; A Slaying Stuns Brazil: It's Right Out of the Soaps
As political history was being written here this week by the impeachment trial and resignation of President Fernando Collor de Mello, the process was almost upstaged by another drama: A beautiful soap opera actress was killed on Monday night and the man who plays her jealous boyfriend in the series confessed to the killing.
Newsstands could not stock enough papers.
Television stations were flooded with phone calls.
As many newspaper pages were devoted to the crime as to the inauguration of the new President, Itamar Franco.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that are to close soon.
If hours are not listed for today, the shows are closed for New Year's Day.
Closing This Weekend
"THE SECRET GARDEN," St.
James Theater, 246 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
A musical based on a novel by Frances Hodgson Burnett; with book and lyrics by Marsha Norman and music by Lucy Simon; directed by Susan H. Schulman.
Through Sunday.
Tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $30 to $60.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"LOST IN YONKERS," Richard Rodgers Theater, 226 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
The Tony Award-winning comedy by Neil Simon about two brothers left in their grandmother's care; directed by Gene Saks; featuring Didi Conn and Isa Thomas.
Through Sunday.
Tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $47.50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"CATSKILLS ON BROADWAY," Lunt-Fontanne Theater, 205 West 46th Street, Manhattan.
Performances by the comedians Freddie Roman, Dick Capri, Mal Z. Lawrence and Louise DuArt.
Through Sunday.
Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $45.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"WOYZECK," Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
Drama by George Buchner about a jealous soldier who murders his common-law wife; directed by JoAnne Akalaitis.
Through Sunday.
Today at 8 P.M.; and tomorrow and Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 598-7150.
"THE NUTCRACKER," New York State Theater, Lincoln Center.
Through Sunday.
Tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 1 and 5 P.M.
Standing room tickets only, at $10, are available on the morning of the performances.
Information: (212) 870-5570.
"A MY NAME IS STILL ALICE," Second Stage Theater, Broadway at 76th Street.
A sequel to the 1984 musical about five women, conceived and directed by Joan Micklin Silver and Julianne Boyd.
Through Sunday.
Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $32.50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"DISNEY IN WONDERLAND: THE SILENT CARTOONS OF WALT DISNEY," American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
Through Sunday.
Screenings tomorrow and Sunday at 2 and 4 P.M.
Screenings are $2 a person, in addition to museum admission: $5; $2.50 for children.
Information: (718) 784-0077 or (718) 784-4520.
ALVIN AILEY AMERICAN DANCE THEATER, City Center, 131 West 51st Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10 to $42.
Information: (212) 581-1212.
"THE MYSTERIES AND WHAT'S SO FUNNY," Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
A performance piece written and directed by David Gordon, with visual design by Red Grooms and music by Philip Glass.
Through Sunday.
Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $28.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
"STAR OF CHRISTMAS," American Museum of Natural History, Hayden Planetarium, Central Park West at 81st Street.
The annual holiday show.
Through Sunday.
Today at 1:30 and 3:30 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday, hourly from 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission: $5; $4 for students and the elderly; $2.50 for children 2 to 12 years old.
Information: (212) 769-5920 or (212) 769-5900.
"THE AIDS MEMORIAL QUILT," "VICTORIAN PLEASURES: 19th-CENTURY AMERICAN BOARD AND TABLE GAMES," "RESTORED VISIONS: RECENTLY CONSERVED PAINTINGS," New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, near 77th Street.
Twenty panels in memory of 20 New Yorkers who died of AIDS; the panels were part of a 21,000-panel quilt on view recently in Washington.
Also, exhibitions of Victorian board games and paintings.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4.50; $3 for students and the elderly; $1 for children under 12.
Information: (212) 873-3400.
"SONGS OF MY PEOPLE: AFRICAN AMERICANS, SELF-PORTRAIT," Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue and 103d Street.
Photographs of black communities around the country, by black photojournalists.
Through Sunday.
Hours: tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission by contribution: $5; $3 for children, students and the elderly; $8 for families.
Information: (212) 534-1672.
"SPATIAL DRIVE," New Museum of Contemporary Art, 583 Broadway, at Houston Street, SoHo.
Interactive installations by 11 artists or groups examine the spaces between viewers and art objects.
Through Sunday.
Hours: tomorrow, noon to 8 P.M. and Sunday, noon to 6 P.M.
Admission: $3.50; $2.50 for students and the elderly; free for children under 12.
Information: (212) 219-1355.
Closing Next Weekend
"THE SEAGULL," Lyceum Theater, 149 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
Through Jan. 10.
Anton Chekhov's play, featuring Tyne Daly, Jon Voight, Tony Robert, Ethan Hawke, Laura Linney and Maryann Plunkett; directed by Marshall W. Mason.
Tuesday and Thursday and next Friday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday and Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $45.
Information: (212) 239-6280.
"GOIN' PLACES," the Big Apple Circus's 15th show, featuring the clown Mr.
Gordoon, a Mongolian contortionist, Russian aerialists, French acrobats, acrobatic elephants and galloping horses.
Through Jan. 10 at Lincoln Center.
Various show times (today, tomorrow and Sunday: 12:30 and 4:30 P.M.).
Tickets, $20 to $45.
Information: (212) 268-0055 or (212) 721-6500.
"FRAGILE ECOLOGIES: ARTISTS' INTERPRETATIONS AND SOLUTIONS," Queens Museum of Art, New York City Building, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
An exhibition of various artists' works that combine art and ecology.
Through Jan. 10.
Hours: Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: $3; $1.50 for children, students and the elderly.
Closed New Year's Day.
Information: (718) 592-5555 or (718) 592-9700.


Art in Review
Lillian Bassman  Howard Greenberg Gallery  120 Wooster Street (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Jan. 16
Lillian Bassman began her career as an assistant to Alexey Brodovitch, the longtime art director of Harper's Bazaar, but after 1947 she devoted herself to her own fashion photography.
In her photographs from that time, gracefully gesturing models are posed in stylish settings in a familiar sort of fashion shot.
But by bleaching out areas of her black-and-white prints, printing through tissues and the like, Ms.
Bassman produced images that combined the narrative richness of photography with the graphic simplicity of illustration.


The First Tastes Of Vintage '93
PUTTING a year to bed is somewhat like finishing a fine old bottle of Bordeaux: you are happy to have savored the experience, even more grateful that another waits on the shelf.
In New York City's cultural world, this weekend offers a first sip of the new vintage.
The city's artistic banquet is served through the holiday season and into the New Year, accompanied by a dazzle of light and music.
For those with the energy to seek out weekend diversions, opportunities abound: in theater, film, art, music, dance, restaurants and more.


It's Time to Savor the First Tastes of Vintage '93; Books
With the advent of a new year, with a new Administration in Washington and with developments abroad that raise new questions about America's place in the world, it seems an apt time to read (or reread) Alexis de Tocqueville's masterpiece, "Democracy in America" (Cloth: Alfred A. Knopf; two volumes, $50. Paper: Vintage Books, Vol. I and Vol. II, $7.95 each).
First published in two volumes in 1835 and 1840, "Democracy in America" grew out of a nine-month trip through America that the 26-year-old Frenchman began in the spring of 1831, and more than a century and a half later, it remains a remarkably prescient study of the workings and consequences of democracy in the United States.


Sports of The Times; Highlight Of the Suns' Honeymoon
MENTION the Phoenix Suns, and my mind immediately zooms back to Friday, June 4, 1976, at Boston Garden.
Game 5 of the National Basketball Association championship series between Boston and Phoenix, the series tied at two games each.
Phoenix trailed by 2 points with two seconds to play in the second overtime.
Garfield Heard took the inbounds pass and in one motion turned and took a shot.
Bingo: triple overtime!


It's Time to Savor the First Tastes of Vintage '93; Theater
For millions of out-of-towners, not to mention those New Yorkers who grew up out of town, holiday season on Broadway means a night at a completely escapist hit musical with great songs, bravura dancing, lavish sets and costumes, a handsome cast and gags broad enough to penetrate even an alcoholic buzz.
That bill could hardly be better filled than it is by "Crazy for You," the new-old Gershwin show in which a stage-struck Manhattan swell (Harry Groener) of the Depression era travels to Dead rock, Nev., to relight a dark theater and, not so incidentally, to win the girl (Jodi Benson) of his dreams.
Susan Stroman's choreography for "Crazy for You" is already legend for its inventive juggling of props like rope ("Slap That Bass"), tools ("I Got Rhythm") and chairs ("Stiff Upper Lip").
My own favorite number arrives when Mr.
Groener and a bevy of Ziegfeld girls magically pop out of a vintage car to sing and tap to "I Can't Be Bothered Now." The Ira Gershwin lyric, written for Fred Astaire and sung by Mr.
Groener from an appropriate elevation, sums up the levitating spirit of the entire enterprise:
I'm up among the stars;
On earthly things I frown.
I'm throwing off the bars
That held me down.


Often Mammography Doesn't Tell the Story
To the Editor:
That mammography may not be helpful to women in their 40's (Health page, Dec. 16) comes as no surprise to me or the members of my breast cancer support group.


Does Art Inspire Geese, Too?


Finding an Economic System for a New Century; Never Better
To the Editor:
The foundation for most of Peter G. Peterson's "Hard Truths for Better Days" (Op-Ed, Dec. 1) is an almost universally accepted but increasingly flawed view of how the economy works and ought to work.
Briefly, the core "truth" is the old saw that rising production will solve the problems of unemployment and poverty just as a rising tide lifts all boats.


Review/Theater; An Animal Nativity Of Puppets
For 30 years, the Bread and Puppet Theater has been enlightening audiences about timeless political issues.
Peter Schumann's anniversary show, "Nativity 1992," at Theater for the New City, is one of the troupe's more playful efforts.
This animal fable is an exemplar of performance folk art.
It reaffirms the fact that Bread and Puppet is entertaining as well as uplifting.
This time the message comes in a bright holiday wrapping.
Played on and around a small two-level proscenium stage, an expandable puppet theater, the show frequently catches the audience off guard as actors dressed as puppets remove their outer masks, change their postures and transform themselves into startlingly different creatures.
Beginning with four bulbous-headed peasants marching for Greenpeace, "Nativity 1992" never moves too far from social consciousness yet remains lighthearted when touching matters of portent.


Police Speed Investigation Of Officers
Complaints of police misconduct included in civil lawsuits will be investigated immediately by the New York City Police Department as part of the expanded duties of the new Internal Affairs Bureau, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly announced yesterday.
Previously, lawsuits based on such complaints as excessive force, false arrest, assault and civil rights violations had to wend their way through the courts before the department conducted more than cursory reviews.
Now, investigations could lead to departmental hearings long before the lawsuits are heard, helping the city to decide whether to represent the officer or whether criminal charges should be drawn.


Clinton's Challenge; Starting the Decade -- at Last
The Nineties begin today.
That it is possible to say this three years after the advent of the decade serves as a sad monument to President Bush's indifference to the nation's social and economic vitality.
The statement also defines the task before Bill Clinton, a man of untested promise who has the opportunity and the obligation to shape the ethos of a decade.
New Year's Day is a good time for the President-elect to reflect on why we have been marking time.
George Bush had a chance to shape the Nineties, just as two other Republicans, Dwight Eisenhower and Ronald Reagan, shaped their decades.
He failed by bringing to the White House a notion of passive stewardship in domestic affairs that is better suited to service on a community board than to leadership of the most complex nation in history.


At the Bar; From Football Glory, a Step Up to Bench
The Minnesota Vikings and the Minnesota Supreme Court play their respective games in different parts of the Twin Cities.
But the gap will close next week when Alan Page completes a remarkable migration from the gridiron to the bench.
Last November, the 47-year-old Mr.
Page -- 10 times an All-Pro defensive tackle and a member of professional football's Hall of Fame -- was overwhelmingly elected to the state's highest court.
On Monday, after three of his four children help him don his robe and the fourth reads from the speeches of Robert F. Kennedy, Mr.
Page will become the court's first black justice.


Today's TV Listings And Dining Reviews
Some features ordinarily found in Weekend appear today in section A. Restaurant reviews and advertising are on pages A22-23.
Television listings are on page A28.


Skiing in the East Need Not Apologize
To the Editor:
In "Smart Caterpillars Ski the American West" (letter, Dec. 15), Richard Roher calls Western skiing "some of the world's best." This is neither quite true, nor is Eastern skiing so different.


Boathouse Regulars Wonder Just Who Travis Really Was
Travis may have been his name. Travis
Something,
or
Something
Travis. Nobody knows for sure.
Nobody is even sure whether Travis was his real name.
The police are trying to find out.


Art in Review
Timothy Hawkesworth  Littlejohn-Sternau Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through tomorrow
Even with a clear debt to Giacometti, the Irish-born Timothy Hawkesworth's small graphite drawings manage to create a distinctive centripetal density of their own.
The images, built of reiterated lines and erasures, sit at the center of the sheets of paper like clouds of metal filings sucked together by a magnet.
From this tangle, attenuated human figures emerge along with scattered words in English and Spanish.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-14 SARAJEVANS JEER U.N. CHIEF
The Secretary General was jeered in Sarajevo after he arrived to press his appeal to the Bosnian Government not to open an offensive to break the Serbian siege of the capital.
Bystanders shouted "Fascists!" and "Criminals!" at him and Cyrus R. Vance.
A1 News Analysis: The reputation of the U.N. is at stake in Bosnia.
A12 Cyrus R. Vance expressed cautious hope for a Bosnian accord.
A12 CZECHS AND SLOVAKS SPLIT
Against the wishes of many of its 15 million citizens, Czechoslovakia split into two countries, with 5.2 million residents in Slovakia and 10.3 million in the Czech Republic.
A1 Fireworks and celebrations in Bratislava, the capital of Slovakia.
A14 BUSH IS 'EMOTIONAL' OVER SOMALIA
President Bush had his first glimpse of the Somali famine that he has sent troops to ease when he visited a feeding center and toured a small hospital with sick and malnourished patients near Mogadishu.
A1 His Presidency is winding down, but Mr.
Bush is speeding up.
A8 LEBANON REJECTS FRENCH OFFER
The Lebanese Government said it would not allow the 415 Palestinians expelled by Israel two weeks ago to remain in southern Lebanon and rejected a French proposal that they be placed under the protection of U.N. peacekeepers in the area.
A2 GERMANY SEES FALLOUT IN ATTACKS
Violence against foreigners in Germany is scaring away investors and tourists and endangering Berlin's bid to attract the Olympic Games in 2000, business leaders say.
They are urging the Government to take stronger measures to combat the violence, which they say threatens efforts to pull Germany out of its recession.
A3 BRAZIL'S POOR TO GET ATTENTION
Brazil's new President, Itamar Franco, announced his economic program, which will probably slow the country's move toward open, deregulated markets and an economy based on low inflation.
The program includes aid for Brazil's 60 million desperately poor people.
A4 Brasilia Journal: A beautiful soap- opera actress was killed.
A4 Salvadoran Army fails to purge rights violators.
A3 UKRAINE DOES NOT WANT TO PAY
Ukraine wants to know how much will it cost to get rid of the former Soviet Union's weapons of mass destruction, and who is going pay the bill.
A Ukrainian diplomat says the cost to Ukraine will be more than $1.5 billion, which he urges the international community to pay.
A10 A SINGLE MARKET IN EUROPE
A single market went into effect in Western Europe, linking 345 million people in the 12 nations of the European Community by eliminating tariff and customs barriers.
Most steps to reach this goal have been taken gradually over the last five years, so it will be hard for most people to tell what has changed, and indeed, much has not changed.
A8  National A16-20 C.I.A.
TO OVERHAUL FILES
Embarrassed by the handling of a bank-fraud case, the Director of the C.I.A. has ordered a sweeping overhaul of how the agency maintains its extensive store of intelligence information.
A16 BAD NEWS, AND GOOD
The second big snowstorm of the week pounded the mountains of Northern California, making life miserable for many holiday travelers but bringing hope of drought relief to state water officials.
A16 IN THE WAKE OF RECESSION
Economic Pulse: Amid signs of rejuvenation, there is also concern that the post-recession pace in the heavily urbanized "Chesapeake Crescent," stretching from Baltimore to Norfolk, will never equal the raging boom of the 1980's.
A17 THE 'HOME ALONE' CASE
The suburban Chicago couple who left their young children home alone when they flew to a nine-day vacation in Mexico were released from jail on bond, and their lawyer met with reporters but offered no clues to explain the startling behavior.
A16 A NEW WARNING ON AIDS
In more patients infected with the AIDS virus, it is showing early resistance to AZT, the drug most commonly used against it, and researchers say there is an urgent need to develop new drugs to combat the epidemic.
A18 A gain was reported in the fight against brain cancer.
A18 MATH STUDY PROVES DISTRESSING
A decade after the beginning of efforts to improve mathematics education in American public schools, students there still lag significantly behind their peers in Japan and Taiwan, a new study has found.
A20 The defecting Cuban pilot told of his flight to Miami.
A17 An Amtrak train with 200 people aboard derailed in Michigan.
A17 Law PageA19 MR.
JUSTICE, ALL-PRO
At the Bar: The Minnesota Vikings and the Minnesota Supreme Court go about their respective business in different parts of town.
But the gap will close next week, when Alan Page completes a remarkable migration from the gridiron to the bench.
A1 A new report urges a more active role for jurors.A19 A Philadelphia law firm won reversal of a sex bias verdict.
A19 In his year-end report, Rehnquist struck a note of cooperation.
A19 Metro Digest B1 RATE RISE FOR EMPIRE BLUE CROSS
The Cuomo administration granted a huge rate increase to Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, presenting 1.4 million New Yorkers with rises in premiums that will average 25.5 percent.
A1 LEFT BEHIND AFTER JEAN HARRIS
If, as expected, Jean Harris is released soon after 12 years in prison for killing her lover, other women will be left behind -- even though some prison officials consider their continued incarceration equally pointless.
A1 FEUD AMONG DINKINS AIDES
A feud between two of the Dinkins administration's top officials has become so bitter that it has undermined the city's ability to forge coherent strategies on social issues like homelessness, say advocates for the poor, union leaders and some city officials.
A1 Weekend C1-28 Holiday multiple choice.
C1 From tea leaves to tarot cards.
C1 Music: Trombone concerto.
C3 Art: Works on homelessness.
C16 Word and Image: "The Furies," a novel.
C25 Sports B6-12 Basketball: Knicks will appeal Oakley's fine.
B7 Football: Coughlin appears the clear favorite.
B7 Sugar Bowl the stage for national title game.
B7 Hockey: Rangers fall to Sabres.
B11 Business Digest D1 Neediest Cases B5 Obituaries A20-21 Rev.
Timothy S. Healy, president of the New York Public Library.
A21 Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27 Editorials Starting the decade -- at last.
Letters Anthony Lewis: New year resolution.
Tess Gallagher: When the enemy is illiterate.
Li-Young Lee: Withdrawn.
Emily Hiestand: In the chemistry of this century's youth.
Donald Hall: Home movies.
Jane Mead: I have been living.
Sandra Cisneros: Little clown my heart.


A Railroad's Legacy: Land Rich and Cash Poor
In the 1860's, the Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe Railroad Company, which had gorged on Federal land grants, was particularly aggressive -- and fanciful -- in marketing land abutting its line.
One advertisement likened land along the Santa Fe Trail to a tropical banana tree, "known by its fruits."
More people settled the West between 1879 and 1900 than in the previous two and a half centuries, and this lure was certainly a factor.
But for the modern company that inherited much of the railroad's land, even a modest real estate bonanza appears, for now, unlikely.
Good Market Gone Bad
Tight credit, wary purchasers and anemic land values have combined to constrain the ambitions of the San Francisco-based Catellus Development Corporation, formed with fanfare two years ago when the Santa Fe Pacific Corporation spun off some realty holdings.
Its stock has been limping along on the New York Stock Exchange near a 52-week low of $6.125, closing the year at $6.625.


Girl's Mother Was Warned About Sitter
Almost a year before a 9-year-old girl disappeared from the care of John Esposito at a Long Island video arcade, her mother was warned by an official of the local Big Brothers organization that Mr.
Esposito's behavior sounded suspicious.
This and other reports questioning Mr.
Esposito's fitness as a baby sitter came out today as the Suffolk County police continued to investigate him.
Seven officers arrived at his home here early this morning with a search warrant and went through his home looking for any trace of Katie Beers, the girl who the police say was kidnapped Monday afternoon.
Her 10th birthday was Wednesday.


Robot Tested on Extreme Earthly Elements Before a Voyage to Mars


DON'T GET TOO FULL: THE SUGAR IS FOR DESSERT
A national champion at last, one without debate?
College football faces that prospect on New Year's Day in the Sugar Bowl match-up of Miami and Alabama, the consensus No. 1 and 2 teams in the nation.
The successful on-the-field confrontation of the two top-ranked teams to determine the unofficial national championship in the Sugar Bowl is the work of the College Football Bowl Coalition.


Judge Cites Trade Accord In Ending Zenith Contract
In ordering the Air Force to terminate a $740 million contract awarded to the Zenith Data Systems Corporation for desktop computers, an administrative judge agreed with the losing bidders that Zenith's bid did not comply with the Trade Agreements Act of 1979, as required by the contract.
The decision to uphold the protests was made on Dec. 23, but Judge Catherine B. Hyatt of the General Services Administration's Board of Contract Appeals did not disclose her reasoning until late on Wednesday.


Economic Pulse: The Washington Region; Once-Booming Megalopolis Is Struggling With Harder Times
At first glance, it could be the good old days all over again, just the way things were a couple of years back, before the recession hit this little rural patch sandwiched between the suburbs of Baltimore and Washington.
Bulldozers are ripping out lots for new subdivisions.
Concrete trucks are pouring foundations.
Carpenters are hammering together wall frames, and the signs pounded into the raw earth in front of the new houses read, "Sold . . . Sold . . . Sold."


Restaurants
If you find yourself on New Year's Day holding a vexing amount of surplus cash that you had intended to dispose of the night before, there's still hope.
Try dinner soon at Parioli, Romanissimo, New York City's priciest pasta house, where you can burn up close to $100 a person while drinking house wine.
And what does one get for this tariff?
A cushy, genteel setting, mannered (though hardly razor-sharp) service and competently prepared if unimaginative northern Italian cooking.


Lebanon Presses for the Return Of Deported Palestinians to Israel
The Lebanese Government said today that it would not allow the 415 Palestinians expelled by Israel two weeks ago to remain in southern Lebanon and rejected a French proposal that they be placed under the protection of United Nations peacekeepers in the area.
President Elias Hrawi told reporters: "We cannot allow the Palestinians expelled by Israel to remain on Lebanese soil indefinitely. Nor will we agree to have them relocated in the zone of operations of the United Nations Interim Force."


Last-Minute Slide Hits Dow But Nasdaq Rises to Record
The Nasdaq average marched to a third straight daily record yesterday while the Dow Jones industrial average fell under a last-minute barrage of program trading.
It was a fitting conclusion to a year when the Nasdaq average outpaced both the Dow and Standard &amp; Poor's 500, as small investors returned to the stock market.
The Nasdaq composite index of over-the-counter stocks was up 5.10 points, or 0.76 percent, to 676.95 yesterday.


Final Huddle in Denver For Reeves and Elway
The stormy 10-year relationship between JOHN ELWAY and DAN REEVES has ended on a respectful note, with a handshake and wishes of good luck for the future.
The top-ranked quarterback and his former coach on the Broncos met Wednesday for 15 minutes in Denver as Reeves was cleaning out his office, two days after he was fired.


A Debut at Daytona
Indianapolis 500 winner AL UNSER JR.  plans to make his Nascar Winston Cup Series debut in the Daytona 500 in Florida on Feb. 14.
The former Indy-car champion is scheduled to drive a Chevrolet Lumina fielded by Hendrick Motorsports in the season-opening classic at Daytona International Speedway.
Only two drivers have won both the Daytona 500 and the Indianapolis 500: A. J. FOYT and MARIO ANDRETTI. (AP)





Blizzard Hits Northern California


Sports of The Times; Country Boys Win Big One In Big City
THEY grew tired of being called country cousins.
That wasn't why Alabama won the national championship with a 34-13 whupping of Miami in the Sugar Bowl late last night.
But they did grow tired of being called country cousins.
The Crimson Tide won their 12th national title because they could run the ball straight at the four-time national champions and because two brutes named John Copeland and Eric Curry made Miami look like it was in the wrong building, or the wrong year, or maybe even the start of the wrong generation.


Ross Bass, Ex-Senator; Tennessean Was 75
Ross Bass, who represented Tennessee in Congress from 1954 to 1966, died today at his home in North Miami, Fla.
He was 75.
He died of lung cancer, said his brother, Horace Bass.


Roll Tide! Alabama Dethrones No. 1 Miami
Gene Stallings went for the ride of his life tonight.
Sitting atop crimson shoulders and bathing in the bright light of the flashbulbs before him, the football descendant of Alabama legend Paul (Bear) Bryant led the second-ranked Crimson Tide to a virtually certain national championship.


President Visits Center of Crisis In Somali Town
As United States troops blocked roads and posted armed lookouts on rooftops, President Bush ventured today into the epicenter of the Somalia famine, praising the American forces that had successfully escorted food convoys but pledging that when the time comes, "we'll do what I told the American people we'll do -- we'll leave."
Later, the United States military command said the withdrawal of American troops from Somalia could begin by the end of January.


Resolutions to Resolve Old Resolution Conflicts
TYPICALLY for this time of year, the Old Guy was morose.
Once again lofty intentions lay threatened by chronically weak and seasonally dyspeptic willpower.
The hope-frustration-guilt-cycle loomed, as it had every year for decades.
Ever since gray hairs were first sighted, the phases of the cycle have been accelerating annually.
In 1992, the first piece of chocolate was consumed before New Year's lunch, the unwritten novel had been fully abandoned by Groundhog Day and the possibility of moral regeneration rejected before the spring thaw.
The Old Guy considered what he should do about yet another impending failure of will.
He wondered whether watching a certain number of televised football games involving teams he never heard of might serve as penance.
Maybe each game watched would bring the right to ignore a resolution.
Each quarter?
Where do you get indulgences these days?
Maybe he should take the rowing machine out from the back of his closet.
Maybe he should give the rowing machine to the building super or the Salvation Army.
Does the Salvation Army take rowing machines?
Just then the Old Guy's sidekick came by.
Being a pal he tried to help.


Wake for Timothy Healy
A wake for the Rev.
Timothy S. Healy, the Jesuit priest who was the president of the New York Public Library and former president of Georgetown University, will be held tomorrow and Monday, from 2 to 5 P.M. and 7 to 9 P.M., at America House, 106 West 56th Street.
The funeral will be on Tuesday at 10 A.M. at St.
Ignatius Loyola Church, Park Avenue and 84th Street.
Father Healy, 69, had a fatal heart attack on Wednesday night at Newark International Airport.


Jean Mayer, 72, Nutritionist Who Led Tufts, Dies
Dr.
Jean Mayer, the Chancellor and former president of Tufts University whose work as a nutritionist helped clarify the nature of hunger and obesity and expanded the Federal food stamp and school lunch programs, died yesterday in Sarasota, Fla., where he was vacationing.
He was 72 and lived in Boston.
Dr.
Mayer, who was elevated to Chancellor on Sept. 1 after 16 years as the university's president, died of a heart attack, said Gail Bambrick, associate director of communications for Tufts, in Medford, Mass.


Riley Has 10,000 Reasons Why the N.B.A. Is Out of Bounds
Both Charles Oakley and Coach Pat Riley remained upset today about the $10,000 fine that was levied on Thursday against the Knicks forward by the National Basketball Association for an incident Wednesday night against Indiana in which Oakley was not even charged with a foul.
Oakley had little to say but was clearly furious before today's practice, as the Knicks prepared to play the Los Angeles Clippers on Saturday afternoon at Madison Square Garden.


Kettle Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 29


The New Reverse Mortgage
Some older homeowners may obtain one to help meet expenses: This couple pledged their $145,000 home as collateral for monthly payments of $277 for life.
Page 35.  [ Photo ]


Dewey Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Before You Pity the Russians in Estonia
To the Editor:
I have been reading your newspaper regularly, and as the coordinator of the Estonian Institute for Human Rights, I have often found relevant information in it.
Regrettably, Francis Fukuyama's "Trapped in the Baltics" (Op-Ed, Dec. 19) does not serve to promote human rights.


Etymology of Turkey
To the Editor:
Harold M. Kamsler's attempt to trace English "turkey" to Hebrew "tuki" (letter, Dec. 13) makes etymology seem as easy as finding like-sounding words in other languages.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  ARMS PACT IS TEST FOR YELTSIN
On the eve of President Bush's arrival in Moscow, President Yeltsin faced criticism that a hastily negotiated nuclear-arms treaty would confirm Russia's subordinate status in a post-Communist world.
The two leaders open their talks today and are to sign the treaty on Sunday.  1


No Headline
Word is out that Federal and state law prohibits pregnancy discrimination, so employers are typically more devious and couch discrimination in other terms.
During an economic downturn, employers can mask pregnancy discrimination as layoffs and downsizing, which makes it harder to prove the underlying discriminatory motivation. -- SALLY GOLDFARB, a lawyer for the NOW Legal Defense and Education Fund.  [ 1:2. ]


Calder's Playful 'Big Crinkly' To Winter in Manhattan Park
The gardens of Bryant Park will be brighter beginning in mid-January when "Big Crinkly," a 1971 work by Alexander Calder, takes up temporary residence.
The 24-foot-high standing mobile, with red, blue and yellow metallic arms that swing with the wind, will be placed in an open area occupied in warmer weather by sunbathers and workers on lunchtime breaks.


Who Killed Jeffrey Harden?
Jeffrey Harden, who died last January at the age of 5 months, was a victim of abuse and neglect -- by his family and by New York City.
As detailed this week by Celia Dugger of The Times, Jeffrey's death highlights many failings of the city's overburdened child welfare system.
Caseworkers didn't know or failed to find out about his mother's prior conviction for abusing another child.
They also didn't know about one of the mother's boyfriends, who may have been responsible for the infant's death.


Bassett Furniture Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Phillips Re-signs With the Tigers
The Detroit Tigers have agreed on a $10.6 million, three-year contract with TONY PHILLIPS, avoiding salary arbitration with their do-it-all leadoff hitter.
The 33-year-old Phillips, who signed the contract on Thursday, has been an everyday player without an everyday position since coming to Detroit as a free agent from Oakland after the 1989 season.
He has started at second, third, shortstop, designated hitter and all three outfield positions.
Hitting in front of a power-packed lineup that included CECIL FIELDER, MICKEY TETTLETON, TRAVIS FRYMAN and ROB DEER, Phillips led the major leagues in runs last season with 114.


Ban Lifted on Blood Donations From Gulf Veterans
The American Association of Blood Banks and the Department of Defense have lifted the ban on blood donations by military personnel who served in the Persian Gulf war.
Both civilian and military blood banks were advised this week to allow the 500,000 members of the armed forces affected by the ban to donate blood beginning yesterday.


On the Couch on Bowl Day: Send in the Clowns
Woke up for New Year's Bowl Day Georgia Bulldog-tired.
Stayed up late with "Nick at Nite" to watch Chuckles the Clown die again on "The Mary Tyler Moore Show." Fatigue is a bad when there are eight bowls to watch.
In the beginning at 11 A.M. there was the Hall of Fame Bowl, which begat the Cotton, Citrus and Blockbuster Bowls, leading to a long day's journey into Sugar:
3:27 P.M.
At halftime of the Blockbuster Bowl, Blockbuster Chairman Wayne Huizenga narrates travelogue of South Florida.
When you've bought a bowl, a baseball team, a hockey team and half of Joe Robbie Stadium (and distribute the video of the Blockbuster), you can do this.


The Irish Leave A&amp;M Feeling 100% Rotten
They came seeking solace and left in shame.
This was not a new experience for the Aggies of Texas A&amp;M.
In the past month, the Aggies' schedule was ripped, their conference ridiculed.
A newspaper cited N.C.A.A. violations in their program, and four players, including a key starter, consequently were suspended.


College's Fight to Survive Mirrors Plight of Many Black Campuses
Morris Brown College has never loomed large on the national stage -- not when it opened in a crude wooden building 108 years ago, and not in its current incarnation as one of six colleges in the mainly black Atlanta University Center.
But Morris Brown, now facing a $10 million budget deficit and fighting for its life, has come to symbolize many of the issues facing America's private black colleges as they try to square educational needs and financial ones in the 1990's.


Hmm, Haven't We Met Somewhere Before? Yes, in Regular Season
New meets old in today's two National Football League playoff match ups.
Yet, familiarity abounds.


Gasoline Tax Plan Is Reviving
President-elect Bill Clinton, who repeatedly criticized Paul Tsongas and Ross Perot in the Presidential campaign for supporting an increase in Federal gasoline taxes, is hearing from a lot of his advisers that it is not such a bad idea after all, and he seems to be warming to the idea.
"There were a lot of good arguments made for the gas tax," Mr.
Clinton said at a news conference after the two-day meeting on the economy that he convened in Little Rock, Ark., in early December.
But he added, "No matter what the other merits of the gas tax are, you don't want to load it onto the inequality you already have" in the tax system.


Violence Disrupted Exemplary College
To the Editor:
"College Student Sprays Campus With an Assault Rifle, Killing 2," a Dec. 16 news article reports from Great Barrington, Mass.: "An honors student armed with an assault rifle he bought Monday morning sprayed a college campus near here with bullets that night, the police said, killing two people and injuring four others before surrendering."


Prenuptial Agreements, Despite Challenges, Stand Up in Court
To the Editor:
"Wedding Bells, Dotted Lines" (Your Money page, Dec. 19) leaves the unfortunate impression that prenuptial agreements are on the way out and subject to "successful legal challenges." Nothing could be further from the truth.


History or Heresy? Churchill's War Role Attacked
With a sudden ferocity, scholars, amateur historians and even politicians here have joined an emotional debate that seems as strange as it is inflammatory.
Would Britain be better off today had Churchill been more willing in World War II to negotiate an earlier end to the fighting with Germany?
Over the last week, whoe pages of London newspapers and entire television shows have been given over to historians, book cirtics and former Government officials blustering and fuming over a 649-page political biography that offers a starkly iconoclastic vision of the former Prime Minister, who is lionized as the nation's wartime savior.


Dresser Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Lost Bowl, and then Coach, at Southern Cal
The University of Southern California, which was routed by Fresno State in the Freedom Bowl earlier this week, today announced that Larry Smith had resigned as its head football coach.
"This resignation comes after discussions the past two weeks with Larry about the future of the program, given the circumstances and the concerns we had," Mike McGee, Southern Cal's athletic director, said in a prepared statement released this afternoon.


Policies for Covering Cost of Long-Term Care
MORE and more Americans are becoming aware of the possibility that at some point in their lives they will require extended care in a nursing home or their own homes because of a prolonged illness or disability.
As a result, purchases of long-term-care insurance policies, intended to cover part of the increasingly high costs of such care, are rapidly increasing.
More than 2.5 million of these policies, which protect against risks that are not covered by other categories of health insurance, have already been sold by about 130 insurance companies.
Yet while consumers are being bombarded with literature outlining the merits of long-term care insurance, there are many elements to consider in determining whether and what kind to buy.


An Increase in Bias Is Seen Against Pregnant Workers
Five weeks after giving birth to triplets last year, Joan Levine received a phone call from the head of FCB/Leber Katz Partners, the advertising agency in New York where she had worked for 12 years.
He called to say another woman would get a chance at her job.
It was all part of a corporate reorganization, she was told, and when she returned in three weeks she should check with the personnel department.
Instead of her old position, supervising 20 workers, she was asked to take a new post with a staff of one.


Some Highs and Lows Of Buying on Margin
IN September, John Appley, a businessman in Clearwater, Fla., sued his broker at Paine Webber, Robert Magnan, for losses from what he said were unauthorized trades of stocks and mutual funds in brokerage accounts worth more than half a million dollars.
Mr.
Appley seeks to recover $145,000 in portfolio losses plus $16,000 in interest that had accrued on nearly $375,000 in margin loans that Mr.
Appley said he had not approved.
Paine Webber insists that Mr.
Appley had signed documents authorizing his broker to buy for him on margin, but Mr.
Appley is trying to establish in court that this was not made sufficiently clear to him.


Israelis Wonder if Expulsions Aren't More Than an Image Problem
When the Government expelled 415 Palestinians from the occupied territories two weeks ago, many Israelis justified the move as a necessary response to a surge of killings by Islamic militants.
But as the exiles remain stranded in southern Lebanon, a public debate has developed here over whether the deportation has tarnished both Israel's image abroad and its values at home.
Some commentators ask whether the blow aimed at the fundamentalist movement Hamas and another, Islamic Holy War, has undermined Israel's system of justice and upset the balance between the country's security needs and the rule of law.


Bridge
New Laws of Bridge, for social games as distinct from duplicate competition, came into force yesterday.
One feature is a softening of the two-trick revoke penalty, which becomes one trick unless the revoker personally wins the revoke trick or if the card he should have played later takes a trick.
The diagramed deal, played many years ago in an American tournament, features a revoke that has a good claim to be considered the most sensational in the history of the game.
South landed in two spades doubled, and it might seem that he was destined to lose a minimum of three trump tricks and three aces.


Religion Notes
Fighting Evil
As many celebrated on New Year's Eve with parties large and small, about 100 Muslims gathered at a Harlem mosque for an alternative celebration called Lail'a'tul-Iyadh: the night of seeking refuge.


Vatican's Secular Treasures On View
Legend has it that the love letters of Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn wound up in the Vatican Library when a mischievous clerk slipped them into the pages of the King's "Defense of the Seven Sacraments," an orthodox defense of Roman Catholic doctrine by a monarch soon to break from Rome.
The rigorous theological tract with a beating, passionate heart is an apt metaphor for the 500-year-old library, which contains the world's richest collection of Renaissance manuscripts and books, most of them secular.
More than 200 works have traveled to the United States, where they will be on view in the Library of Congress from Friday through April 30 in an exhibition titled "Rome Reborn: The Vatican Library and Renaissance Culture."


Pasadena Journal; Seeing Too Much of One Color in the Tournament of Roses
The last thing the image makers want is a sullied picture.
Pasadena, which throws the biggest, most lavish bash in the country every New Year's Day, has worked hard to maintain its imperturbable, all-American front, the illusion that nothing can go wrong in a place so perfect.
In recent years, however, the organizers of the Tournament of Roses have been awash in just the kind of negative attention they try to avoid.


Simms and Hostetler Eye the Door
The Giants without Phil Simms?
Without Jeff Hostetler?
Brace yourself, because next season, no matter who replaces Ray Handley as the head coach, one of those veteran quarterbacks is likely to be gone.
It is not that they cannot tolerate each other; in fact, they are friends.
But each wants to start, neither seems to function well when he does not and each has indicated that the situation cannot go on.


In Hartford, Data Portray Schools in Crisis of Poverty
Reduced to charts and graphs, the state of Hartford's schools was vividly displayed in Superior Court here this week as civil-rights lawyers presented crucial evidence in a lawsuit seeking to integrate the capital city's schools with those of its suburbs.
On graphs showing the concentration of minorities and poverty in the Hartford metropolitan area, sharp spikes marked the city's place, high above its neighbors.
On graphs showing students' test results, deep notches marked the city's performance, worst in all of Connecticut.


INSIDE
Paradise Loses Visitors
What with hurricanes and the economy, Hawaii's tourism industry declined in 1992.
And some Hawaiians say that's good.
Page 6.
Salvadoran Warned on Pact
The U.N.
Secretary General warned President Cristiani that he appeared to have violated the accord that ended 12 years of civil war.
Page 3.
Vote Fraud Cited in Kenya
Citing what they called cheating, opposition parties in Kenya said they would not accept the outcome of this week's elections.
Page 3.
Tufts Chancellor Dies
Dr.
Jean Mayer, a leading nutritionist who led Tufts University for 16 years, suffered a heart attack.
Page 9.


Devils' Year Begins Like Day-Old Bubbly
From the coaches to the goaltender to the last player on the fourth line, nothing went right for the New Jersey Devils this afternoon as they were routed, 9-2, by Washington here at the Capital Centre.
The Capitals took control from the outset and never let up, gaining their seventh victory in their last eight game at home (7-0-1) and their 14th victory in their last 20 games over all (14-4-2).
They have an overall record of 21-16-3, and are in second place in the Patrick Division, 3 points ahead of the Rangers.


Orange Find Footing to Beat Buffaloes
Colorado hadn't played on grass all season; Syracuse hadn't played on it since September, and neither team had played on anything like this: sand, mixed with dirt and grass, reduced to clay by frequent rain during the last five days at Sun Devil Stadium.
"At the beginning of the game, the field was on our minds," conceded Syracuse defensive end Kevin Mitchell.
"But once we started playing, it went to the back of our minds."


On Lonely Mission, Robot Starts Descent Into Volcano
The robot Dante stepped into the inferno today as it started down into an Antarctic volcano on a mission that could be a prelude to robotic exploration of the Moon and other planets, scientists said.
Dante began inching its way down the steep inner slopes of Mount Erebus about 1:30 A.M. and was expected to take 24 to 36 hours to reach the lake of molten lava on the crater's floor 700 feet below the rim, researchers said.


Seminoles' Bowl Victory Turns Into Dreary Event
Relegated to a side stage for national title consideration, Florida State still made a strong statement tonight in the Orange Bowl game.
Fighting a vicious rain that had reduced a crowd of 57,324 to less than 15,000 before the third quarter's end, Florida State repelled the maligned, but motivated Nebraska Cornhuskers, 27-14.


Another Opening, Another Year; Curtain Is Raised on '93 With Readings, Football, Food and Icy Plunges
New Year's Day is a peculiar holiday -- a day, unlike other holidays, without any religious or political significance for most people, a holiday just because a new year has begun and some day has to be first.
In fact, very little really happens on New Year's Day in New York City -- no parade, no presents, no special services, no bowl games except on television -- though a number of new state laws took effect the moment that glittering ball came down in Times Square, including one that requires car alarms to stop shrieking after three minutes. (That, anyway, is something to celebrate.)


The Guns of Virginia
It's common lore on the sidewalks of New York: If you want a gun, go to Virginia, where weak laws and willing dealers allow almost anyone to acquire firearms.
A recent study of guns seized at crime scenes found that one in four in New York had come from Virginia; in Washington D.C. the figure was one in three.
Even in Batman comics, denizens of Gotham City swap drugs for guns in Virginia.


Paraguay Raises Its Profile As a Center for Investment
For decades, the only press Paraguay received was a bad press: a stereotyped Latin American dictatorship where unrepentant Nazis mingled with fugitive heroin dealers and homegrown cigarette smugglers.
Then in 1989, the aged dictator fell and democracy sprouted.
Stripped of notoriety, Paraguay saw its image problem become one of no press.
Landlocked and located in South America's heart, Paraguay seemed fated to once again become "an island surrounded by land."


Shouts and Murmurs in Free Slovakia
It's not clear that most Czechs or Slovaks really favored the velvet divorce that became final on New Year's Day.
But Czechoslovakia, once the model democracy in middle Europe, is no more.
Knocking on wood, and with a nervous glance at the disintegrating Balkans, Americans can only join the celebrants and wish a prosperous life to the new Slovak Republic and the new Czech Republic.
Smaller, poorer Slovakia, with 5 million people and an 11 percent jobless rate, faces the more bruising readjustment.
Yet 10 million Czechs may soon discover that when there's frost in Bratislava, the chill will be felt in Prague.
The two Slavic republics are linked together not only by history, but in the perception of foreign investors.


High Court to Consider Rules On Use of Scientific Evidence
Jason Daubert, of San Diego, was born 19 years ago with only two fingers on his right hand and without a lower bone on his right arm.
Eric Schuller, 12, also of San Diego, was born without a left hand and with one leg shorter than the other.
As birth defects go, limb deformities like theirs are relatively common, afflicting about 1 in 2,000 American infants born each year.
Yet these two boys' stories could help shape thousands of legal decisions now mired in a debate over what sort of scientific evidence should be admissible before a jury and what sort of credentials a scientist or other expert must possess to take the witness stand.


Alabama Beats Miami to Win Sugar Bowl


The Top 10 Mutual Funds for Ginnie Maes
Ginnie Mae funds own securities issued by the Government National Mortgage Association, which buys mortgages from lenders, pools them and then sells shares to investors, who receive their proportionate part of the homeowners' monthly principal and interest payments.
The Government guarantees payment of interest and principal, so the Ginnie Mae funds have virtually no default risk.
But share prices can slip as a result of prepayments, mainly because when homeowners refinance mortgages to get lower monthly payments, the fund must then replace higher-yielding paper with lower-rate issues.
To compensate, Ginnie Mae funds yield more than Government bond funds, 6.49 percent compared with 5.82 percent.


3 Crossing Queens Blvd. Hit and Killed
Three pedestrians were struck and killed on Queens Boulevard in Kew Gardens last night by a driver who was charged with driving while intoxicated, the police said.
The driver was identified by the police as Carlyle Thompson, 44, of 123-33 83d Avenue in Kew Gardens, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.
Other possible charges are pending, he added.


Romeo Muller Jr., 64, Writer for Animation
Romeo Muller Jr., a television writer who created family Christmas favorites including "Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer," "Frosty the Snowman," "The Little Drummer Boy" and "Santa Claus Is Coming to Town," died on Wednesday at his home in High Falls, N.Y.
He was 64 years old.
He died in his sleep, said his brother, Eugene E. Muller.


Review/Music; A New Year's Eve Party With an American Accent
It was inevitable that someone would eventually challenge the moldy and not entirely explainable tradition of surrendering New Year's Eve concerts to parades of frothy, 19th-century Viennese ballroom music.
Leonard Slatkin, who conducted the New York Philharmonic's New Year's Eve concert on Thursday evening, has been toying with that tradition lately.
When he led the Philharmonic New Year's Eve concert last year, he moved the waltzes and polkas to the second half of the program and devoted the first half to Saint-Saens's "Carnival of the Animals," with an amusing new narration by Peter Schickele.
This year, Mr.
Slatkin pushed his renovation forward.
The Viennese bonbons kept their grip on the second half.
But on the theory that the Viennese works are so entrenched because they combine dance rhythms and are often descriptive novelty pieces, Mr.
Slatkin sought equivalents in the American symphonic repertory.


Freedom Under Arrest -- A special report; Burmese Loosen Up; Outsiders Are Skeptical
Late last fall, a dark sedan carrying a group of olive-uniformed army officers raced down University Avenue in Yangon toward the home of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the dissident who won the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize for her campaign to bring democracy to Myanmar, the nation once called Burma.
As a group of startled neighbors looked on, the officers stepped from the car in front of Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi's lakeside villa and ordered laborers to begin rolling up the long coils of barbed wire that had been placed there the year before.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about the Rev.
Timothy S. Healy, the Jesuit priest who was president of the New York Public Library and former president of Georgetown University, misstated the dates of his wake.
It will be held tomorrow and Monday -- not today -- from 2 to 5 P.M. and from 7 to 9 P.M., at America House, 106 West 56th Street in Manhattan.


Car-Animal Accidents Raise Concern
Here in the suburbs where the car is king, the merging of man and nature has led to concern over how to prevent the collisions that every year kill thousands of animals, large and small.
The victims range from sparrows and squirrels to deer and cows.
People often suffer in these accidents as well, from injuries sustained on impact, damage to their automobiles and emotions brought on by the sight of dead animals.


King Back With Bullets
Washington Bullets forward BERNARD KING, who has been out of action for more than a year because of knee problems, has returned to the team, the Bullets' owner, ABE POLLIN, said yesterday.
"Once Bernard has passed a physical examination, head coach WES UNSELD will determine when he is ready to play for the Bullets," Pollin said.


Learn to Walk, Learn to Fly
The Op-Ed Page asked students in two New York City school districts, District 9 in the South Bronx and District 28 in Bayside, Queens, to write about their hopes and fears.
Here are excerpts from their essays.
Charisse Rice
4th grade, (Mount Hope) P.S. 28 Tremont, the Bronx


Women Explore a Percussive Path of Expression
When she first laid a hand on an African drum at a music festival three years ago, Penny Gnesin set off, with a gentle thud, on a complex journey through rhythm and consciousness.
It has taken her far from the rat-a-tat cadences of high school marching bands into the growing ranks of women discovering drumming as a means of spiritual transformation, stress relief and personal growth.


Rescue by Valenzuela
Jockey PATRICK VALENZUELA rescued a 9-year-old boy from a burning motor home on Wednesday night in Arcadia, Calif., it was learned Thursday.
Valenzuela, one of the nation's leading riders, was on his way to dinner with friends when the incident took place.
"Suddenly, I saw this propane explosion in this motor home," Valenzuela said Thursday.
"I could see lights on in it through its rear window, and I saw this boy inside. I didn't think twice about it; I just ran up to the motor home, banged on the door, but there was no answer.


YELTSIN RECEIVING CRITICISM OF FOES ON NUCLEAR TREATY
On the eve of President Bush's arrival here to sign a nuclear arms reduction treaty, President Boris N. Yeltsin is being criticized for pushing through an accord that some say serves American interests and confirms Russia's subordinate status in a post-Communist world.
Mr.
Yeltsin, his authority eroded by a bruising battle with the Legislature last month, pressed the White House into a rapid completion of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, known as Start II.
Mr.
Bush had let it ride during his election campaign, but both sides were eager to complete the treaty.
The terms were approved on Tuesday and the signing will be on Saturday.


Toll Increase
To the Editor:
Your report on the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's vote to increase New York City tolls on Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority facilities (news article, Dec. 19) implies that the board of directors elected not to exempt residents of Staten Island and the Rockaways from the toll increase, but left that for the State Legislature to decide.


Eagles Lose, but Will Giants Gain?
Following the victory by Tennessee in the Hall of Fame Bowl game here today, the losing coach, Tom Coughlin of Boston College, refused to address his future as a candidate for the position of head coach of the New York Giants.
Coughlin was angry, which was completely understandable because his Eagles played so poorly in losing to the Volunteers, 38-23.
"Probably the poorest tackling performance maybe I've ever seen in my life," said the 46-year-old Couglin, perhaps the coach mentioned most frequently as a possible successor to Ray Handley, whom the Giants dismissed two days ago.


PCC Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Let's Scrap the Council of Economic Advisers; Room for Both
To the Editor:
In "Clintonomics Doesn't Need a Czar" (Op-Ed, Dec. 10), the eminent economists James Tobin and Robert M. Solow misunderstand the nature of President-elect Clinton's new National Economic Council, at least as recommended by the Commission on Government Renewal sponsored by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and the Institute for International Economics.


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING Very Crafty, Indeed Ridden by Richard Migliore, Win Crafty Lady scored a pace-setting, one-length victory over Wood So in the $100,000 Interborough Breeders' Cup at Aqueduct yesterday.
Quick Mischief, the 7-5 favorite, was a neck back in third.
The mare, trained by Robert Barbara, covered 6 furlongs in 1:10 1/5 to win the first New York stakes race of 1993.
She earned $66,600 for owner Sabine Stable.


Lidak Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


History or Heresy? Churchill's War Role Attacked
With a sudden ferocity, scholars, amateur historians and even politicians here have joined an emotional debate that seems as strange as it is inflammatory.
Would Britain be better off today had Churchill been more willing in World War II to negotiate an earlier end to the fighting with Germany?
Over the last week, whoe pages of London newspapers and entire television shows have been given over to historians, book cirtics and former Government officials blustering and fuming over a 649-page political biography that offers a starkly iconoclastic vision of the former Prime Minister, who is lionized as the nation's wartime savior.


Uncertain Future for Last Baths on Lower East Side;
The 10th Street Russian and Turkish baths are the last survivor of the sort of Eastern European-style public baths that once dotted the Lower East Side.
Their searing Russian room, ice-cold pool, vigorous massages and fresh-squeezed fruit and vegetable juices have attracted the likes of John Belushi, Mick Jagger, Frank Sinatra and John F. Kennedy Jr.
Alexander Frish, the ringmaster of the Moscow Circus, hangs out there when he is in town.
But suddenly the shvitz, as it is known in the Yiddish slang still favored by old-time habitues, is facing rough waters.
Last week, it lost a lawsuit to the owner of the adjacent building, who convinced a jury that his tenants were so hot as a result of heat seeping into their living space that one fried an egg in his bathtub.
The jury ordered the Russian bath owners to pay $500,000 in damages.


CHRONICLE
Citing bad publicity from his recent arrest on drug charges, the actor TODD BRIDGES has resigned as head of a youth center he founded, The Associated Press reported.
Mr.
Bridges, 27, told about 20 people at the center, the Todd Bridges Youth Foundation, that he was leaving because he didn't want its work to suffer.
"When things happen, people tend to shy away," he said.


Alexander Neuwirth, Investment Banker, 60
Alexander Neuwirth, an investment banker who opened the first Tokyo office for Burnham &amp; Company, died on Thursday at New Milford Hospital in New Milford, Conn.
He was 60 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complication from myelodisplasia, an illness that makes it difficult for the blood to clot, said his wife, Marjorie.


Clinton, Off and Running, Sees the Sun Rise on '93
Most Americans spend New Year's Day as coach potatoes, loafing before the ball games on the tube, resting from the rigors of the year and the night before.
For Bill Clinton, whose hyperactivity appears to start where George Bush's leaves off, the start of the new year is a chance to get out there and do things.
Lots of things.
Energetic, building-a-sound-mind-in-a-healthy-body sorts of things.


Liberty State Park Is Set To Open Science Center
On a knoll here in a far corner of Liberty State Park sits a glistening new $67 million science center, getting ready for a grand opening on Jan. 24.
Its motto is "Science = Fun," and it is chock-full of exhibits for inquisitive kids of all ages.
Farther east, on the edge of the park along New York Harbor, the final piece of a grand, 45-foot wide promenade called Liberty Walk awaits dedication.
It stretches in a gentle curve offering sweeping views of the Statue of Liberty, Ellis Island, and the Manhattan skyline.


Ponder Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Truck With Missiles Crashes in Louisiana
A truck carrying Army antiaircraft missiles swerved across an interstate highway and crashed late Thursday.
As a precaution, the authorities closed three miles of the road and evacuated about 1,000 people, barring them from their homes overnight.
Bomb experts from Barksdale Air Force Base, about 100 miles to the west, spent the night removing the Hawk missiles from the flatbed truck and checking them for damage.


Hawaii Is Rethinking Its Dependency on Tourism
When final figures are in, 1992 will show the worst reversal for Hawaii tourism since the state converted its economy from plantation agriculture to world-class resort a generation ago.
Odd as it seems, many Hawaiians are not sure if that is good or bad.
"What we get from tourism is a lot of people stepping on the grass," said Prof.
Ira Rohter, a political scientist at the University of Hawaii who harbors a dark vision that further growth of tourism will be the ultimate ruination of Hawaii's already desecrated tropical environment.


Moi Well Ahead in Kenya, but Most in Cabinet Lose
Citing what they said was across-the-board cheating and vote rigging, leaders of Kenya's three strongest opposition parties announced today that they would not accept the outcome of this week's elections, which appear to have returned President Daniel arap Moi to office with the prospect of a majority in Parliament.
The three opposition figures, in a joint statement, said they would not take their seats in the legislature, and they called for new elections.


Czechs and Slovaks Are Hoping to Find Prosperity in a New Independence
The Kaucuk factory has survived for 30 years turning out synthetic rubber, plastics and refined petroleum mostly for the domestic Czechoslovak market.
With the demise of Czechoslovakia this morning, the future of this company, and many others like it in the Czech Republic, are now tied to the uncertain fortunes of a foreign country: Slovakia.
"I'm an optimist," declared Vaclav Srajer, a 48-year-old coal stoker, as he left Kaucuk's 6-A.M.-to-2-P.M. shift today.
"We are not dependent on the Slovaks. We can trade with the rest of the world. They never helped us. We were always supporting them."


Q &amp; A
Converting Savings Bonds
Q What are the benefits, if any, of exchanging Series EE bonds for Series HH bonds?
PAUL PELLETIER, SALEM, MASS.
A Series HH savings bonds, which pay interest semiannually, can be acquired only by converting Series EE savings bonds with a value of $500 or more.
"When you convert your Series EE bonds to Series HH bonds, any accrued interest on the Series EE bonds is deferred for tax purposes as long as you hold the HH bonds," said Thomas Anfinson, executive director of United States Savings Bonds.


Teamwork Concept Faces Challenge
There is a certain indisputable logic to the ubiquitous management approach that travels under many rubrics, including employee participation, involvement or empowerment programs, quality circles or work teams.
At their best, participation programs promote cooperation by inviting workers into decision-making.
It makes sense that morale would improve, and along with it, productivity -- and thousands of American companies have embraced such programs over the last two decades to help them survive and prosper in a highly competitive global marketplace.


Orr Out of Hospital
Iowa State's basketball coach, JOHNNY ORR, was resting at home yesterday in Ames, Iowa, after an overnight stay at the hospital.
"I'm just taking it easy here today and I expect to go back in for a little while tomorrow," Orr said.
"And I hope to be back Tuesday." The Cyclones play host to Marathon Oil on Tuesday.


Cintas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Gretzky Sets a Date
WAYNE GRETZKY, sidelined since training camp by a back condition that threatened his career, hopes to return to the Los Angeles Kings for a Jan. 16 game against Winnipeg.
"We haven't really nailed it down, but we're shooting for Jan. 16," Gretzky said on Thursday.
"That's our goal. We probably won't start before then. We won't start on the road. We will start at home."


In a Striving Section of the Bronx, The Races Mix, but Don't Mingle
Joe Kraus tries not to think about race, but being retired, he's got time on his hands.
The other day, as he sat near two other elderly white men playing cards in a Bronx social club, Mr.
Kraus allowed himself this simple proposition: People can live together peaceably, more or less.
He did not have to look far for proof.
As his friends played rummy, Jose Rivera sat across the hall explaining the invention he hopes will make him rich: United States Patent No. 4,598,918, the sideways-skating roller skate.
Behind a partition, eight children grunted as Kevin Hall, a black kung fu teacher, said to them, once again: concentrate, concentrate.


No End to the Mexican Kidnap Case
A judge's dismissal of murder charges against Dr.
Humberto Alvarez Machain has not stilled the anger -- on both sides of the border -- over the torture-killing of a U.S. drug agent and the abduction of Dr.
Alvarez in Mexico for his trial in Los Angeles.
Mexico still voices outrage.
A brazen State Department belatedly calls on Mexico to try the doctor for the crime.
The Bush Administration still won't acknowledge its mistakes and recklessness.
Mexico, with a checkered drug enforcement record, also has much for which to answer.


Critic's Notebook; Grove Opera Dictionary Can Make Experts Of Dilettante and Pro
Before buying the New Grove Dictionary of Opera, make sure your back is sound enough to lift it.
Next, check the sag factor in your bookcase.
These are four bruising volumes, not a row of paperbacks.
If you already own the New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians (20 volumes), the New Grove Dictionary of American Music (four volumes), the New Grove Dictionary of Jazz (two volumes) and the New Grove Dictionary of Musical Instruments (three volumes), I suggest you look for a bigger apartment.
But if you have the room and the appetite, this newest New Grove is a feast: meat and potatoes for the serious student, dessert for the dilettante.


Michigan on Top When See-Saw Stops
Coming in, the 79th Rose Bowl had been difficult to market.
Michigan may have been undefeated this season, but it also had a decade worth of ties -- three.
Washington may have been the defending national champion, but in the fall it had undergone a decade worth of internal investigation.
So, there was only enough intrigue today to attract a crowd of 94,236, the smallest Rose Bowl gathering in 38 years.
Who knew?
Michigan (9-0-3) and Washington (9-3) ended up playing an exhilarating, Ping-Ponging game, with Michigan winning, 38-31, on Elvis Grbac's 15-yard touchdown lob to his virtuoso tight end, Tony McGee, with 5 minutes 30 seconds left in the game. 'A Wild Coach Now'
"They'll say I'm a wild coach now," Michigan's Gary Moeller said.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
WHERE RACES MIX BUT DON'T MINGLE
Williamsbridge, a Bronx neighborhood, is a noteworthy place when the subject is the true state of race relations in New York City.
Demographers say there are few places in New York quite like this, with whites, blacks and Hispanic residents living in almost equal proportions.
And they have created a cordial standoff of integration without assimilation and a respect built on common economic status and aspirations.
Page 1.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Cases of pregnancy discrimination are growing, many employment lawyers and women's organizations say.
Staff reductions and management overhauls have given companies opportunities to save money by unloading or demoting workers whose personal circumstances may require special attention, in their view.
New mothers, a group plagued by well-meaning misinformation as well as outright prejudice, are especially likely targets.  [ Page 1. ]
Who should decide when a scientific claim is legitimate enough to put before a jury in a civil or criminal case?
The United States Supreme Court has taken up a California case involving assertions that a drug caused birth defects, thereby tackling an issue with vast legal and ethical implications.
The outcome could affect many contentious tort cases that attribute cancer to industrial chemicals, autoimmune diseases to breast implants and the like.  [ 1. ]


Slight Dip in Homicides In New York City in 1992
The number of reported homicides in New York City dipped slightly last year, continuing a drop that police officials say could be attributed to factors ranging from shifts in personal behavior to demographics to community policing.
The Police Department recorded a preliminary total of 2,020 homicides last year, 134 fewer than in 1991, a drop of 6 percent, said Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a police spokesman.
In 1990, an arson that claimed 87 lives at the Happy Land Social Club in the Bronx helped to push the the number of homicides to a record high of 2,245.


Using Garage Sales to Help Save a Swamp
For years, civilization has been nibbling at the Dismal Swamp, more than 400 acres of marshland where generations of boys have caught frogs and snakes and older hunters have stalked pheasants and deer without fear of bullets going astray in someone's backyard.
The swamp is still home to the blue heron, the wood turtle and dozens of other species.
But they now co-exist with bulldozers and graders.
Acres of trees have disappeared, and a road that will cut through the heart of the swamp is starting to take shape, foreshadowing more development in the next year.


Schwinn Ready to Sell Most Assets
After 97 years of family ownership, the Schwinn Bicycle Company plans to ask a Federal bankruptcy judge here on Tuesday for permission to sell most of its assets, including its name, to the Zell-Chilmark Fund, an investment partnership that specializes in acquiring financially strapped businesses, and Scott U.S.A., a company in Sun Valley, Idaho, that makes ski equipment and bicycles.
The sale would provide Schwinn with nearly $41 million it needs to order its 1993 products from Asian suppliers in time to provide its 1,800 dealers with full inventories for the March-to-May selling season.
Other terms, outlined in papers filed with the court on Thursday, could lift the total value of the deal to more than $60 million.
Family Would Lose Influence
The Schwinn family, which owns the company through a trust fund, will end up with $2.5 million and the contents of the company's bicycle museum here.
But it is expected to lose all influence over the company, and Edward R. Schwinn Jr., the company's chief executive and great-grandson of the founder, Ignaz Schwinn, is not expected to remain in that post, people involved in the bankruptcy say.


Ashikaga Journal; A Festival That Permits Japanese to Be Impolite
The life of a typical Japanese -- working endless hours, enduring long commutes on packed trains and adhering to rigid rules of behavior -- would drive many Americans to the brink of rage.
But Japanese seem to bottle up any anger and maintain their world-famous politeness.
Except just before midnight on New Year's Eve in Ashikaga.


For the Do-It-Yourself Financial Planner, Software to the Rescue
People who keep careful financial records, tracking how much they have spent and comparing the outflow with their budgets, are apt to spend less and save more than people who simply buy now and pay later.
But who has time for all that tedious record-keeping?
Ah, computer software to the rescue.
New versions of popular personal finance programs make it easy to keep those New Year's resolutions about getting organized financially.


Neediest Cases Assists Victim of Mental Illness
When William K. lived alone in the mid-1980's, he said, he would hallucinate that the Mafia and the Government were after him.
At night, he often bolted the door, wrapped himself in blankets and lay still and awake.
When he went to his job as a loan collector for the Small Business Administration, he cowered in front of his computer, fearful that the F.B.I. and the C.I.A. were coming to torture him.
He could not function and eventually was dismissed.


El Salvador Warned on Purge Deadline
The United Nations Secretary General warned President Alfredo Cristiani of El Salvador today that he appeared to have violated the agreement last month ending the 12-year civil war in his country by not meeting the deadline for the purge of army officers accused of human-rights abuses.
But a senior State Department official and a Western diplomat in El Salvador familiar with the process said that they thought it was only a matter of a short delay and that Mr.
Cristiani intended to proceed with the purge within a few days.


Look, It's, It's . . . the Swamp Thing; At Byrne Arena, 7-Foot Shower Heads, Mrs. Fields Cookies and Ennui
This is where sound goes to die: The towering black roof of Byrne Meadowlands Arena, the largest segmented dome in the world.
Clap, and there is no echo.
Scream invectives from Section 107, and the waves travel leisurely across the basketball floor, or over the ice surface, unimpeded, unamplified, only once.


Police Trace Call by Missing Girl to Pay Phone
The Suffolk County Police today continued their search for the 10-year-old Mastic, L.I., girl missing since Monday, checking telephone records of her friends and relatives and tracing to a pay phone a frantic call she apparently made after she disappeared.
In the call, made to the answering machine of the godmother of the girl, Katie Beers, a voice the police say was Katie's left a screaming, hysterical message that she had been kidnapped by a man with a knife.


A Business Guide to the New Europe
The new year brings new rules to the European Community, which hoped to create a single market for its 345 million people.
AIRLINES
Not much change.
Unrestricted competition will not be permitted among airlines throughout the community, until Jan. 1, 1997.
Then, for example, British Air or Lufthansa will be able to compete with Air France on the Paris-Nice route.
BANKS
A single banking license grants freedom of establishment anywhere in the community.
But differences persist.
For example, some communities have interest-bearing checking accounts, but France does not permit them.
BEER
A single market has been formed after a concession from Germany, which had strict standards of purity dating from the 1500's.
CARS
Citizens can buy cars anywhere, and all cars are now made to Eurostandards (although standardized white headlights are being introduced only this year, replacing the yellow in France).
But value added tax rates remain different and manufacturers apply widely differing prices in different markets.
CHEESE
After a huge row, the European Commission loosened its regulations, allowing France to sell its cheese made from non-pasteurized milk throughout the community.
COMPANY STATUTES
It is not yet plausible to set up a community-wide company because of disagreement on what provisions the law should carry for the participation of workers in management.
CUSTOMS
Goods move freely as of Jan 1, and an estimated 60 million customs documents and forms are to disappear.
ENVIRONMENT
Common environmental standards have been set for industry throughout the comunnity but targets have not yet been reached.
INSURANCE
Regulations on life insurance will not be harmonized until 1994. PASTA
Italians tried to bar imports of soft-wheat pasta from elsewhere in the community.
The case went to the European Court of Justice where the Italians were told they would have to accept the mushy pasta.
PRICES
They vary widely.
Cameras, for example, cost 40 percent more in Portugal than in France.
PUBLIC PROCUREMENT
Open bidding for contracts awarded by water, telecommunications, energy or transport utilities has been adopted.
But in practice, analysts believe it will be hard to break through national barriers in these areas.
SHOPPING
Limits have been abolished on what community citizens can buy in other community states.
But people may be questioned if they are buying more than 800 cigarettes, 100 bottles of wine, 110 liters of beer or 10 liters of spirits.
SOFTWARE
Copyright protection has been harmonized as of January 1. TAX
Harmonized European taxes are not around the corner.
But value added tax levels are being gradually harmonized, with a minimum of 15 percent established.
Germany is lowest, at 15 percent.
Denmark highest at 25 percent.
No agreement has been reached on whether to allow companies to offset tax liabilities in one member state with losses at subsidiaries in another.
TELEPHONE
The market for data services is now open, but not the market for basic telephone services, a huge market that state-owned companies are reluctant to surrender.
TV
No restrictions on broadcasting across borders.


Transactions
Baseball American League
DETROIT TIGERS -- Agreed to terms with Tony Phillips, infielder, on a three-year contract.
National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Named Davey Johnson major league consultant and Bobby Valentine advance scout and advisor for player personnel.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
NBA -- Fined Charles Oakley, Knicks forward, $10,000, and Dale Davis, Indiana Pacers forward, $7,500 for flagrant fouls commited in a game Dec. 30.
ATLANTA HAWKS -- Waived Morlon Wiley, guard. Signed Alex Stivrins, forward.
CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Placed John Williams, center-forward, on the injured list.
Activated Jay Guidinger, center-forward, from the injured list.
Continental Basketball Association
OMAHA RACERS -- Signed Mario Donaldson, forward.
Placed Paul Weakley, forward, on injured reserve.
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Signed Ralph Lewis, forward.
Placed George Ackles, forward-center, on injured reserve.
ROCHESTER RENEGADE -- Signed David Harris, center.
Acquired Curtis Blair, guard, from the Rockford Lightning for future considerations.
SIOUX FALLS SKYFORCE -- Signed Clifford Lett, guard. Football  National Football League
HOUSTON OILERS -- Activated Doug Smith, defensive tackle, from injured reserve.
Released Joe Campbell, running back, from the practice squad.


Markets Closed
Financial institutions around the world were closed yesterday for the New Year's holiday.


Bewildered in Buffalo, Rangers Look for Answers
The Rangers were so bewildered after their humiliating loss to the Sabres in Buffalo on Thursday night that they were at a loss for words afterward as they tried to explain their worst thrashing since 1985.
Ending 1992 with a 11-6 loss, their fourth loss in five games, was not a good sign for a team with Stanley Cup aspirations.
And with Mark Messier leading the way, anger and confusion was evident in everyone's face after the game.


MSI Electronic reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Let's Scrap the Council of Economic Advisers
To the Editor:
In "Clintonomics Doesn't Need a Czar" (Op-Ed, Dec. 10), James Tobin and Robert M. Solow urge the new Administration not to make the President's Council of Economic Advisers a sideshow.
What they ignore is that the council has, in fact, become a sideshow, particularly under the Bush Administration.


CHRONICLE
POPE JOHN PAUL II celebrated the New Year yesterday with special prayers for an end to the conflict in the republics of the former Yugoslavia, the Reuters news agency reported.
He also condemned violence in Africa and the Middle East.
"The threat of nuclear destruction may have receded but the blessings of peace have not yet established themselves everywhere," the Pope said at a Mass in St.
Peter's Basilica in Rome.
"Sadly, on our continent and especially in the Balkan region, the spread of destructive war and violence has not subsided. Can Europe distance itself from this situation and not feel challenged by it?"


States Mark Oregon Trail
Festivities will blossom in the spring in six states along the length of the Oregon Trail during the 150th anniversary of the movement that settled the West.
A wagon train retracing the trail's route from Independence, Mo., to Oregon City, Ore., will be a highlight of the celebration honoring the 350,000 pioneers who traveled the trail in search of gold, land and a better life.
From 1842 to 1860, the trail carried them west along a route stretching 2,200 miles across Missouri, Kansas, Nebraska, Wyoming, Idaho and Oregon.
The 1993 wagon train is scheduled to roll in mid-April and halt five months later, according to the Oregon Trail Coordinating Council.
The states along the trail are planning trail markers, historical displays and exhibits, plays and festivals.
Information about plans and events are available from Metropolitan Events, 208 N.W.
Couch Street, Suite 222, Portland, Ore. 97209, (503) 223-6191, or from the Oregon Trail Coordinating Council, 22 N.W.
Davis, Suite 309, Portland, Ore. 97209.


Assaying Holiday Movies: After the Pitch, the Reality
Like exquisitely wrapped presents, movie previews tantalize audiences in the weeks before Christmas with wild expectations -- passionate stories, comic surprises, visual candy.
But c'mon, were we born yesterday?
We've all been in audiences where previews have been greeted with hoots and snickers ("The most frightening words on earth . . . LAWNMOWER MAN!").
We all try to read between the scenes.


An East End 'Guest' Looks at the Baymen
As a frequent "guest" of the East End, to use Tony Bullock's word  [ "Rancor Grows Between Baymen and Anglers," Dec. 6 ]  and one who injects a good bit of money into the local economy without taking anything out, neither dime nor striped-bass fillet, I hereby wish to exercise a guest's right to comment on some of the attitudes of my self-appointed hosts, Messrs.
Bullock, Joel and King; Ms.
Lester, and others who stand united behind 30 privileged families claiming a sacred and exclusive right to extirpate a species from water that belongs to no one, but to all.
Actually, I take it that all guests are not created equal.
For example, Mr. and Mrs.
Joel seem to be more welcome than I and others who just pass through for a day's fishing pleasure.
It was sad to watch Lester and Bullock, et. al., invite arrest -- the summonses, by the way, were prewritten, thanks to advance agreement with the Department of Environmental Conservation, and shocking to see D.E.C. officials, again by prescribed agreement, actually stand and watch rehearsed criminal activity without doing a thing to prevent it.
Aren't public officials supposed to observe the law?
The day of infamy on Indian Wells Beach was clearly a publicity stunt.
The real beneficiaries, obviously, are Mr.
Joel and his record company and Mr.
Bullock, who apparently chose arrest as welcome relief from his other duties, which evidently consist mainly of arranging to appear in Dan's Papers with melanoma-bent "guests" of the female persuasion.


Fashion; Watch For . . . The New Dealers
Everybody knows that success on Seventh Avenue is a crap shoot.
Still, every year a few talented contenders, with a little something special, emerge from the pack.
Armed with their ideas, skills and dreams, they hope to make it to the top.
Among the New York aspirants this season are potential specialists in everything from glamorous garb to avant-garde attire to sophisticated career clothes.
This may also be the year in which a hugely successful European designer, Jil Sander, acquires the same recognition here.
Becoming a big name in the States will be just another feather in the designer Jil Sander's cap.
The German dynamo is a star of megamagnitude in Europe, famous for designs that combine sophisticated ease with a knowledge of cut and a slightly avant-garde sense.
She is also an astute businesswoman running a $100 million company.
With the recent arrival here of Sander's perfume, American women are becoming more aware of her name.
Her prices are among the highest (from $1,000), but that's the going rate for such workmanship and timelessness of design.
With their subtle daring and sporty yet elegant mien, Sander's clothes seem aptly suited for American life at this moment.


The 2,000-Year-Old Book
It would be a daunting task to chart the long history of the book in a single volume, or to itemize the ways in which it has shaped and reshaped culture.
Wisely, Michael Olmert, in THE SMITHSONIAN BOOK OF BOOKS (Smithsonian, $45), does not try.
He provides, instead, an amiable summary of some of the more remarkable events in the history of the written word, beginning with the earliest examples of writing (produced in the Middle East, in the fourth millennium B.C., on clay tablets) and concluding with the profound impact of computer technology on publishing and reading.
"The book as we know it," Mr.
Olmert notes, "is pushing its 2,000th birthday," having taken its present form in Rome when someone first folded sheets of papyrus into a semblance of pages.
For much of its history the book has been a handmade object, often a work of art, as many of the reproductions here demonstrate -- of early Middle Eastern and Far Eastern religious texts, glowing pages from the Irish Book of Kells and majestic 15th-century Bibles, including Gutenberg's 1455 masterwork.
Mr.
Olmert, a magazine journalist, is particularly fascinating in describing the impact of the printing press in Europe, the lives of the first printers and designers and the phenomenal growth of the industry: between 1455 and 1500 a staggering 10 million copies of books were printed.
But finally the book is most affecting not in its summaries but in its incidentals, such as the wonderful description by James Boswell of Samuel Johnson, sitting at the dinner table with a book "wrapped in the table-cloth . . . from an avidity to have one entertainment in readiness, when he should have finished another." It is an image that any fervid reader can identify with.


A Tradition Continues At U.S. Championship
IN addition to the main prizes in the United States championship, which ended on Dec. 20 in Durango, Colo., several prizes for individual performance were awarded.
This was in accordance with a tradition that the United States Chess Federation picked up from its now defunct Soviet counterpart.
The basic idea is that placement in the final table of standings is not the only thing worthy of recognition.


Russian Economic Change Will Take Time
To the Editor:
In "Go Faster on Russian Reform" (Op-Ed, Dec. 7), the Swedish economist Anders Aslund criticizes "unreformed" United States Sovietologists who admire the father of perestroika, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, and who agree with Civic Union that the pace of economic reform has been too fast for Russian society.


Duty in Bahamas
To the Editor: Caveat emptor should be uppermost in the minds of any visitors to the Bahamas who decide to buy brand-name cameras or other photographic equipment, and they should be aware of the United States prices.


Carol Martin, Joe Terry
Carol Martin, a news anchor at WCBS-TV in New York, was married on Thursday to Joe Terry, a television director for "The Maury Povich Show" in New York.
Ms.
Martin, who is keeping her name, graduated from Wayne State University.
She is a daughter of Idessa Martin of Charlotte, N.C., and the late Daniel Martin.
Her father was an auto worker for the General Motors Corporation in Detroit.


POSTINGS: Co-Op Election Company; Democracy for a Fee
Bored of directors?
Do competing slates make you want to declare a proxy on both their houses?
Want an outside organization to handle your cooperative or condominium election, to try to avoid potential court fights or other problems?
Well, these days everything is a business, so it's not surprising to find the aptly named Co-Op Election Company, whose Manhattan offices have supervised about 70 such votes in the three years of its existence.
An affiliate of Shareholder Communications, a Wall Street proxy-solicitation firm, the Co-Op Election Company lists among its services preparing, printing and distributing ballots, proxies and notices; getting out the vote; collecting proxies before meetings; attending the meetings and registering voters; collecting ballots; confidentially tabulating the votes; supplying affidavits of accuracy in the tallies; consulting on aspects of the election process, and guaranteeing a quorum.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
AIDING OTHERS IN ENGLISH
A worthwhile addition to the many resolutions everyone has undoubtedly made for the New Year would be a stint as a Literacy Volunteer of Westchester County.
This private, nonprofit agency trains tutors to assist the thousands of functionally illiterate and non-English-speaking adults in their communities to learn to read or to speak English as a second language.
There are now 1,300 prospective students on a waiting list for tutors.


Profile/Peter Middleton; A Contemplative Master at Lloyd's
PETER MIDDLETON, the new chief executive of Lloyd's of London, says his colleagues at the venerable insurer should not be surprised if they walk by his office and see him doing nothing.
"The British disease is that people are wholly task-oriented, and success is moving one pile of paper from an 'in' tray to an 'out' tray," Mr.
Middleton explained.
"Some people feel uncomfortable just sitting at a desk thinking. They should be doing it, and they should be doing it for a more signficant part of their day. Otherwise, how do you say to yourself that you're giving the right direction and the right emphasis to the things you're doing?"


High Dudgeon In a Hampton
IN Britain, Boxing Day is marked by the giving of gifts to servants and workers.
In Southampton, L.I., last weekend it was celebrated with high tea and verbal pugilism.
On the evening after Christmas, Marina and Francesco Galesi lent the 63-room ocean-front mansion they bought recently, with its indoor waterfall and scuba-diving grotto, to the Parrish Art Museum for a fund-raiser.


Miss McCartney, Edward Claire
Allyson McCartney, the daughter of Douglas and Lesley McCartney of Freeport, L.I., was married yesterday to Edward John Claire, a son of Francis J. and Mary Claire of Freeport.
The Rev.
George W. Portice performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church of Baldwin, L.I.
Mrs.
Claire, 23, teaches at the Glen Head (L.I.) Elementary School.
She graduated from the University of New Hampshire at Durham.
Her father is a senior manager at Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company, a private bank in New York.


No Headline
Sure, it all seems beguiling now.
All the lively chat about infrastructure and all the intense seminars on spiritual renewal.
The slow jogging and fast-food binges, the lip curls and love handles, the New Age networking and the his-and-hers Presidential file boxes full of holiday homework.


The Executive Computer; New Technology on One Hand Is Clutter on Another
AT offices around the country, personal computer shoppers have been saying buy-buy, spurred by a price war that has made even the newest, powerful systems cheap by historical measures and by the obsolescence of older office computers.
Even machines just a couple of years old cannot keep up with the demands of newer software, especially the Microsoft Corporation's Windows and the International Business Machines Corporation's OS/2.
The influx of machines has left many companies pondering what to do with the old ones.
"We're in a renewal cycle," said Seymour Merrin, president of Merrin Information Systems Inc., a consultancy in Palo Alto, Calif.
"All the 286's have to go because they don't run Windows. The old 386's have to be upgraded with bigger drives, and some of them are not powerful enough to run the software. In two years you're not going to be able to load most of the software on those 486SX's."


Come Join the Fight
To the Editor:
I was distressed to see myself listed in "Calls to Restrict Immigration Come From Many Quarters" (The Week in Review, Dec. 13) as a sponsor of a constitutional amendment that would deny United States citizenship to American-born children of undocumented parents.


NOTES
The Electric Slide is getting its own club night at Laura Belle.
The line dance, inspired by Marcia Griffith's song of the same name, will be the featured activity for "Electric Fridays" during the month of January at the West 43d Street club.
Jellybean Benitez, the record producer, will be the guest deejay on Friday, Jan. 8.
"Everybody seems to know how to do the dance," said Kevin Doyle, the club's regular deejay.
"We even had some 23-year-old Ford models out there doing it one night. I have no idea where they learned it."


GROWING U.S. DEBT IS LIMITING OPTIONS OPEN FOR CLINTON
America's vast and growing Federal debt is sharply narrowing the options available to President-elect Bill Clinton as he prepares to reshape the budget that President Bush will submit to Congress next week.
That process, which will take place in the coming weeks, will mark a turning point for the new President.
The act of subjecting his campaign promises to the discipline of budget-making will give the country a first look at his real fiscal intentions, just as Ronald Reagan's first budget message of Feb. 18, 1981, provided a blueprint for the entire Reagan revolution.


Chamber Recitals Usher in New Year
IT usually takes a couple of weeks for the concert season to recover from its holiday hiatus, but concertgoers do not have to wait longer than this afternoon to enjoy fine performances.
Chamber Music Plus and First Congregational Church of Old Greenwich have both made a point of starting their activities on the first Sunday of the New Year.
At 3 P.M. today, "Classical Dialogues" propel the 13th annual Post-New Year's Chamber Music Plus concert, the title specifically referring to the "Dialogue for Cello and Piano," composed by Benjamin Lees in 1977 for founding directors Harry Clark and Sanda Schuldmann.
The program in the Seaverns Room at the Bushnell in Hartford also lists Beethoven's Serenade in D for String Trio and the E-Flat Piano Quartet of Mozart, the last in collaboration with the violinist Renee Jolles and the violist Lois Martin.
Tickets will be available at the door; for information about future Chamber Music Plus events, call 232-0085.
No tickets are required at First Congregational Church of Old Greenwich for the 4 o'clock candlelight recitals that constitute "Sunday Afternoons Live," although offerings are taken.
The Soundview Chamber Players usher in the series today, Dorothy Happel and David Buechner play violin and piano sonatas next Sunday, and the remaining six matinees cover the tonal range, from chamber music by the Mendelssohn String Quartet to cabaret songs with Jaymie Meyer (637-1791).


Congress Is Hoping to Enter a New Era
The 103d Congress convenes Tuesday, with Democrats hoping to prove that inaction in Washington can end now that they have a Democratic President to work with.
With solid majorities in the House and the Senate and promises from leaders and important committee chairmen that President-elect Bill Clinton's agenda is their agenda, the Democrats also know that if they fail to pass a hefty measure of legislation, they will have no plausible excuses.


A 'Hands Off' Owner Completes 20 Years
Robert Morse ("Sugar"), Alan Bates ("Butley") and Jerry Orbach ("6 Rms Riv Vu") were on Broadway that afternoon and evening, Sonny and Cher were on television that night, and the obscenity trial of the movie "Deep Throat" came to a close in Manhattan Criminal Court.
And in the Bronx 20 years ago today, CBS announced that it had sold the Yankees.
The new owners were a group of businessmen and lawyers headed by George Steinbrenner, a 42-year-old shipbuilder from Cleveland.


A New Industry Tie With Academia
IN September 1991, Brad Thomas, a top engineer at Becton, Dickinson, was handed a sizable design task, one that was central to his company's long-term growth.
But it came with a surprising twist: he'd be supervising a team of M.I.T. graduate students and faculty members.
Industry and academia are no strangers, of course, as engineering programs at dozens of universities reach out to companies for cooperation and sponsorships.
But this program takes such links a long stride further, with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology actually signing a contract to come up with a workable product design within two years.


Christine Parrillo, Thomas Cantilli
Linda R. Vernooy of Saddle River, N.J., and Dr.
Vincent N. Parrillo of Ridgewood, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Christine Rea Parrillo to Thomas Matthew Cantilli, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Cantilli of Ramsey, N.J.
Miss Parrillo, 23, is an accountant with Ernst &amp; Young in Hackensack, N.J.
She graduated magna cum laude from Lehigh University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a stepdaughter of Robert Vernooy of Saddle River and Elizabeth Parrillo of Ridgewood.


Caution: Ants at Work (Watch Your Step)
THIS is about ants.
Although they are often thought of as rather lowly, unnecessary nuisances in the garden, a great respect for these tiny creatures is evolving.
The first clue came when a good friend and expert gardener, was visiting my garden this fall.
The tiny Cyclamen hederifolium was just coming into bloom and the display was such a joy to see.
This tiny cyclamen pokes up many delicate flowers from each fat tuber, which is just under the surface of the soil.
The flowers are only an inch or so high and when there are enough of them, the tiny blossoms make a splendid display.


Russian Economic Change Will Take Time; Moscow's Pizza Hut
To the Editor:
In "Help Russia but Hold the Pizza" (Op-Ed, Nov. 23), Edward L. Keenan writes that people in the former Soviet Union do not need pizza parlors or automatic-teller machines so much as they need basic life-support systems.


When Exotic Really Is the Right Word
ETHIOPIAN fare is exotic enough but Caffe Adulis in New Haven takes unusual ethnic dining one step farther in offering Eritrean fare as well.
Eritrea is part of Ethiopia (on the northeast coast, bordering the Red Sea), and the restaurant is named for an Eritrean port city.
Although the restaurant is barely three months old, its popularity was already evident on recent visits there.
Caffe Adulis is no hole-in-the-wall, undercapitalized kind of place.
Situated diagonally across from the Shubert in downtown New Haven, it has converted a storefront location into an airy, bright, spotless two-level dining space, divided into smoking and nonsmoking sections.


OFF THE COUCH
If modern psychiatry has grown up to join its cousins in the medical and surgical specialities, then it, too, faces the practical constraints of governmental agencies and insurance companies.
The author neglects the fact that such regulations often dictate the type of treatment patients receive or the length of time they may remain in treatment.
If there is a perception that modern psychiatry is about medication, or that the battle is about whether to medicate or not to medicate, then we should understand that psychiatrists, as doctors, are influenced (and often compromised) by political and economic realities.
The bottom line may be that a bottle of pills is worth more than an empathetic ear.
Whoever still thinks "talk is cheap" should have his head examined.
MITCHELL S. NOBLER, M.D.
New York, N.Y.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Islamic fundamentalism misidentified the university with which Azizah al-Hibri is associated.
She is a professor of law at the University of Richmond.


Data Bank/January 3, 1992
New Home Sales
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Monthly percent change
-8.3
-8.2
7.0
Existing Home Sales
Monthly percent change
0.2
1.1
0.5
Index of Leading Indicators
Monthly percent change
0.8
0.5
-0.1
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
-1.1
2.0
1.3
Consumer Confidence
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
1985 = 100
78.3
65.8
54.6
Economic Activity
Purchasing Managers Index
55.9
55.0
50.6
Weekly Jobless Claims
Dec. 18
Dec. 11
Dec. 4
In thousands
332
360
348
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Dec. 31
Dec. 24
Dec. 18
Yield in percent
7.39
7.36
7.42


Hilary C. Bacon, C. F. Gabrieli
Hilary Conant Bacon, a daughter of A. Smoki Bacon of Boston and the late Edwin C. Bacon, was married yesterday to Christopher Frater Oscar Gabrieli, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Elemer Gabrieli of Buffalo.
The Rev.
Allan Warren, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Church of the Advent in Boston.
Mrs.
Gabrieli, 32, is a tax consultant for the Harvard Institute for International Development at Harvard University in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated from Harvard and received a law degree from the University of Notre Dame.
She also received a master's degree in tax law from Boston University.
Her mother and her stepfather, Richard F. Concannon, own Bacon-Concannon Associates, a public relations firm for nonprofit organizations in Boston.


The Crucial Link for Labor Talks
With talks progressing between the city and its municipal unions, it's crucial that Mayor Dinkins and his negotiators stand firm on the central issue: linking wage increases to productivity gains and other concessions.
Should the city abandon that demand, the public will bear the burden.
The latest reports are not encouraging.
Initially Mr.
Dinkins insisted on a fundamental principle: no increases larger than those in the city's long-range financial plan unless the unions pay for them with concessions and increased productivity.
The plan calls for no increases for two years, then an increase of 1.5 percent in the third year and 2 percent in the fourth.


How to Cope When a Solution Shares the Problem
In a room filled with 113 students, talking in 4- and 5-year-old voices, a shrill blow of a whistle brings order out of the chaos of four kindergarten classes going on at once.
Storybook lessons trail off.
Building blocks clunk to the floor.
A tenuous calm falls.
The room, actually the fellowship hall of a Presbyterian Church, is the school system's answer to overcrowding at Public School 215 in Queens, a mile and a half away.


Corrections
The description of "Boneyards," by Robert Campbell, on Dec. 6 in The Book Review's list of notable books of 1992 misstated the year in which Mayor Richard J. Daley of Chicago died.
It was 1976, not 1977.


GENDER DE PLUME
Having published fiction under both male and female pseudonyms, I read Dinty W. Moore's About Men column "Gender de Plume" (Dec 6) with interest.
He is right that if his story is good enough to convince readers, it should be published.
Fiction always plays with the truth, even if it's an autobiographical account that's simply been shaped into a story.
DAVID GALEF
University, Miss.


Evan Higgins and Richard Jeske
Evan Higgins, the director of community relations and development at Grace Church Community Center, a social outreach center in White Plains, was married yesterday at Holy Trinity Lutheran Church in New York to the church's senior pastor, Dr.
Richard Jeske.
Bishop James Sudbrock of the Metropolitan New York Synod of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Jeske, who was a widow, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. LaRocque of Harrison, N.Y.
She graduated from Manhattanville College and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father, now retired, was the executive vice president and director of American Flange Inc., a maker of steel drum fittings in Linden, N.J.


THE WEDDING GIFT
After reading Carolyn Marks Blackwood's Hers column "The Wedding Gift" (Dec. 13), I was impressed by her remarkably good perspective on the last few months spent with her husband.
As a physician, I have often wondered whether prolonging life for only a few months is more valuable than harmful to a sick patient and family members.
It is encouraging to see that, when the quality of one's final days -- as depicted by Blackwood's recollection of her wedding -- is potentially high, a few months can provide a lifetime of fond memories to a loved one.
STEPHEN COVEY, M.D.
New York, N.Y.


Shortsighted Thinking
To the Editor:
As a tall man (6 feet 5 inches), I wonder why is it that most wall labels are intended to be read by a museumgoing population of Tom Thumbs?
If you wear bifocals, you practically have to get underneath the label and look up.
At the Matisse exhibition at the Modern, my back gave out before my eyesight did.
MELVIN N. PORETZ Merrick, N. Y.


Investors' Sentiment Rises, but Are They Wrong?
INVESTORS, like other consumers, are looking over the American economy and finding more to cheer about.
That may be a reason for caution in buying stock.
The University of Michigan has been separating out the attitudes of investors, as opposed to more plebeian consumers, for only three years.
But the university's survey is already beginning to look as though it might have some value as a contrary indicator.


A Critical Job: Stop Proliferation
Even as the U.S. and Russia are sharply reducing their nuclear arsenals, another urgent danger is emerging -- the proliferation of nuclear and high-tech arms to renegade states that might have little compunction about using them.
How do states like Iraq and Iran arm themselves with material and equipment that could be used to make weapons?
With help, it turns out, from the U.S. and its allies.
Lax controls allow Western companies to ship dangerous technologies that have civilian uses but can be converted to military purposes as well.
Iraq, for instance, built centrifuges for enriching uranium with welding and milling machinery from Germany, lubricants from the U.S. and carbon fiber from Japan.


PALESTINIANS EXIT LEBANON IN DROVES
As many as two-thirds of Palestinians living in camps in Lebanon have left the country, Palestine Liberation Organization officials say, in a move that could affect P.L.O. negotiating strength and the nation's delicate balance of religious communities.
"As many as 100,000 Palestinians left refugee camps in Lebanon" since 1991, one official, Salah Salah, the P.L.O.'s political officer, said recently at Ain El Hilwe, a refugee camp 25 miles south of the capital on the outskirts of Sidon that is the largest of 12 in Lebanon.
P.L.O. officials say the exodus is a response to worsening economic and security conditions in the camps, as well as Government restrictions on jobs for non-Lebanese.


U.N. Chief Seeks Basis for Peace in Somalia Today
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali of the United Nations is to visit this ravaged nation on Sunday as he begins a new effort to bring together Somalia's battling factions and restore civil authority to a country that has been without a government for two years.
The Secretary General arrived in neighboring Ethiopia today, where he will return for a two-day meeting intended to bring together leaders of 14 Somali factions.


'With Friends Like You'
To the Editor:
In his review of Matti Golan's "With Friends Like You: What Israelis Really Think About American Jews" (Nov. 29), Clyde Haberman makes the gratuitous comment that the book will have Hadassah members across the United States squirming in their chairs.
This because, according to Mr.
Haberman, Mr.
Golan is so uncomfortably on the mark.
As it happens, Hadassah members are not squirming in their chairs.
They are actively engaged in the exploration of Hadassah's 1992-93 educational theme: the relationship between Israeli and American Jews. (I am the director of the national department of Jewish education at Hadassah.) The Hadassah study guide "Israeli and American Jews: Understanding and Misunderstanding" is the antithesis of Mr.
Golan's simplistic, arrogant, off-the-mark portrayal of an intricate relationship.


Corrections
A front-page picture on Dec. 20 with a headline about Benin was published in error.
It showed a Portuguese horseman's pendant made in the former kingdom of Benin, not the modern-day country of Benin. (The kingdom of Benin flourished in the 15th century and lasted until 1897 in an area that is now in southern Nigeria.)


Vikings Score Quickly, But It Doesn't Unsettle The Veteran Redskins
The Minnesota Vikings grabbed the opening kickoff and returned it 21 yards.
Five straight runs, and they were at their 41.
Two quick passes and they were at the Washington Redskins' 1-yard line.
One smashing leap and dive and they were up, 7-0.
Just like that.


Susan Thompson, Thomas Billington
Susan Siler Thompson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Reid Thompson of Chevy Chase, Md., was married yesterday to Thomas Keator Billington, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
James H. Billington of Arlington, Va.
The Rev.
Sanford Garner performed the ceremony at St.
Alban's Episcopal Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Billington is a speech pathologist in Chevy Chase.
She graduated from Stephens College and received a master's degree in speech and language pathology from George Washington University.
Her father retired as chairman of the Potomac Electric Power Company in Washington.


Sound Bytes; On the Near Side of 30 at Gateway 2000
TED WAITT, the ponytailed, chain-smoking president of Gateway 2000 Inc., does things in a hurry.
In 1985, after several years of college studies and nine months of working in a retail computer store in Des Moines, Iowa, he decided that selling computers directly to customers made more sense, so he went home and started Gateway, a direct mail supplier.
Corporate computer customers were initially wary of the company's spartan offices in a cow pasture in North Sioux City, S.D. -- Gateway's computers still come in boxes painted to resemble cow hides -- but today Gateway is solidly in the top tier of PC makers with 1992 sales of more than $1 billion.
Mr.
Waitt turns 30 in two weeks.
Question: Gateway doesn't spend a lot on research and development.
Some of your competitors say PC companies are doomed if they compete only on price, without a technological edge.
Do you agree?


Anne-Marie Lund, Christopher Kagy
Anne-Marie Lund, the daughter of Robert E. Lund Jr. and Dr.
Patricia Z. Lund of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., was married there on Monday to Christopher Carver Kagy, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Merle D. Kagy of Tiffin, Ohio.
The Rev.
John Heller performed the ceremony at St.
John's Evangelical Lutheran Church.
Mrs.
Kagy, 22, and her husband graduated from Dartmouth College.
She is a law student at George Mason University.
Her father is a senior programmer for the International Business Machines Corporation in Purchase, N.Y.
Her mother is an associate professor of nursing at Western Connecticut State University in Danbury, Conn.


The Face In the Crowd
CAPRICE BENEDETTI stared fixedly at herself in the mirror, surveying her beauty, and saw that her color was just not right, so she repaired that deficiency quickly.
She daubed on a touch more lipstick.
Self-absorption is expected of a model.
It was late in the day, and she had already changed clothes and makeup a half-dozen times, piling new look upon new look.
"O.K.," she said.
"I'm the next me."
She bounced out of her apartment building in Manhattan, the doorman nodding to this latest version of her.
Quickly, her long legs propelled her into the humming convoy of pedestrians, those who had uncomplainingly lived with the same look all day long.
"Some days, I'm changing my face and changing my clothes 10 times," she said.
"I'm elegant. I'm casual. I'm chic. I'm downtown. I'm sexy. I'm theatrical. I begin to wonder: Who am I? I'm 10 different people. Where's the real me? You have an identity crisis. Who is this?"


Miss Weaver, Mr. Kouwenhoven
Mr. and Mrs.
Garrett L. S. Weaver of West Hartford, Conn., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, Christine Simonne Weaver, and Nicholas Willson Kouwenhoven, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William G. Kouwenhoven of Baltimore.
Miss Weaver, 26, is a writer and editor at the Career College Association, an organization of business, trade and technical schools in Washington.
She and her fiance graduated from Connecticut College, she magna cum laude.
She received a master's degree in English from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is a stockbroker for Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. in Hartford.
Her mother, Francoise Weaver, is a lecturer in French at Trinity College there.


Auguring Well: Trouble on Deck; A Season Called On Account of Greed?
Baseball has just staggered through such a gloomy season that one can imagine a future without booming home runs and dashing slides and warm summer nights at the ball park.
A 1993 doomsday scenario for baseball goes something like this:
The owners force their labor negotiator, Richard Ravitch, to threaten a lockout to limit free agency.
Since the commissionership was knee-capped, Ravitch is seen as a hired gun rather than an ombudsman.
There is no spring training, which puts baseball out of sight.


In Installation Art, a Bit of the Spoiled Brat
Installation Art, the love child of late 60's idealism, may be turning into the spoiled brat of the 90's, consuming quantities of materials, museum space and attention without giving much in return.
This is not to say that good installation work does not exist.
It is simply to make a modest proposal: enough already.
This proposal came to mind at "Art at the Armory: Occupied Territory," an exhibition organized by the Museum of Contemporary Art in Chicago.
Fourteen artists, three collaborative groups and a two-artist team were set loose in the Chicago Avenue National Guard Armory to create new installation works or present existing ones.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  HOUSTON OILERS -- Activated Lamar Lathon, linebacker, from injured reserve.
Placed Jeff Alm, defensive tackle, on injured reserve.
Hockey National Hockey League  ISLANDERS -- Recalled Tom Kurvers, defenseman, from Capital District of the American Hockey League on an emergency basis.


Let's Not Laud Mr. Greenspan
To the Editor:
Regarding "Greenspan's Gift to the Nation: No Bank Crisis" (Dec. 20), it is good to know that American taxpayers may not be called upon to deal with a banking crisis.
But the idea that this is a gift from Alan Greenspan is hard to digest.
As the article stated, after interest rates fell, "the banks found a way to make nice money without making loans . . . by buying two-year to five-year government securities."


Carriage House
To the Editor:
I take exception to the article on Nov. 29  [ "The End of a Victorian Gem" ]  about the Brinckerhoff carriage house on East 77th Street.


Nets Come All the Way Back Only to Give It All Away
This is not the kind of game the Nets have lost this season.
It was close.
It was on the road.
And it was in their hands with only seconds to play.
But this was no normal game, and so a normal end shouldn't be expected.
New Jersey trailed the Charlotte Hornets by as much as 14 points in the second half.
The Nets, as they have done often on the road this year, fought back and actually led by 117-116 with 12 seconds left.
Then the unexpected happened.


Rethinking the Plain Old Telephone
BEFORE Alexander Graham Bell was born, the word telephone referred to a ship's foghorn.
When Bell invented his "electrical speaking telephone" in 1876 and summoned his surprised assistant, Watson, down the hall, he forever changed the meaning of the word whose Greek roots mean "distant sound."
Today, technology is once again changing what we mean by telephone.
Companies from Apple Computer to Philips Electronics to MCI are rethinking the way people communicate electronically, and within a decade, the current phone will seem as quaint as that long-ago "marine alarum." But the leader in this field, unique in its resources and its resourcefulness, is the company that Bell founded, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.


Auguring Well: 1968 Plus 25; Abbie, Eldridge and RFK: Heavy Flashback, Man
Ouch.
It is here already.
The new year brings with it the 25th -- that's right, 25th -- anniversary of 1968, that surreal year of dissent that pulsated with hedonism and turbulence.
It can't have been that long ago, but it was, and for the children of the sixties it doesn't ease their cholesterol count to know that bell-bottoms and platform shoes are back.
Get ready for the maudlin recollections, for celebrators to exhume the frayed and corroded images.
So much to remember of those 365 days when it was vital to be alienated.
The Vietnam War raged and students wrested control of campuses.
Cities were torched.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. loosed the Poor People's Campaign.
The New Left stormed into prominence, putting the world on notice that the apocalypse was near.
Timothy Leary was urging everyone to turn on to LSD and drop out.
President Johnson chose not to run for reelection.
Dr.
King and Robert F. Kennedy were gunned down.


Martha L. Jay, Milton L. Schultz
Martha Liane Jay was married Monday to Milton Lee Schultz.
Both are tax partners at KPMG Peat Marwick, the accounting firm, she in New York, he in Houston.
The Rev.
Dr.
Richard L. Jeske, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony at Cloverdale Farm in Logansport, Ind.


Scientists Call Off Robot's Mission Into Volcano
Scientists called off the robot Dante's mission of climbing down into an Antarctic volcano today after a crucial communications cable between the machine and its control station broke.
The robot, which on Friday started its trek down the volcano, Mount Erebus, had inched about 24 feet into the crater when it ran into problems.


Passionate and Twisted
To the Editor:
Katha Pollitt's review of "Incest" (Nov. 22), the latest volume of Anais Nin's unexpurgated diary, seems to draw a conclusion that diminishes the work.
Ms.
Pollitt wonders if this book's revelations were orchestrated by hidden editorial hands seeking to promulgate a cult of Nin.
She encourages us to wait for Nin's biography, suggesting that the secondhand sleuthing of an academic will somehow reveal the real Nin that the reading of the woman's actual words cannot.


With a Curtsy To Society
The annual International Debutante Ball, at the Waldorf-Astoria, Dec. 29.


THIS LAND IS YOUR LAND . . .
Shirley Christian's article "This Land Is Your Land . . . This Land Is My Land" (Nov. 29) was interesting.
However, her mention of Violeta Chamorro's defeat of Daniel Ortega by a "landslide margin" is misleading.
She failed to remind readers that, after financing and guiding a devastating contra war, the United States interfered openly in the election of 1990 by organizing and financing a coalition of 11 or 12 political parties to oppose Ortega and the Sandinista Party.


Getting the Answers From the Library
Re: "From the Serious to the Seriously Weird," Dec. 6:
Reference librarians like myself at local public libraries throughout New Jersey must be pleased for the mention in the article about New Jersey Nightline's first anniversary, but there should have been more emphasis on the fact that Nightline was designed by the State Library to
supplement
local services by providing telephone reference when municipal libraries are closed and there is an urgent need for information.


Philip Schoenfeld and Lauren Hiller
Lauren Hiller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lee Hiller of Bellmore, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Philip Schoenfeld, the son of Frances Himelfarb of New City, N.Y., and the late Stanley Schoenfeld.
Rabbi Leonard Romm performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Mrs.
Schoenfeld, 26, is a pediatric physical therapist at Rhode Island Hospital in Providence, R.I.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in physical therapy from Columbia University.
Her father is a senior vice president at Lord &amp; Taylor in New York.


Conversations/Allan G. Lindh; Is 1993 the Year of the Big One? Rumblings from a California Prophet
ALLAN G. LINDH looks the part of a latter-day Jeremiah, with a long russet-and-white beard, a piercing gaze and an absent-minded mien.
And he sounds the part when he warns Californians that the recent earthquakes in the Mojave Desert, among the largest in state history, are a "final warning" that the Big One on the southern end of the San Andreas Fault is just around the corner and that "it's time to act as if the damn thing will happen tomorrow."


At Work; The Loneliness of the Layoff Survivor
PETER DiToro, a senior consultant at Computervision in Bedford, Mass., is a veteran of what is becoming the combat zone of the 90's.
He has survived a half-dozen rounds of layoffs over the last four years and in recounting them, he talks about this group "getting shot" or that group having "a hand grenade rolled under it."
The dramatic shrinking of American industry during this seemingly endless slump has been characterized by large companies laying off thousands of workers.
While the focus has been on the plight of the suddenly unemployed, the survivors are left to handle the emotional stress wrought by dramatic changes in the workplace, often with scant attention from senior management.


Dinkins May Have Regrets, but Not on Crown Hts.
Mayor David N. Dinkins, a man who rarely admits fault, reflected last week on his performance over the last year and rendered this judgment: he was right the first time.
In his annual year-end interview with reporters, Mr.
Dinkins did not give an inch to his critics among Orthodox Jews who have repeatedly attacked him for his handling of the racial violence in Crown Heights, Brooklyn in August 1991.


Susan Forbes, Bruce Williams
Susan Forbes, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Florence Jr. of Bedford, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Bruce Williams, the son of Fernando H. Williams of Houston and Jane Voulgaris of Fredericksburg, Tex.
The Rev.
Dr.
William E. Foley performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Williams, 34, and her husband, 39, work for the Texas Commerce Bank in Houston, she as an investment banker and he as a vice president of finance.
The bride graduated from Smith College and received an M.B.A. degree from Rice University.
Her father is the corporation counsel for the City of Peekskill, N.Y.
Her mother, Judith Florence, is a college admissions adviser in Bedford.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


In Stamford, 'Dancing at Lughnasa'
IT may be too soon for Alexander H. Cohen, the executive producer of the Stamford Center for the Arts, to make known his mission for a real regional theater, with home-grown productions and an artistic point of view, but serious theatergoers are not being slighted in the meantime.
"Dancing at Lughnasa," last season's most honored stage work in New York, following triumphs in Dublin and in London, is the premiere production in the elegant new Rich Forum, where Brian Friel's luminous memory play is being seen professionally for the first time since ending a year's run on Broadway.
Note, too, that the production bears the imprimatur of the Abbey Theater in Dublin, the play's birthplace in 1990 and the point of its return a year later in preparation for Broadway.
The current company, which concludes a 12-day run today, consists of replacements and understudies who appeared on Broadway, with Donal Donnelly, whose association with the playwright's works began with "Philadelphia, Here I Come!" in 1966, creating anew his original role.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
DECISIONS, DECISIONS
A six-part series of discussions focusing on the United States Supreme Court's decision-making process will begin Saturday at 2 P.M. at the Hartford Public Library, 500 Main Street.
Every other Saturday through March 20, participants will meet to explore landmark constitutional cases.
The series, for which there is no charge, is sponsored by the League of Women Voters of West Hartford.
Recommended reading between sessions will be available at the library .
The series leads off with "Being Supreme: Early Power Struggles 1776-1868," followed on Jan. 23 with "Comes Now the Pauper: The Right to Counsel." The subject on Feb. 6 will be "Dangerous Words: Freedom of Speech," and "In Black and White: Equal Protection of the Laws" will be covered on Feb. 20.
The final programs on March 6 and March 20 are "Public Practices: Freedom of (and From) Religion" and "Home Alone: Privacy and the Court."


Correction
An article last Sunday about the winners and losers of 1992 misstated the role of Gary L. Roubos, chief executive of the Dover Corporation, in arguing that stock options for executives have value.
Mr.
Roubos took that position in a letter to the Business Roundtable.


Showcases of the City's Cultural Rejuvenation
RIO DE JANEIRO's most compelling charms have always been its natural wonders.
The mere suggestion of a tropical squall was once a bleak omen for a visitor intent on enjoying Rio's superlative outdoors.
However, within the past three years careful restorations have burnished a group of cultural centers that display a different but equally important aspect of the city.
Among the landmarks that have been recently renovated are Rio's Municipal Theater, the National Gallery of the Museum of Fine Arts, which reopened in late 1991 following nine years of renovations, and the Museum of Modern Art.


Auguring Well: Night and Day; A Centennial in Common
What do Cole Porter and Mao Tse-tung have in common?
Both would have been 100 this year, (June 9 and Dec. 26 respectively); the two also shared a love of language as well as a birth year.
To kick off their centennials, here are a few lyrics by the birthday boys.
The Long March


Vacation Ending, Clinton Plans to Fill More Jobs
As he ends a six-day family vacation here, President-elect Bill Clinton is turning his attention to the next chore on the transition calendar, filling the top tiers of White House jobs.
On Friday, Mr.
Clinton conferred with a longtime aide, Craig Smith, and Richard W. Riley, the former South Carolina Governor he has nominated to be Secretary of Education, to discuss the structure of the White House.
Mr.
Riley has headed the transition operation to fill positions below the Cabinet level.


A New Group Will Champion Youth Agenda In Washington
The MTV generation is getting its own Washington-based public policy center.
Vanessa Kirsch, the 27-year-old founder of Public Allies, a Washington group that sets up public-service apprenticeships, and Steve Barr, the 32-year-old founder of the Boniface Project, a Los Angeles organization that renovates abandoned inner-city buildings and registers voters, are joining forces to create the National Service Project.


On Fur: Taking It Personally
To the Editor:
A very short comment on the On the Street column "Wearing Fur, Walking Fur" (Dec. 13).


Susan Prusaczyk, Alexander Prout
Susan Rosemary Prusaczyk, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard D. Prusaczyk of South Windsor, Conn., was married yesterday to Alexander Maurice Prout, a son of Tomiyo Prout of New York and the late Frank J. Prout.
The Rev.
Matthew Roche performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Assumption in Westport, Conn.
Mrs.
Prout, 28, was until recently the international public relations manager for Tiffany &amp; Company.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.
Her father, now retired, was an English teacher at East Hartford (Conn.) High School.
Her mother, Susan B. Prusaczyk, is an accountant for the Town of Manchester, Conn.


Parties Past
Oh, how they danced in 1992 (and ate and drank and mixed and mingled and laughed).


Corrections
A brief report on page 33 of The Times Magazine today with an article about Iraq's actions against its Kurdish minority misstates the record of United Nations inspectors searching for chemical weapons in Iraq.
The United Nations teams have located and destroyed many chemical weapons in Iraq.


Q and A
English Garden Tours
Q.
We would like to find a tour that visits English gardens in the spring.
Do you know of any? -- Donna Miller, Mystic, Conn.


Fondness for Fur Is Unfashionable
To the Editor:
In a new era of awareness about the environment and the treatment of animals, your On the Street column "Wearing Fur, Walking Fur" (Dec. 13) showed a blatant disregard for a trend that is sweeping the rest of the civilized world but seems to have left New York City behind.


Two Who Know Thin Ice Affirm a Thaw
ONE of them was arriving from a war zone, Yevgeny Ignatenko, Mikhail S. Gorbachev's old spokesman, observed the other day, and the other from the killing fields of political combat.
One has lost his grip on office; the other lives in peril of doing so.
So when President Bush and Boris N. Yeltsin sit down in Moscow in these early hours of 1993 to sign the most sweeping arms reduction treaty of the nuclear age they do so at a moment when much about their countries' future relationship is hard to fathom.


Jennifer Irwin, Matthew Filos
Jennifer Anne Irwin, a daughter of William and Marianne Irwin of Larchmont, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Matthew Filos, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Filos of New York.
The Rev.
Joseph Irwin, an uncle of the bride, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Augustine's Church.
Mrs.
Filos, 29, is a recruiting coordinator for Deloitte &amp; Touche, the accounting firm, in Wilton, Conn.
She graduated from Iona College.
Her father is a senior account executive with Colin Service Systems Inc., a janitorial and building maintenance company in White Plains.
Her mother teaches mathematics at Hommocks Middle School in Mamaroneck, N.Y.


The Royal Family Tree Sprouts Unofficial Limbs
IS the behavior of England's royal family just a latter-day aberration, a bizarre soap opera starring Prince Charles and the Princess of Wales, Prince Andrew and the Duchess of York that is totally out of character with the austere nature of the family?
Not at all, say two men who may be considered experts on English royalty since both claim to be descended from kings and are also keen students of royal history.
They say such shenanigans date back centuries, that what is presently happening is just an extension of an old royal tale.


Outreach Could Be A Way Out
To the Editor:
Carol Vogel's article on the budding romance between art museums and their public  [ "Dear Museumgoer: What Do
You
Think?," Dec. 20 ]  notes that the institutions are seeking ways to draw in large numbers of visitors to make ends meet. While informative, the account omits some of the most important aspects of the problem.


Auguring Well: Cock-a-Doodle-Doo; Chinese Think the Sky May Fall
The Year of the Monkey in the Chinese calendar will give way on Jan. 23 to the Year of the Rooster, and that may mean looking out carefully to keep your head off the chopping block.
"Roosters zip back and forth, this way and that, so the Year of the Rooster will be a time of instability and perhaps bad luck," explained an elderly Beijing woman with bound feet.


Corrections
The listing of film revivals today on page 34 of the Arts and Leisure section includes an erroneous schedule for Film Forum 2 in Manhattan.
It should read: "Today-Thursday: John Huston's 'Wise Blood' (1979) and 'The Dead' (1987). Friday-next Sunday: George Cukor's 'Dinner at Eight' (1933); William Keighley's 'Man Who Came to Dinner' (1941); Aviva Slesin's documentary 'The 10-Year Lunch: The Wit and Legend of the Algonquin Round Table' (1987)."


Editorial Notebook; New York's Particular Patch
Mary Jo Cysewski crossed the continent last week to skate on the rink at Rockefeller Center.
She saw it on television at home in Los Angeles a year ago -- the great Christmas tree above the beckoning rink -- and decided that's where she wanted to be on Christmas Eve 1992.
To trek 2,786 miles for a turn on a rather small patch of ice may seem a bit much.
But for anyone who skates, and for thousands of spectators who don't, this particular patch is special.
It's world famous.
It's theater.
And it's wonderfully refreshing, as much for the spirit as for the lungs and legs.


Japan's Taste for the Luxurious Gives Way to Utility and Frugality
In seasons past, the trendy young Japanese man would stand in line at Tiffany to buy his girlfriend a pendant or ring, then spend Christmas Eve with her at a fancy hotel near Tokyo Disneyland, paying $800 for a room and dinner for two.
The hotels were usually booked by June, forcing many men to make a reservation before they were even sure they would have a date.
But during the last Christmas, rooms were available.
And Tiffany &amp; Company's profits were nearly wiped out in its latest quarter because business in Japan has fallen off so sharply.
French food and expensive gifts are out; tripe stew and handmade presents are in.


Fine-Tuning One's Enemies
DUNSTER
By John Mortimer. 296 pp. New York: Viking. $21.


LITHUANIA DECIDES TO TRY FLEXIBILITY
More than a month after Lithuanians overwhelmingly elected a new Government, the newly designated Foreign Minister says his country will adopt a more open and pragmatic foreign policy.
"Maybe we were too visionary and idealistic before," the new Minister, Povilas Gylys, said.
"We are going to be more flexible now."


Football By Another Name
To the Sports Editor:
George Vecsey says that it should be noted in the interests of accuracy that Cecil Rhodes, when talking of football, was referring to soccer.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
CHARTING THE SEA OF DARKNESS The Four Voyages of Henry Hudson.
By Donald S. Johnson.
International Marine/McGraw-Hill, $22.95.


That Airline Pillow May Be Well Traveled
PAUL EKMAN, a researcher in the School of Medicine at the University of California in San Francisco, asked for a pillow on a recent United Airlines flight home from Boston.
When the flight attendant handed him a pillow, he saw hair on it and complained, only to be told that the pillowcases were not changed after every flight.
Nor, he was told in response to a question, were the headsets changed or cleaned after every flight.
Mr.
Ekman wrote to United about its "unhealthy" practice and received a letter from a customer relations official saying that the pillows and headsets were "checked and cleaned on regularly scheduled intervals" but if the items were "damaged or visibly dirty," they were replaced.


L.I. Looks to Washington For Revival in '93
On Long Island, as elsewhere in the country, attention is focusing on Bill Clinton as the year begins.
When Mr.
Clinton takes office as President will he unleash an array of economic programs that will spur Long Island's economy or will whatever Federal help arrives serve just to complement the true engines of regional economic recovery?
And, Mr.
Clinton aside, is recovery in the cards for Long Island this year or do more hard months lie ahead?
A panel of three economists agreed that a recovery is on the way and may have already begun.
And whatever money Washington injects into the regional economy, they said, will only make things better.


Bigotry, Though Hateful, Is Protected; Holmes in Dissent
To the Editor:
It may bode well for the outcome of the pending Wisconsin hate-speech case that in "Clean Up the Law of Speech" (editorial, Dec. 17) the passage you quote from Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes was written as a dissenting opinion, in United States v.
Schwimmer (1929).


OFF THE COUCH
Stone's article evoked memories of my psychiatric residency training at Columbia.
However, Dr.
MacKinnon's fear that the changes in psychiatry will result in the loss of a place in the specialty for "healing the soul" is puzzling.
In his teaching, MacKinnon always emphasized that psychiatrists are first and foremost physicians, who practice the arts of assessment, diagnosis and treatment.
Revolutionary changes have occurred in all these areas, and the introduction of new medications is only one aspect.
Yet Freud's "Standard Edition" appears to remain the lifeblood of psychoanalysis.
The new dynamics of psychiatry, based firmly in medicine, can only improve our capacity as physicians to reduce suffering and heal the ills, if not the souls, of our patients.
WILLIAM G. HONER, M.D.
Vancouver, British Columbia


Stocks Are Expensive, But Does It Matter?
AS 1993 begins, the best thing that can be said for the American stock market is that most of the alternatives may be even worse.
It is not, of course, that stocks are cheap.
By most valuation standards, they are far from that.
A buyer of the stocks in the Standard and Poor's 500 now is getting a dividend yield of just 2.9 percent.
That's less miserly than the 2.7 percent yield just before the 1987 crash, but it is well below historical averages.


Neither Rain Nor Chiefs Keep Chargers From 2d Round
The San Diego Chargers play like a team from the National Football Conference East, so today's perpetual rain was right up their alley.
The Chargers simply saddled up their tram of a running back, Marion Butts, and followed him to a 17-0 first-round playoff victory over Kansas City.
The Chargers, who finished first in the American Conference West by winning 11 of their last 12 regular-season games, had gone 10 years in between post-season games.
They will now move on to Miami, where they will play the Dolphins next Sunday.


If Anyone Can Dig Deep, It's Buffalo
Buffalo finds itself in an unusual position for this afternoon's American Football Conference wild-card game against Houston.
While they're accustomed to being in the playoffs, the Bills aren't used to proceeding from the bottom up.
Before this season, they had won the A.F.C.
East division four straight years.
In the 1990 and 1991 seasons, they used the home-field advantage to sail through the A.F.C. playoffs and reach the Super Bowl.


Wall Street; The Envelope, Please, Dr. Watson
FOR most Wall Street analysts, 1992 was a year only a gumshoe could love.
It was a year that produced carefully researched "buy" recommendations from respected analysts for companies with phony profits and lying executives.
Financial fudging became so common that analysts considered themselves lucky if a scandal stopped short of indictment -- and often, they were not that lucky.
"It was the year of the scam," said Howard M. Schilit, an accounting professor at American University in Washington.
"And greed being what it is, analysts should not expect that 1993 will be any different."


New Scoring Dooms The High-Level Save
NEW laws of contract bridge, applicable to social games, went into force on Friday.
The biggest change, in line with tournament play, is in penalties for doubled contracts.
A copy of the laws can be ordered from the American Contract Bridge League, 2990 Airways Boulevard, Memphis 38116.
The price is $6.50.


Caution: Ants at Work (Watch Your Step)
THIS is about ants.
Although they are often thought of as rather lowly, unnecessary nuisances in the garden, a great respect for these tiny creatures is evolving.
The first clue came when a good friend and expert gardener, was visiting my garden this fall.
The tiny Cyclamen hederifolium was just coming into bloom and the display was such a joy to see.
This tiny cyclamen pokes up many delicate flowers from each fat tuber, which is just under the surface of the soil.
The flowers are only an inch or so high and when there are enough of them, the tiny blossoms make a splendid display.


SILENCE OF THE FROGS
I think I know what happened to all the frogs: There's a mad princess going around kissing them.
JAVAN KIENZLE
Orchard Lake, Mich.


The Executive Life; Personal Statements Of the Computer Kind
IF you want to learn the real character of an executive these days, check out the glowing computer screen after he or she has gone home for the day.
Call it the Sociology of Screen Savers.
The screen saver, a computer program originally designed simply to extend the life of the phosphors on display screens by preventing the "burning in" of commonly used images when a machine is left on, has begun to take on a life of its own -- producing merchandising and licensing opportunities, and even, some experts predict, an entry for Hollywood into the digital-image market.


Arming the Armani Set
Two BMW's, a Lexus, a Volvo station wagon, two late-model Jeeps and one gray Porsche Turbo are parked outside Gun World/Target Range, a store and firing range in Van Nuys.
Most bear vanity license plates, some with the owners' initials, others with their vocations: "MS FX," "MOVIEBIZ," "MD3." It turns out that the cars are better identified than their owners.
At least here.
"No names," said a woman identifying herself as a 37-year-old entertainment lawyer.
She was wearing an Armani jacket, a cashmere sweater, Donna Karan jeans and blue suede loafers and was carrying a Smith &amp; Wesson 686 revolver when I walked into the target range, where le tout Hollywood hones its marksmanship.


Rediscovering Rio, With Your Eyes Open
IN an odd turn of the wheel, Rio as an international tourist destination has gone back to where it was when I first arrived here in 1976 as a college student exploring Brazil's long coastline by bus.
Today, as before, Rio is off the beaten track.
In the intervening years, mass tourism discovered the city.
Americans and Europeans disembarked by the jumbo jet load.
One result of this encounter between first-world wealth and third-world poverty was a spiraling rate of street crime.
By the late 1980's, tourism had declined; according to Embratur, Brazil's national tourism authority, in 1990 only half of the 1.07 million foreign visitors to Brazil passed through the city, compared with two-thirds of two million foreign visitors in 1987.
And in an Embratur survey of foreign tourists taken in 1990, about a third said crime was the main reason for the decline in tourism to Rio.


Trade Pact Threatens Puerto Rico's Economic Rise
Since becoming a self-governing commonwealth 40 years ago, Puerto Rico has built the most prosperous economy in the Caribbean, creating thousands of manufacturing jobs by offering companies a lower-paid work force and tax incentives not available on the American mainland.
But with the signing in December of the North American Free Trade Agreement, that economic strategy and the gains it has brought the island's 3.6 million people face daunting new challenges.
If approved by Congress, the trade agreement will integrate the United States, Mexico and Canada into a single market and, officials here fear, encourage American companies here to take advantage of even lower wages in Mexico.


Fleetwood Is the B-I-G News for 1993
WE talked here last week about Lincoln's Town Car, a prime example of modern technology applied to the big and somewhat old-fashioned version of American luxury.
Spacious passenger compartment, rear-wheel drive, V8 engine, all that.
But Ford revamped the Lincoln for 1990, and the real news in automotive cabin-cruisers this year comes from Cadillac, which has stretched and redesigned its 1993 Fleetwood four-door, making it the longest -- and generally the biggest -- production car sold anywhere in the world.


Carmen Perez, Charles Marotta
Gustavo Perez of New York has announced the engagement of his daughter Carmen Maria Perez Ferrer to Judge Charles Francis Marotta, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Marotta of Hartsdale, N.Y.


Commercial Property: Big Deals of 1992; For Most Brokers, Creativity and Chutzpah Count
FEW commercial brokers can look back on 1992 with much joy.
Deals were few, and those that did occur took more work for less commission than in the livelier days of the 80's.
Still, even in such a year, most brokers have one deal that stands out -- not necessarily because it was the biggest or the most lucrative, but because it took the most creativity or sweat or sheer chutzpah to pull off.


Westchester, the World's 'Golf Capital,' May Get a New Course
DESPITE its belt tightening on other issues, the County Board of Legislators has voted unanimously to authorize $515,000 in bonds for planning a new golf course next to the county-run Mohansic Golf Course in Yorktown Heights.
The new course, which would become the county's sixth public course, is expected to cost $10 million and must be approved by voters in a referendum next November.
Andrew A. Albanese of Eastchester, the Board's majority leader, said the new course would be "a great thing for Westchester County" and vowed to campaign for it.
"Our golf courses make money for the county," Mr.
Albanese said, adding that Westchester "has always been known as the golf capital of the world." The game was introduced more than 100 years ago at St.
Andrew's Golf Club in Hastings-on-Hudson.


F.B.I. Investigating Perot Aides, Paper Says
The Federal Bureau of Investigation is looking into whether Ross Perot's Presidential campaign improperly obtained credit reports on campaign volunteers, a Dallas newspaper reported Friday.
A few weeks before the election, Equifax, a credit reporting company based in Atlanta, said it had told Federal authorities that somebody had apparently illegally gained access to the files of some Perot volunteers.


Vogue Strikes a Pose
Vogue magazine is becoming a high-profile prop.
Last month, a dancer in Mark Morris's ballet, "The Hard Nut," conspicuously carried the December issue of the magazine in one scene.
Was it just a coincidence that Vogue partly underwrote the performance?
"Obviously we like Vogue, but there were no strings attached to Vogue's participation," said Barry Alterman, the general director of the Mark Morris Dance Group.
"In past performances in Europe, we've always used a fashion magazine, like maybe Elle or Marie Claire, in the French dance scene. Vogue happened to be in the theater at that point."


Grant's Shot Does the Knicks One Better
After Rolando Blackman made a miraculous shot to force overtime, Gary Grant made an even more dramatic shot to beat the Knicks.
Grant's 18-foot jumper from the deep right corner at the buzzer gave the Los Angeles Clippers a stunning 98-97 overtime victory yesterday afternoon at Madison Square Garden.
It was only the second home loss in 15 games for the Knicks, and both of them have come in overtime.
And it was a triumphant homecoming for the former Knicks point guard Mark Jackson (18 points, 8 assists), who played his first game in New York since the Knicks traded him in September.


Bush Arrives in Moscow to Sign Nuclear Arms Treaty


Karen Blumberg, Jonathon Shaevitz
Karen Blumberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Blumberg of New York, was married last evening to Jonathon Shaevitz, the son of Diane Shaevitz of Los Angeles and Dr.
Morton Shaevitz of La Jolla, Calif.
Rabbi Stephen Pearce performed the ceremony at the Mark Hotel in New York.
Ms.
Blumberg, who is keeping her name, graduated from Brown University.
She is a marketing specialist at Leviton Manufacturing Company, a maker of electrical wiring devices in Little Neck, Queens.
Her father is the company's group vice president of marketing and sales.


In Hiss Case, Chambers Steadily Damaged His Own Credibility
To the Editor:
"Hiss Case's Bogymen Are Still Not at Rest" (The Week in Review Dec. 13), although characterized as a "thumbnail" summary of the historic Alger Hiss case, and the pivotal role of Whittaker Chambers in it, nonetheless omits two vital aspects.


RECORD BRIEFS
Les Ambassadeurs Internationales: 'Les Ambassadeurs Internationales Featuring Salif Keita'
Rounder CD 5053; CD and cassette.


New Standards for Television Are in the Picture for 1993
Beginning a new year triggers the prophetic urge.
Although forecasting is becoming harder, as far as video is concerned, one thing is certain: 1993 will be pivotal.
This is the year when the Federal Communications Commission will make its long-awaited decision on new technical norms for American television.
It will be the first basic revision of the now-outmoded standards set in 1937 during television's infancy.


Miami Drivers Are Warned Of I-95 Delays
Because of construction along Interstate 95 between the Golden Gates Interchange in North Miami and State Route 836 downtown, drivers visiting the Miami area are advised to take another route by the Florida Department of Transportation.
The project entails adding new lanes, ramps and connectors along a 10-mile section of the Interstate to improve traffic flow.
Contributing to the delays is a change in traffic patterns in the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew last August.
People who relocated north of the city and drive south to work in the morning, along with southbound vehicles involved in relief and repair work, have added to the congestion, although this factor has eased somewhat recently, according to a department spokesman.


Come Join the Fight
To the Editor:
I was distressed to see myself listed in "Calls to Restrict Immigration Come From Many Quarters" (The Week in Review, Dec. 13) as a sponsor of a constitutional amendment that would deny United States citizenship to American-born children of undocumented parents.


Shibboleths Abound About El Salvadorans
On Dec. 6 you published two letters  [ "Where to Place Blame for Latin Misery" ]  concerning the Central American community on Long Island that contain serious errors.
Harry Katz argues in his letter that the problems that drove the refugees out of their homelands have nothing to do with the United States and that U.S. citizens have no special responsibilities towards them.
He characterizes the "injustice in El Salvador" as nothing more than "a legacy of the brutal Spanish conquest." This just does not hold water.
By 1832 Spanish rule had ended throughout Central America.
Over the next 150 years constant interference in the internal affairs of El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama were the hallmarks of our country's policy in the region.
It is the U.S., not Spain, that has backed brutality in Central America throughout this century.


Harris Release Rewards Friend's Efforts
Jean S. Harris has never stepped foot in the 200-year-old farmhouse where Alice Lacey lives, yet her presence can be found in almost every room.
A tree skirt she quilted lies under the Christmas tree in the living room.
A watercolor of the farm that she commissioned hangs in the kitchen.
A color photograph of Mrs.
Harris sits on a bookshelf in another room.


A Kiss Is Just a Kiss of Immediacy
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS
By Alan Lightman. Illustrated. 179 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $17.


A Remembrance Of Visions Pure And Elegant
The book took the architectural salons by storm, became something of a cult classic and sent the careers of all five men hurtling forward.
These architects eventually moved in quite different directions, but not for some years; for most of the 1970's they were so closely identified with one another, and with New York, that they were known internationally both as the New York School and as "The Five." (In Italy, they were called "I Five di New York.")


Milan Malaise
To the Editor: The Malpensa-Milan Airport director of public relations' attempt to explain airport bus mob scenes is ludicrous inasmuch as this uncontrolled chaos takes place also at the Central Railroad Station in Milan.


Lehman Operagoers Can Still Attend on a Pittance
LET Metropolitan and New York City Opera fans moan about high ticket prices.
For 25 years, the Bronx Opera, which has been called New York's best small opera group, has been presenting first-rate performances at the Lehman Center Theater for no more than the current top price of $13.
Michael Spierman, the company's founder and director, said it was hard to believe that the group had been together for a quarter of a century, "discovering exciting new talents and making the acquaintance of wonderful scores not often presented in this area."
An example of an unusual work on the company's agenda is Smetana's comic masterpiece, "The Bartered Bride," fully staged and sung in English translation with orchestra.
The opera will be performed next Saturday at 8 P.M., with Miriam Burns conducting; Mr.
Spierman will conduct a repeat performance next Sunday at 2 P.M.
For those undaunted by a trip into Manhattan, there will be two performances at the John Jay College Theater on Jan. 15 and 16 at 8 P.M.
For reservations at either location, the number to call is (212) 408-1661.


Linda A. Kagan and Seth Horowitz
Linda Ann Kagan, a daughter of Niki and Arthur Kagan of White Plains, was married yesterday in New York to Seth R. Horowitz, the son of Barbara and Gedale Horowitz of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Mordecai Waxman performed the ceremony at the Plaza.
Mrs.
Horowitz, 28, is a lawyer in the law office of Vincent P. Crisci in New York.
She graduated from Lehigh University and received a law degree from Emory University.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
Her mother is a travel consultant and group sales coordinator with American Express in White Plains.


POSTINGS: Architectural Sleight of Hand; Stable Becomes Carriage House
Down at the end of Grace Court Alley, an otherwise charming mews opposite Grace Episcopal Church in Brooklyn Heights, there sat at No. 21 a stable from the mid-19th century, a bare brick box used mostly for parking.
To the side was an open-air parking lot.
Enter Nino and Elizabeth Celano, who wanted to live there, and Joseph Stella, the Bridgehampton, L.I., architect they hired.
Mr.
Stella faced a major legal hurdle: The stable was overbuilt.
It exceeded the maximum zoning for its tiny lot.
So Mr.
Stella came up with an ingenious solution.


On Fur: Taking It Personally
To the Editor:
A very short comment on the On the Street column "Wearing Fur, Walking Fur" (Dec. 13).


Pamela Mars, Lonnie Wright
Pamela Diane Mars, a daughter of Virginia C. Mars of McLean, Va., and Forrest E. Mars of Arlington, Va., was married on Thursday to Lonnie Jay Wright, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cecil Wright of Casey, Ill.
The Rev.
Gregory F. Stevens performed the ceremony at Emmanuel Memorial Episcopal Church in Champaign, Ill.
Mrs.
Wright, 32, is the plant manager in Mattoon, Ill., of Kal Kan Foods Inc., a pet-food company in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father is the president of Mars Inc., the confections, rice and pet-food producer in McLean.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Deborah Mars of Arlington.


SURFACING
SPORTS --
Precision golf:
Recently received the official "it's a sport" designation (i.e., ESPN coverage).
Golfers compete to hit targets 100, 150 and 200 yards from the tee.
FITNESS --
Butt awareness
: Personal trainers say that a well-shaped derriere is an increasingly common preoccupation of both women and men.
There's even an exercise machine of the moment: the Butt Buster.
COMMUTING --
Toll tags:
Attached to car windshields, they make use of microchip and radio-airwave technologies to allow drivers to pass through toll sites and be billed later.
They can be found on major highways in Dallas and throughout Oklahoma.


Airline Smoking
To the Editor: Those self-righteous do-gooders who are working so hard to ban smoking on flights and in airports should realize they are discriminating against a very substantial minority -- some one-quarter to one-third of the American people.
Ex-smokers, I find, are far less tolerant of smoking than nonsmokers and have made it a crusade.


Quakers Ponder Holding Back the Tide
BY the time the tiny congregation has arrived at the Amawalk Friends Meetinghouse here these frigid Sunday mornings, someone has usually made the fire in the building's two wood-burning stoves and begun to warm up the simple room in which Quakers have worshiped since 1831.
Taking turns with such basic tasks is central to the Friends' way of doing things, and members say they treasure their building -- which has no modern plumbing or heating system and no electricity.
Except for minor alterations, most done before 1901, the building has virtually been untouched for 161 years.


Council's Land-Use Procedures Emerging
TWO years after the Board of Estimate was disbanded and the ultimate authority for planning and zoning passed to the City Council, patterns have begun to emerge in how land-use decisions are made.
Perhaps most striking is the way the Council has given up some of the reflexive parochialism that characterized its predecessor.
While borough presidents on the Board of Estimate generally followed the lead of the colleague in whose borough a given project was situated, Council members have shown no such inclination, at least in certain key votes.
"The parochial issues, while important, are not controlling," said the Speaker of the Council, Peter F. Vallone of Queens.


Patricia M. Hynes and Roy L. Reardon
Patricia M. Hynes and Roy L. Reardon, both lawyers in New York, were married yesterday in Chester, Vt.
The Rev.
William Giroux performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Reardon, 50, is a partner in the law firm of Milberg Weiss Bershad Specthrie &amp; Lerach.
She graduated from Queens College and received her law degree from Fordham University.
She is a daughter of Catherine E. Hynes of Phoenix and the late Raymond C. Hynes.


Auguring Well: Barristers; Judgement Day For the Wig
After three centuries as the ultimate in haute court fashion, the wig may soon going out of style among British lawyers and judges.
Both the Lord Chancellor and Lord Chief Justice, whose command over the British judicial system includes the trickier questions of court dress, are to recommend in the coming year whether barristers and judges should lose their wigs, not to mention their robes, breeches and fancy neckwear and sashes (known formally as jabots and tippets), in favor of the bare heads and sober clothing of ordinary English men and women.
Wigs and robes are mandatory dress in virtually all British courts above the lowest level.
But in recent years there have been growing compalints that such court dress is elitist and dehumanizing, not to mention uncomfortable.
More troubling, a courtroom filled with people who look like they just stepped out of a period costume drama can have an intimidating effect on other participants, including witnesses, juries and defendants.
Traditionalists scoff, arguing that wigs and robes provide a measure of dignity and grace and, not incidentally, anonymity (useful to judges and lawyers who worry that a vengeful defendant might find them too easy to recognize).
Over the last six months, lawyers, public interest groups and ordinary citizens have been offering their thoughts on the question, which the Lord Chancellor's office will use to frame a formal recommendation on whether to amend the rules and traditions governing court dress.
The final decision will be up to Queen Elizabeth II.


New Applications For Still Photography
ROBERT PLEDGE, president of Contact Press Images in New York, is looking for new directions for the picture agency he helped to found in 1976.
"I've begun spending more time in Paris," he said, "because of the tremendous shift of the news in the last few years. The news has switched from the west side of the Atlantic Ocean to the east side.


Joseph R. Burstin, Theater Producer, 85
Joseph R. Burstin, a theater producer and the founder of an advertising company, died on Dec. 27.
He was 85 and lived in Blauvelt, N.Y.
He died after a lengthy illness, said Camille Burstin, his daughter-in-law.


Cynthia Hawkins, Daniel Stryker Jr.
Cynthia K. Hawkins, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Hawkins of Verona, N.J., was married Thursday to Daniel E. Stryker Jr., a son of Mr.
Stryker of Spokane, Wash., and Rosemarie Stryker of Everett, Wash.
The Rev.
Boyd E. Lien performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Verona, N.J.
Mrs.
Stryker, 35, is the treasurer and the director of finance at Salthouse-Torre-Norton Inc., an advertising agency in Rutherford, N.J.
She graduated from Montclair State College.
Her father, now retired, was a mechanical engineer with the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in Newark.


Business Leaders See Hope
IN discussing the county's economic prospects, several Westchester business leaders say that a recovery is possible this year.
They cite the increased activity in the construction industry, the relocation of new companies to the county and a growing market demand for single-family houses as bright spots.
They caution, however, against over-optimism, indicating that the strength of the recession is tied not only to the policies of a new Administration but also to the county's own efforts to revitalize its economy.


Mutual Funds; Careful Picks, Modest Expectations
DISAPPOINTED after 1991's big gains, when the average stock fund shot up 30.7 percent, only a handful of investors saw double-digit returns last year -- and 1993 looks like more of the same.
Post-election euphoria sent the stock market spinning up at yearend, but most analysts expect the afterglow to fade.
In bonds, there is a chance of perhaps one more interest rate cut as the Federal Reserve gives the economy a final push.
Call it a fund-picker's market, in which investors will have to thread their way carefully and should expect modest investment returns.


Tara Anne Scully, M. S. Rockefeller
Mr. and Mrs.
Francis P. Scully Jr. of Marblehead, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Tara Anne Scully, to Michael Sorum Rockefeller, a son of Rodman C. Rockefeller and the late Barbara O. Rockefeller.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Scully is a senior merchandise manager at the Manhattan Menswear Group, the men's accessory division of the Salant Corporation, a manufacturer of clothing and accessories in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
Her father is the president of Scully International, a real-estate marketing company in Marblehead.


Ms. Goldman, H. I. Grossman
Suzanne Barbara Goldman, a language teacher at the Wheeler School in Providence, R.I., was married on Friday to Herschel I. Grossman, the Merton P. Stoltz Professor of Social Sciences at Brown University.
Rabbi Sol Goodman performed the ceremony at the couple's home in Providence.
Mrs.
Grossman is also the community-service coordinator at Wheeler.
She graduated from the University of Rhode Island and received a master's degree in management from Lesley College.
She is the daughter of the late Benjamin and Birdie Oringel.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


POSTINGS: Phipps Houses President; A Developer Retires
"I'm not sick," said Lynda Simmons.
"I'm not being fired. I just decided that this is the time."
The 58-year-old Ms.
Simmons was talking about her retirement last Thursday as president of Phipps Houses, New York's oldest and largest developer of low- and moderate-income communities.
She had worked at Phipps for 23 years, the last 10 as president.
Phipps owns and manages 3,600 apartments for homeless and low- and moderate-income tenants and, through a subsidiary, manages 5,800 other apartments.


The Straight-Faced Revs and Cost
REVS and Cost -- two men whose nicknames, printed on signs all over Manhattan from the Battery to 96th Street, have puzzled New Yorkers for a year -- are as enigmatic as their posters.
The signs, with cryptic messages like "Who killed Revs" and "Hello my name is Cost," first appeared almost a year ago in SoHo, and soon spread to St.
Marks Place, Sheridan Square, Lincoln Center and points north.


Out of the Basement, Into the Sanctuary
For years, the Korean Church of Westchester wandered.
It started in 1977 in the basement of a church in White Plains, moved to rented space in Rye and then found a berth at a church in Scarsdale.
Now its wanderings have ended, and the congregation has moved into a home of its own.
"The Lord has answered our prayers," said the pastor, the Rev.
Gil Y. Sohn, as he stood beneath the great silver pipes of the organ in the 115-year-old church that the congregation bought.
"This is our dream come true."


Romanticizing Foie Gras
To the Editor:
As the information specialist in the research and investigations department of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, I must respond to Betty Fussell's review of "A History of Food," by Maguelonne Toussaint-Samat (Nov. 29).
Only without the necessary research or appropriate concern for animals' well-being could Ms.
Fussell have boasted of being "a glutton for foie gras" or accepted the author's erroneous claim that "the goose itself invented cramming" for foie gras, since geese eat large amounts before migrating.


For Jenkins, Another Tragic Twist in the Road
In the morning, Ferguson Jenkins had noticed that the hose to the large red vacuum cleaner was missing, but he paid little attention to it, never once imagining what terrible use it might be put to.
Then in the late afternoon, around 5 o'clock, the phone rang in the kitchen of his ranch house here.
The date on the calendar on the wall was Tuesday, Dec. 15, 1992, two days after Jenkins's 49th birthday.
Jenkins was outside, smoothing the red clay in the driveway with a shovel, when his ranch foreman, Tommy Christian, answered the phone.


Japan's Nuclear Project
To the Editor:
Regarding "Japan's Nuclear Fiasco" and Japan's would-be stockpile of plutonium for its breeder reactor becoming a target for terrorists -- the spent fuel of ordinary uranium-burning reactors contains a mixture of plutonium isotopes.
Plutonium bombs consist of almost pure Pu-239 and allow for less than 1 percent contamination of Pu-240.
The Japanese shipments contain over 20 percent Pu-240 in addition to other contaminants.
Isotopes of the same element cannot be separated chemically.
The separation of Pu-239 would require huge plants that are out of the question even for the Japanese Government.
This is clearly no project for a terrorist.
THOMAS LOWINGER  New York, Dec. 23
Thomas Lowinger is a radiation physicist at the Stich Radiation Center, New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.


In Opposition To Flood Tunnel
Re: "Flood Tunnel: A Way to Avert Tragedy," a recent letter to the New Jersey editor: Passaic County Freeholder Richard DuHaime used strong language in his letter with regard to those who oppose the flood tunnel.
As a longtime resident of Kearny (since 1921) and a retired businessman, I am outraged that this official presents such a Nimby position.


SILENCE OF THE FROGS
The herpetologist William Duellman is wrong about the frog situation in the Midwest.
It is not "copacetic." My parents own a home on a small lake near Minong, Wis., and in past summers, my young nephew collected frogs by the dozens, in buckets (letting them go after an hour or so at our bidding).
Two summers ago, only a few frogs hopped out from under the canoe in the mornings, and last summer, not a frog was to be found.
Nor did I hear the reassuring music of bullfrogs in the nearby marshes.


When Housing Collides With Race and Class
VELMA WILLIAMS divides her life between two worlds.
During the day she works as a statistical assistant for the Veterans Memorial Medical Center in West Haven where she has many things in common with her colleagues, most of whom are white.
They often laugh together, eat together and share stories about their families.
But when the day is done, said Ms.
Williams, "We go our own ways, and as a black person mine is to be isolated."
For 16 years Ms.
Williams has lived in the Brookside public housing development in New Haven.
Situated next to a landfill, the complex is cut off from the rest of the city by a ring of fences and dead-end streets.
Residents of the neighborhood say that garbage collection, public transportation and police protection are inferior to other neighborhoods, and that residents who need medical assistance often have a difficult time getting nurses to visit because the area is perceived as dangerous.


Islanders Score Quickly and Then Survive a Yawner
In a season of 84 games, spread over more than six months, there are bound to be performances like these.
Watching it was like eating leftovers the day after a big, holiday feast.
From an Islanders' point a view, a boring victory is better than a thrilling defeat, so they happily held on tonight to accept a 3-2 triumph over the Minnesota North Stars.
"It was a struggle, but we managed to hang in there," said Coach Al Arbour, whose team took a 3-0 lead in the first 14 minutes.
"We managed to get by. We sat back a little too much."


Emigres in Queens Mourn Couple and Daughter Struck by Car
The women, all recent emigres from what were once Soviet lands, sat side by side on a couch in the sparsely decorated third-floor apartment, moaning and rocking, crying and rocking.
Only hours before, one of the women, Burcha Kimyagarov, 80 years old, had been told that her daughter, son-in-law and granddaughter had headed out late New Year's Day to walk another granddaughter home from her job at Dunkin Donuts.
But they never made it to the shop.
And they never made it back home to their apartment in Briarwood, Queens.


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on Nov. 8 about the weather in Bryce Canyon, in Utah, misstated its elevation.
A letter from a reader, delayed in reaching the editors, points out that it is 8,000 feet, not 5,200.


Ms. Smithberg, Jonathan Pointer
Madeleine Rachel Smithberg, the daughter of Dr.
Lorraine Smithberg and Dr.
Eugene Smithberg of New York, was married yesterday to Jonathan Patterson Pointer, a son of Bonnie McCally of Richmond, Mo., and the late Jack E. Pointer.
Walter Lawton, the leader emeritus of the Westchester Ethical Humanist Society, performed the ceremony at Prix Fixe, a restaurant in New York.
Ms.
Smithberg, who is keeping her name, is a partner in Half Baked Productions, a television production company in New York.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Binghamton.
Her father is a psychotherapist in New York.
Her mother, a psychoanalyst, is a supervisor and teacher at the Center for Modern Psychoanalytic Studies in New York and Boston.


Beware the Incest-Survivor Machine
How often do you suffer from the following symptoms?
* You feel that you're bad, dirty or ashamed.


Natasha Pray, Eric Grayson
Mrs.
F.
Richards Ford 3d and Malcolm S. Pray Jr., both of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Natasha Justina Pray to Eric D. Grayson, a son of Lieut.
Col.
Cyrus Grayson, U.S.A.F., retired, and Mrs.
Grayson of Valley Stream, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Pray, 29, is a vice president and the director of sales and member services of the American Fitness Institute, a fitness center with headquarters in Greenwich.
She graduated from Hartwick College.


Amy Mazzola, Tad Flynn
Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Mazzola of New York have announced April wedding plans for their daughter Amy Mazzola and Terence Brian Flynn, a son of James T. Flynn of New York and Mary L. Flynn of Chapel Hill, N.C.
Miss Mazzola is a vice president in corporate finance at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
She and her fiance graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
She was a member of the Junior Assembly in 1981.
Her father, a former president of Lincoln Center in New York, is a management consultant to arts organizations in New York.
Her mother, Sylvia Drulie Mazzola, is a former theatrical producer in New York.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Dec. 6 about testing a high-speed train for Amtrak service between Boston and Washington characterized the sizes of Philadelphia and Baltimore incorrectly.
Philadelphia, with a population of nearly 1.6 million, and Baltimore, with 735,000 people, are larger than either Boston or Washington.


Mamet's Women
On a census form, she'd be pretty much a cipher.
Her first name is Carol.
We never learn her last name.
She's a college student in her 20's, failing a course that has something to do with educational theory.
Her origins, beyond their apparent modesty, are a mystery.
So is her life outside the college professor's office, where she shows up at the start of "Oleanna," seeking help and guidance.


Hail to Chiefs Without Military Pasts
When President-elect Bill Clinton is sworn in Jan. 20, he becomes the constitutional Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States.
He inherits immediate military decisions wherever American armed forces are now committed.


Knight Seeks 600
For BOB KNIGHT, the next victory is always his most important, so what's so special about this next one?
If you rejoice in personal milestones -- and the Hall of Fame coach clearly doesn't -- then you will know what's so special: In his 22d season at Indiana and 28th over all, Knight needs one more victory to reach 600 for his career.


Sports of The Times; Inevitable As the Tide: Bama Is Back
THE amazing thing about Alabama's winning yet another national championship was how natural it seemed.
This ultimate renaissance did not happen for Ray Perkins or Bill Curry.
They could not just drive into every small town in Alabama and invoke the name of Bear Bryant and summon 150 superb high-school recruits to Tuscaloosa and win Bama's 12th national title.


'Classics' Earn a Little Respect on Public Radio
When you think of music on public radio, you think classics.
So does Felix Hernandez.
The only difference is that on his show Michael Tilson Thomas has been upstaged by Rufus Thomas.
Every Saturday morning from the tiny studios here of WBGO-FM, Mr.
Hernandez showcases what he calls "classic soul" as host of Rhythm Revue, a five-hour rhythm-and-blues blowout whose die-hard following has made it the public radio station's top-rated show.
Rhythm Revue's 300,000 listeners enthusiastically prefer the show's gritty and soulful tunes over the blander mix on typical oldies shows, and some swear they are so addicted to it that they forget about housework, errands or getting to work on time.
Since the show was syndicated by National Public Radio last October, expect to see more people neglecting to take care of business from coast to coast.
Mr.
Hernandez's program has succeeded in making public radio become truer to its name -- playing popular music that appeals to a large population not typically associated with public broadcasting.


Caracas Getting Continent's Biggest Mosque
Ever since 1498, when Spanish sailors planted a cross on a beach in a land they later called Little Venice, Roman Catholicism has been the dominant religion in Venezuela.
Now, against the emerald green shoulder of an Andean ridge, a slim white minaret rises 370 feet to a crown of a star and crescent.
Mirroring modern Venezuela's religious tolerance and its oil realpolitik, artisans here are putting finishing touches on what will be the biggest mosque in Latin America.
Rising higher than the Catholic Cathedral a few blocks away, the new minaret is the highest in the West.


BEST SELLERS: January 3, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) After being accused of murdering her employer, a woman tells of killing her husband almost 30 years earlier and of her life ever since.
2
2
7
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.50.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
3
3
9
MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) While researching the lives of his ancestors, an American journalist learns about the history of the land south of the border. (LP)
4
5
43
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
5
4
11
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $24.) Lestat embarks on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
6
6
21
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
7
8
12
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) The fortunes of a businesswoman are imperiled by secrets from her past. (LP)
8
12
12
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
9
9
25
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
10
10
7
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter, unearths scandals in the military.
11
7
18
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
12 *
11
10
MOSTLY HARMLESS, by Douglas Adams. (Harmony, $20.) In the fifth volume of the "Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" series, a survivor tries to cope with new predicaments.
13
14
18
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on the trail of a dead rock star who has been sighted.
14
13
2
DINOTOPIA, written and illustrated by James Gurney. (Turner Publishing, $29.95.) The adventures of a biologist and his son in a land where dinosaurs and humans live happily together.
15
9
DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) An ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a series of mysterious deaths.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
16
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
2
13
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general.
3
3
18
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
4
4
29
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
5
8
21
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
6
5
11
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the co-host of the television show "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."
7
6
15
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
8
9
4
JFK: Reckless Youth, by Nigel Hamilton. (Random House, $30.) The first 29 years of the 35th President.
9
7
9
SEX, by Madonna. (Warner, $49.95.) Erotic photographs of the pop star by Steven Meisel, and her reflections on them.
10
12
9
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life and achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
11
11
7
MY LIFE, by Earvin (Magic) Johnson with William Novak. (Random House, $22.) The autobiography of the retired Los Angeles Lakers basketball player.
12
10
18
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
13
13
3
DAVE BARRY DOES JAPAN, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $18.) The life and culture of the Land of the Rising Sun, as observed by the syndicated humorist.
14
14
2
HANG TIME, by Bob Greene. (Doubleday, $22.50.) Life as lived and perceived by Michael Jordan during two championship seasons with the Chicago Bulls.
15
15
2
I HAVEN'T UNDERSTOOD ANYTHING SINCE 1962, by Lewis Grizzard. (Villard, $18.) A humorist's curmudgeonly reflections on what has happened since his high school days.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
25
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
2
1
4
CREATING LOVE, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $23.) Ways to establish healthy relationships with other people.
3
5
15
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $12.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
3
15
THE MEASURE OF OUR SUCCESS, by Marian Wright Edelman. (Beacon, $15.) The head of the Children's Defense Fund offers rules to live by for her own children and others'.
5
4
14
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) The third edition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE ISLAND: Three Tales, by Gustaw Herling. (Viking, $20.) Unified by a common theme -- the persistence of life in the face of pain, humiliation and extremes of solitude -- these stories by a Polish writer are told with a humane, compassionate detachment.
JESUS' SON: Stories, by Denis Johnson. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.) The universe of Mr.
Johnson's fifth book of fiction is governed by addiction, malevolence, faith and uncertainty, rendered with ferocious imagery and a menacing sense of humor.
NATIONALISM: Five Roads to Modernity, by Liah Greenfeld. (Harvard University, $49.95.) A learned and comprehensive exploration of the development of nationhood in England, France and the United States, where it worked out well enough, and in Germany and Russia, where it didn't.
FLOOD!
A Novel in Pictures, by Eric Drooker. (Four Walls Eight Windows, $15.95.) A vision of alienation in a New York peopled by the blighted and despairing, told virtually without words.
GOING BACK TO BISBEE, by Richard Shelton. (University of Arizona, cloth, $35; paper, $15.95.) A memorable ride through time and experience from booming Tucson to struggling Bisbee, Ariz., with fascinating sidetracks into botany, history and biology.
THE TIBETAN BOOK OF LIVING AND DYING, by Sogyal Rinpoche. (HarperSanFrancisco, $22.) Tibetan Buddhism, an ancient, complex and mystical religion, gracefully expounded by a native Tibetan authority (the Dalai Lama contributes a preface).
THE ANCHOR BIBLE DICTIONARY.
David Noel Freedman, editor in chief. (Six volumes, Doubleday, $360.) This monumental work brings together the efforts of nearly 1,000 scholars in entries, some of them at essay length, on innumerable biblical topics.


Come Join the Fight
To the Editor:
I was distressed to see myself listed in "Calls to Restrict Immigration Come From Many Quarters" (The Week in Review, Dec. 13) as a sponsor of a constitutional amendment that would deny United States citizenship to American-born children of undocumented parents.


LAUGHING OFF THE RECESSION
"We're trying to get a better joke on page 11."
"And we've been trying for 20 minutes."


Bean Dishes to Fight the Chill
THIS is not the time of year for tuna brochettes with salsa.
Hearty, old-fashioned food is what you want when the weather gets cold; anything simmered or braised in a delicious sauce will do, especially when it comes with a comforting heap of beans.
Lamb shanks braised with white beans is a classic French peasant dish.
The shanks are an inexpensive cut and come out meltingly tender, the meat almost falling off the bone.
The shanks are mixed in with the beans, sprinkled with bread crumbs and baked, uncovered, for about 30 minutes before being sprinkled with parsley.
This dish is also good topped with thinly sliced baby artichokes fried in olive oil until crisp.


Town Builds a Prison and Stores Its Hopes There
If the drug dealers and sex offenders ever arrive, many in this quiet farm town plan to celebrate.
"We've been waiting a long time for something good to happen around here," said Dianne Johnson, president of the local Chamber of Commerce and the editor of the weekly newspaper.


Rolling With the Times
DARTS are dead. So is Foosball. Even Velcro wall-jumping has become passe.
So what's the newest craze to strike a New York City saloon?
It's human bowling-ball contests, held weekly at Aces and 8's, a bar in the East Village in Manhattan, steps away from the Joseph Papp Public Theater, home of the New York Shakespeare Festival.
"Most people say, 'I've never seen anything like this before,' " said Jonathan Ressler, who is 28 and runs the bar with his brother, Jim, 25.
"As far as I know, we are the only people in the city to offer it."


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on page 3 of the Travel section today, about aircraft-cabin health issues, refers incorrectly in some copies to the location of a court in which a passenger sued after being sprayed with insecticide.
It was the United States Federal Court, not in Australia.


Redskins and Chargers Win First-Round Games


Louise A. Pardoe, J. Mark Hastings
Louise Ashcom Pardoe, a daughter of Mrs.
Michal W. Bristol of Carversville, Pa., and E. Devon Pardoe of Southwest Harbor, Me., was married on Thursday to J. Mark Hastings, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James O. Hastings Jr. of Nashville.
Mayor James McGill of Doylestown, Pa., officiated at the home of the bride's mother and stepfather.
Mrs.
Hastings, 27, is a recruiter and special events coordinator in the human resources department of BBDO New York, the advertising agency.
She graduated from Simmons College.
Her father, now retired, was the president of two pharmaceutical manufacturers, Electron Microscopy Sciences and Diatome US, in Fort Washington, Pa.
Her mother, Edith W. Bristol, is a painter in Carversville.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Marguerite Pardoe of Southwest Harbor.


Can't Anybody Here Enjoy This Sport?
Jennifer Capriati, in a mood as black as her favorite clothing, called it an annus horribilis long before Queen Elizabeth reached that assessment.
The 16-year-old smiled when she won her Olympic gold medal in August, and smiled again when she ended her work year with a respectable three-set loss to Gabriela Sabatini at the Virginia Slims Championships, but the rest of 1992 failed to inspire her.
Capriati thought that her turbulent relationship with her father, Stefano, was not a matter for public speculation.
As she suggests, last year in tennis was long on off-court trauma and short on on-court drama.
And she wasn't the only angry person in the business.


On Fur: Taking It Personally
To the Editor:
A very short comment on the On the Street column "Wearing Fur, Walking Fur" (Dec. 13).


Wanted: 2 Mayors to Set Fractures
MEASURING New York against Los Angeles is usually like comparing apples and oranges.
America's two biggest cities have prided themselves on being worlds apart spiritually.
But this year both are reaping a bitter fruit from common ground: as their mayoral campaigns begin, they are riven by racial and ethnic rivalries and by deep ambivalence about the police.
More than the mayor's office is at stake.
These elections, in cities that presage the nation's changing complexion, are a test of perhaps the greatest challenge facing America in the 21st century: managing diversity when whites become a minority.


3 Brooklyn Museums to Explore Crown Hts. Roots, and Nerves
In a response to racial tensions in Crown Heights, three Brooklyn museums are collaborating on a major project to trace the history and relationships of the neighborhood's three major racial and ethnic groups: black Americans, Caribbean-Americans and Lubavitch Jews.
Through the project, called "Bridging Eastern Parkway," the Brooklyn Children's Museum, the Brooklyn Historical Society and the Society for the Preservation of Weeksville and Bedford-Stuyvesant History will trace the interwoven paths of those three groups and the other groups that form one of Brooklyn's most diverse neighborhoods.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
DECISIONS, DECISIONS
A six-part series of discussions focusing on the United States Supreme Court's decision-making process will begin Saturday at 2 P.M. at the Hartford Public Library, 500 Main Street.
Every other Saturday through March 20, participants will meet to explore landmark constitutional cases.
The series, for which there is no charge, is sponsored by the League of Women Voters of West Hartford.
Recommended reading between sessions will be available at the library .
The series leads off with "Being Supreme: Early Power Struggles 1776-1868," followed on Jan. 23 with "Comes Now the Pauper: The Right to Counsel." The subject on Feb. 6 will be "Dangerous Words: Freedom of Speech," and "In Black and White: Equal Protection of the Laws" will be covered on Feb. 20.
The final programs on March 6 and March 20 are "Public Practices: Freedom of (and From) Religion" and "Home Alone: Privacy and the Court."


For the Former Knick Jackson, This Is No Garden-Variety Game
Troy Jackson had strict instructions.
If anyone asked, this was "just another game" for his brother Mark, the former Knick and current floor leader for the Los Angeles Clippers.
Troy was not allowed to tell funny anecdotes about his brother.
He was not allowed to divulge Mark's weekend activities.
He was not allowed to admit that Mark might have been a bit nervous about his return to Madison Square Garden yesterday.
"I've been given instructions," Troy said solemnly after his brother's Clippers beat the Knicks, 98-97, in a wild overtime game.
"I'm supposed to say 'This was just a regular game.' "


Late Checks Provide Aid To Neediest
When Christmas decorations begin to engulf New York City and radio stations start playing a marathon of seasonal selections, many people draw up lists of holiday chores: buy presents, mail cards, plan a special meal, pray for snow, send a donation to charity.
Sometimes that final item is overlooked amid the eat-until-you-burst parties and visits from old friends and shopping-mall expeditions and annual trips to distant relatives' homes.
Late last month, though, a number of contributors remembered for the first time to send a check to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


What's in Store? A Chinese Zodiac Sees All, Tells All
Tired of the same old zodiac?
One of the quirkier refills among the 400 in the Lefax line is the 96-page Chinese horoscope, written by Barry Fantoni, the astrology columnist for The Guardian of Britain.
Find out whether you were born in the year of the rat, monkey, or buffalo, for instance, and what it means for your character, career and love life.


Robinson Is Reported As the Choice at U.S.C.
JOHN ROBINSON is returning to his old job as football coach at Southern California and has agreed to a multiyear contract, The Orange County Register reported yesterday.
CBS Sports, Robinson's employer in 1992, also reported that the 57-year-old coach was returning to Southern Cal, where he won three Rose Bowls and was 67-14-2 from 1976 to 1982, when he left to coach the Rams.


Taxes and Gambling Top Lawmakers' List
PICTURE the Connecticut General Assembly as a majestic cruise ship, ready to embark this week on a stately five-month legislative tour of informed debate and eloquent discourse.
Now throw on the cold water and a truer picture emerges: a boatload of rookie lawmakers heading for a storm, with uncharted reefs on every side and a yawning budget deficit off the bow ready to swallow the unwary.
"It's going to be tough," said Representative Reginald L. Jones, a Republican from Darien.


Talking: Superliens; A Condo's Foreclosure Rights
THE drive to insure more effective collection of delinquent common charges and monthly maintenance payments is moving into the political arena.
Only there, say lawyers and officials who have been involved, can many of the problems that have plagued condominiums, homeowner associations and co-ops since the start of the recession be sorted out, since legal remedies are proving inadequate.


In Tune Now, U.N.'s Quintet Plays Themes Penned in '45
WITH the cold war over, the United States appears to be calling the shots on a Security Council that is finally displaying the awesome powers the United Nations' founders endowed it with in the San Francisco Charter of 1945.
From driving the Iraqis out of Kuwait to providing famine relief to Somalia, American initiatives have been the essential catalyst for the council's renaissance.
Now, as fears mount that the Balkan conflict could spread south from Bosnia, the United States is pressing for firmer Security Council measures against the Serbs.


A Hair Stylist Sports Spots To Suit a Mood
The current rage for animal prints has gone to one man's head.
Two weeks ago, Vincenzo Milioto, a Manhattan hair stylist, decided to cover his hair with leopard spots.
"It took about four hours; you really have to have patience," said Mr.
Milioto, who cuts hair at the Limitone Salon, 162 Seventh Avenue South, at Perry Street.
"Thom Perry, a guy who works with me, did it. First he had to bleach it, and then dye it blond. Then with Q-Tips you do painting, more or less. We used a dark brown and gold for the spots."


Real Life Inspires A Producer
NAME: Trudie Styler.
IDENTITY: Documentary film producer; wife of Sting.


Concessions on Arms Pact Made by U.S.
As President Bush arrived today in Moscow to sign a sweeping nuclear arms treaty with President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, senior Administration officials said the United States, with Mr.
Yeltsin's weakened domestic position in mind, had made significant concessions.
The officials said the Administration had tried to meet Russian concerns about the military and economic impact of the accord because Mr.
Yeltsin may face a difficult fight to get the agreement ratified by the conservative Russian legislature, which recently forced him to abandon his choice for Prime Minister.


It's Noisy! It's New! It's 90's!
There was no reason to think that popular music would survive the 1980's with a shred of dignity or intelligence.
Increasingly distant from its roots, swallowed by ever-expanding media conglomerates, upstaged by video imagery and marketed with unrelenting repetition, rock could easily have become as glittery, superficial and disposable as other American consumer products.
But despite -- and sometimes because of -- those changes, as 1993 begins, it is clear that the early 1990's have brought better popular music than anyone might have expected.
Rock of the 1990's is shaping up as a polymorphous mess -- dozens of categories and subgenres and recombinations -- with a core of genuine innovation and surprising seriousness.
While shallow commercial pop and lovers' ballads will never disappear, they're not alone amid the gold and platinum albums; alongside them is music that takes chances and overhauls conventions to speak from the heart.
The best 1990's rock (a term I'll use to encompass hip-hop, dance music and the rest of the mess) often rejects prettiness, but it has the severe beauty of passion inventing its own structures.
It also has the kind of visceral kick that puts bodies in motion and demands a reaction, the way rock should.


Miss Matthews, Timothy Greer
Kathryn Ilene Matthews, a daughter of Cynthia H. Matthews of Stamford, Conn., and Donald J. Matthews of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Timothy Perot Greer, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alexander P. Greer of Spokane, Wash.
The Rev.
Avery Manchester, a Methodist minister, performed the interdenominational ceremony at the First Church of Round Hill in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Greer, 33, is an advertising account executive at Art in America magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of Notre Dame.
Her father is a senior vice president at Johnson &amp; Higgins, an insurance brokerage in New York.
Her mother is a real-estate sales representative in Stamford.


Milan Malaise
To the Editor: The answer of Francesco Visconti of Milan's Malpensa Airport, to the complaint from Frank DiStefano (Letters, Nov. 8) was no answer at all.
I too, landed at the airport twice this year, and both times were a nightmare.
As Mr.
DiStefano described, hundreds of tired, frustrated, baggage-laden travelers waited for long-overdue busses with no system of boarding.


'Assisted Living' Builders Regroup for 90's
As the nation's population is maturing, so is the industry that provides housing for the elderly.
Having learned from mistakes in several project failures in the 80's, professionals in the industry believe they finally understand the needs of those they serve.
Choice, affordability, service and access to health care are the key elements for success in the 90's, said Mel Gamzon, president of Senior Housing Investment Advisors, a Newton, Mass., consulting firm.
He was among the speakers at a three-day conference held here in December by the National Association of Senior Living Industries.


Devils Dig Deep and Emerge With a Tie
The Devils waited 54 minutes 25 seconds to give their fans a little something to cheer about, like a single goal.
They got one goal at that time and another one later, after they had fallen behind again, to earn a 2-2 tie with the Winnipeg Jets tonight at Byrne Meawowlands Arena.
"We had to make some sort of a statement after that awful game in Washington," Devils forward Randy McKay said, referring to the 9-2 loss to the Capitals.
"We knew we played awful there, and we were determined to make up for it."


Bush's Last Hurrah in Cold, Wintry Moscow
In principle, summit meetings are not to talk about the weather.
But history shows that Russian winters have a way of forcing themselves onto the agenda.
First it was a thick wet snow that forced Presidents Bush and Boris N. Yeltsin to abandon their plan to meet in Sochi, a resort town on the Black Sea.
Then Mr.
Bush flew into a Moscow that was bitterly cold, with temperatures hovering around zero Fahrenheit and the city powdered a fine white.


Focus: Housing the Elderly; 'Assisted Living' Builders Regroup for 90's
AS the nation's population is maturing, so is the industry that provides housing for the elderly.
Having learned from mistakes in several project failures in the 80's, professionals in the industry believe they finally understand the needs of those they serve.
Choice, affordability, service and access to health care are the key elements for success in the 90's, said Mel Gamzon, president of Senior Housing Investment Advisors, a Newton, Mass., consulting firm.
He was among the speakers at a three-day conference held here in December by the National Association of Senior Living Industries.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 13 headed "What's Doing in Philadelphia" referred incorrectly to food sold at the Reading Terminal Market.
None of it is kosher.


Nancy Whitney, David Schmidt Jr.
Nancy Leigh Whitney, an operations control analyst with Merrill Lynch in Somerset, N.J., was married on Thursday to David John Schmidt Jr., a civil engineer with Van Cleef Engineering in Hillsborough, N.J.
The Rev.
H.
Dana Fearon, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Nassau Inn in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Schmidt, 28, graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
She is a daughter of Leon and Juliet Whitney of Belle Mead, N.J.
Her father is a broker at J. T. Boyer Associates, a real-estate company in Princeton.
Her mother, Juliet Whitney, is a broker at John T. Henderson Inc., a real-estate concern in Belle Mead.


INSIDE
U.N. Chief to Visit Somalia
Boutros Boutros-Ghali plans to visit Somalia today as part of a quest to bring its battling factions together and restore civil authority.
Page 3.
New Season on Capitol Hill
Congress convenes Tuesday, with the Democratic majority hoping to prove that a Democratic President means inaction can end.
Page 16.
A Deadly Walk
A Russian immigrant family mourned three members killed by a car in Queens.
Its driver was charged with drunken driving.
Page 23.
This Town Wants Convicts
Needing an economic lift, a Minnesota town decided two years ago to get into the prison business.
What it needs now are prisoners.
Page 14.
News Summary, Page 2 Obituaries, Page 30 Weather, Page 31 Radio, Updated TV, Page 29


Corrections
Corrections in other sections: Business, page 11; The Week in Review, page 5; Travel, page 17; Book Review, page 12.


True Leadership for the Next Millennium
As President-elect Clinton, his Cabinet and advisers prepare to take office, concentration on immediate and short-term issues would be scarcely surprising.
Should the North American free trade agreement be accepted?
Should more pressure be put on Serbia to cease its "ethnic cleansing" in Bosnia?
Can some troops now be withdrawn from Somalia?
Should our profligate use of petroleum be curbed by a gas tax?
How can the new Administration convince the markets it is serious about cutting the deficit?


Kathryn M. Shaw, Stephen Patterson
Kathryn Marie Shaw, a daughter of Sheila M. Shaw of Boca Raton, Fla., and Dr.
William V. Shaw of Leicester, England, was married yesterday to Stephen Sands Patterson, the son of James T. Patterson of Providence, R.I., and the late Nancy W. Patterson.
The Rev.
Heidi Hoskin performed the ceremony at Plymouth Congregational Church in Miami.
Mrs.
Patterson, 27, is a photographer in Chicago.
She and her husband, 28, both graduated from Williams College.
Her father is a professor of biochemistry at the University of Leicester.
She is a stepdaughter of Elizabeth Shaw of Leicester.


Unhemmed, Unhampered
As the curtain goes up on the new year, the point of modern fashion is to free women from constrictions of movement.
The artful covering (and uncovering) of the leg appears to be an important base for a contemporary style of dress.
Adding a puffy, oversize jacket accentuates the long stretch of leg unencumbered by the nostalgic ups and downs of skirt lengths.
This ballerina-like silhouette gives fashion a fresh proportion set on delicate ankle boots.
Long skirts, short skirts, trousers, jump suits and short pants are all apt for women who have been liberated from social, moral and designers' dictates of the past century.
And for finely tuned bodies, leggings are a head-turning alternative.


What New Year? All Rangers Hear Is '1940'
The Rangers tonight ended the sort of three-game road trip that gets players traded, coaches fired and downtrodden New York fans thoroughly depressed.
The Rangers were outshot, and eventually outclassed, by the defending champion Penguins at the Civic Arena, 5-2, the latest in a string of three lowdown, no-good defeats.
This time, the Rangers fell about 40 minutes short of an upset, playing solid hockey in the second period but far less than that in the first and third.


45 Cars Pile Up on Expressway in Chicago


Strong Prospects Shy Away From Senate Race in Texas
The role of kingmaker is not what it used to be in Texas politics.
In fact, it has become a major headache for Gov.
Ann W. Richards, who has repeatedly put off naming someone to replace Senator Lloyd Bentsen when he becomes Treasury Secretary in the Clinton Cabinet.
For almost a month now, Ms.
Richards has been interviewing prospective candidates to fill the Senate seat until a special election, likely to be called for May 1.
But, instead of having her pick among political heavyweights, she has been left to choose among several candidates with only modest followings because so many obvious contenders have pulled out of the running.


Hooked Up to the Same Air and Water
I spent Christmas in Los Angeles, where people string colored lights around palm trees and on cactuses that grow two stories high.
There were a number of Bethlehem scenes of Mary and the baby with all the animals peering over the manger.
They were set out on handkerchief lawns, sheltered by bright red poinsettias as big as dogwood trees and giant agaves so full of torchlike orange blooms that nobody needed candles.
The plants are so loud here.
I used to think them vulgar, but now I dress in the same colors when I come to L.A.
And all the other New Yorkers must do the same thing; I didn't see a black downtown outfit once.
And the plants started working on me.
I used to think palm trees were silly -- telephone poles with fronds on their heads.
Now I love them.
They make me think of Egypt, of royalty, of the columns of ancient temples.


GIRL TALK
Don't kid yourself about Nancy Drew.
A product of her age, she was just killing time until Ned finished his education and put that ring on her finger.
The baby sitters are a new generation.
The girls have set themselves up in a successful business.
Their self-esteem comes from satisfaction with their own achievements, not from the approval of boys.
BRENDA BOWEN
New York, N.Y.


If You're Thinking of Living in: SoHo
BEHIND the graffiti-covered cast-iron facades of SoHo's cold 19th-century factory buildings, above the trendy boutiques and restaurants and their crowds, are artists and their allies in art-related fields who provide a support system for this center of the currently depressed international art market.
The desolate Dickensian streets -- part of the ambiance of inverse snobbism adopted by residents attracted to the look of post-industrial decay -- are a distant cry from the farmland and meadows that the area south of Houston (thus: SoHo) to Canal Street was in the 18th century


Ms. Mittelstadt, Othon Prounis
Monica Geli Mittelstadt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Mittelstadt of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Othon Alexander Prounis, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore O. Prounis of New York.
Archbishop Iakovos, the primate of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of North and South America, gave the blessing at the Cathedral of the Holy Trinity in New York.
The Rev.
Randolph L. C. Weber performed the ceremony at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Prounis, 30, is an associate at the New York law firm of Rogers &amp; Wells.
She graduated from Amherst College and received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father is a consultant to the Interpublic Group of Companies Inc., an advertising conglomerate in New York.
Her mother, Angelica Mittelstadt, is a portrait artist in Rye.


Pedestrians at Risk On Queens Boulevard
Queens Boulevard, a bustling thoroughfare that bisects the sprawling borough whose name it bears, is one of the deadliest streets in the city.
In four of the last five years, as many people were killed in car accidents on Queens Boulevard as on any other New York street.
The couple and their teen-age daughter who were fatally struck by a driver in Kew Gardens Friday night were probably just the first on this year's list of Queens Boulevard fatalities.
The three were trying to cross Queens Boulevard near the middle of the block.
The driver, Carlyle Thompson, 44 years old, was charged with driving while intoxicated and criminally negligent homicide.


Iraq Accused: A Case of Genocide
In an underground facility, somewhere in the United States, researchers are going through a mountain of Iraqi files that could provide the legal basis for the first case of genocide ever to be brought before the World Court.
The materials, captured by Kurdish rebels in the uprising against Saddam Hussein immediately following the Persian Gulf war, provide the first written documentation of a campaign of terror waged for a decade against the four million Kurds in Iraq, a campaign that reached its zenith between March and August of 1988.


Methods Differ for Transporting Cash
Their trade routes are similar; bustling highways and streets over which they haul shipments of cash while guarding against thieves.
But that is where most of the similarities end between two of the city's longtime armored courier services.
The Coin Devices Corporation dispatches hulking armored trucks from a gritty industrial section of Brooklyn, while the Epic Security Corporation keeps a fleet of sleek vans near its main office in Manhattan.


Breaking Up Is Not So Hard To Do
The 15 million people who three days ago were citizens of Czechoslovakia are starting 1993 as citizens of Central Europe's two newest nations.
Many, perhaps most, would rather not.
This breakup, unlike those of Yugoslavia or the Soviet Union, did not stem from heartfelt popular sentiments.
Instead, the end of the 74-year-old union of Czechs and Slovaks was engineered by two politicians who, though they prevailed in the 1992 elections, did so with only about one-third of the votes in their respective republics, thanks to the multiparty systems in which they competed.


Bigotry, Though Hateful, Is Protected
To the Editor:
It is disappointing that "Clean Up the Law of Speech" (editorial, Dec. 17), about a case pending in the Supreme Court involving the constitutionality of Wisconsin's hate-crime law, so completely disregards its First Amendment implications.


Battle Over Grass-Roots Lobby
Thousands of New Jersey residents last fall received a letter from a group calling itself People for Fair Insurance.
The letter urged them to send enclosed postcards to their state senators and Assembly members in support of a bill that would change the way auto insurance rates are set.
Gov.
Jim Florio had vetoed the measure.
On Oct. 29, the Legislature voted to override the veto.
And soon thereafter, administration officials charged that the group was financed, at least in part, with money provided by the insurance industry.


A Four-Season Maintenance Schedule
JUST like a car or other vehicle, houses need regular inspections and care to operate smoothly and prevent small problems from becoming large ones.
Organizing a year-round schedule is a key to keeping up with repairs.
A season-by-season approach assures that work will be time for the best results.
SPRING As early in the season as possible, make a thorough tour of the exterior.
Look out for damage caused by winter weather and be prepared to make spot repairs to roofs and siding before leaks appear.
They are common during spring rains.


For John Daly, a New Beginning
Now that John Daly has gone through the public humiliation of arrest and the admission of a serious drinking problem, those who care most about the young golf star believe it was the best thing that could have happened.
According to what his wife, Bettye, told the police, Daly flew into a rage after drinking at a party on Dec. 19 in their Castle Rock, Colo., home.
Afterward, the scene was undeniably frightening: an overturned big-screen television, broken glass and walls with holes punched through them.
She was shaken and told the police he had pushed her and pulled her hair.


Nigerian Emigre Makes 'Colorblind' Movie Set on the Island
On a cold gray day in February 1990, Uzo, a 35-year-old graphic artist from Nigeria, resigned his day job in Manhattan.
After working four years to make the film, his company, Cold Grey Entertainment of Patchogue, screened his first feature, "Walls and Bridges," and the response has been red hot.
Uzo's semiautobiographical film is about the marriage of opposites.
It traces the arc of love and marriage between a white nun who leaves her order and a black artist who becomes blind from a random act of violence.


The BBC Is Not A Panacea
To the Editor:
I am no apologist for the networks.
I make my living with a company that produces programming for television stations outside of the network system.


Debra Klein, Bradley Cohen
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Klein of Miami have announced the engagement of their daughter Debra Anne Klein to Bradley Michael Cohen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Cohen of Highland Park, Ill.
Ms.
Klein, 27, is a freelance television news writer in San Francisco.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is the provost of the New World School of the Arts, an arts conservatory in Miami.
Her mother, Rhoda A. Klein, is the president of Guidance and Consulting Services of Miami.


Streetscapes: The Queens Aviary; A Great Outside Interior Space
THE newly reopened aviary at the Queens Zoo in Flushing is not just for the birds.
It is also one of the great interior spaces of New York City -- even though it's really all outside.
In the winter, thick snow offers an unexpected treat; it is trapped by the netting that covers the dome, forming a surreal, igloo-like space.
The structure of the Queens Aviary was built in 1964 as a space for special events, The Pavilion, for the 1964-65 World's Fair.
Although the architects for the installation was the firm of Eggers &amp; Higgins, the dome itself was one of Buckminster Fuller's geodesic domes and the framing was designed by a company he set up, Synergetics, of Raleigh, N.C.


Hope Chests Designed to Outlast the Marriage
Some of the heftiest hope chests in history were made 300 years ago in western New England for well-to-do women.
Today these pieces are called Hadley chests, a term coined a century ago by the Hartford-based collector Henry Wood Erving in referring to a richly carved example he had bought in Hadley, Mass.
The name stuck, and ever since historians have used the word Hadley to describe the wide-board oak chests and other boxy furniture decorated, as was Erving's, with a tulip-and-leaf motif.
Although the botanical image was the most favored at the time, other patterns appeared on Hadley furnishings, which were produced along the Connecticut River between 1690 and 1740.


The Charger Who Left and Wouldn't Come Back
A persistent rain could not dim the enthusiasm of the fans who packed Jack Murphy Stadium yesterday afternoon for the Chargers' first playoff game in a decade.
San Diego's opponent, the Kansas City Chiefs, were an old nemesis from the American Football League, having won 33 games to the Chargers' 31 with one tie in their series.


Sports of The Times; Joe Gibbs Knows How to Roll the Playoff Dice
SO much for gratitude.
Only a week ago, the Minnesota Vikings put the struggling Washington Redskins in the Super Bowl XXVII playoffs.
The Redskins had lost their last two games, but when the Vikings frustrated the Green Bay Packers, the Redskins walked backward into the playoffs.


A Crown That Is Fit For Only Alabama
There was no argument the morning after.
There were no debates about the system that establishes the top team in college football, no unexplainable first-place votes among the electorate, and no outraged appeals from distant precincts.
When the morning after arrived, the view, depending on the shade of one's dark glasses, was that of either an Alabama crimson happily-ever-after or a shockingly punishing and one-sided defeat that this generation of Miami Hurricanes will remember forever.


Spending Is Up, but Jobs Aren't
FOR Westchester, 1992 was a most difficult year -- one that many observers of business activity in the county said they were happy to close the books on.
It was a somber year -- a period when bad news clearly overshadowed the few bright signs suggesting that economic hard times might not last forever.


Bartender Training Rejected By Vermont's Liquor Board
A proposal that would have strengthened Vermont's training program for bartenders and others who may be held liable for drunken driving accidents has been rejected by the State Liquor Control Board on procedural grounds.
The board rejected the proposal on Nov. 10 on the advice of its counsel and the State Attorney General, said Norris Hoyt, the Commissioner of Liquor Control.
Since Vermont already has a mandatory training program enacted by the Legislature in 1987, only the Legislature can amend it, Mr.
Hoyt said.


Taking On His Own Reflection -- and Tennessee Williams
As reformed sinners go, Rob Lowe is not half bad.
He doesn't preach or beat his breast; he owns up, gets a laugh and nimbly moves on.
At the end of the smash 1992 film "Wayne's World," in which he portrays a manipulative smoothie (someone, perhaps, not unlike his former licentious self), he looks into the camera and opines, with choirboy sincerity: "I've learned that a flawless profile, a perfect body, bright clothes and a great car can get you far in America, almost to the top, but it can't get you everything."
Bravo. And bravado.


Japan's Nuclear Project
To the Editor:
As engineers with more than 60 years of combined experience in the design and construction of various industrial and power plants, we think "Japan's Nuclear Fiasco" (Dec. 20) should have been placed in the editorial section as opinion.
First, no mention was made of the obvious benefits of recycling nuclear waste into nuclear fuel for advanced reactors, whose waste can again be recycled into fuel for conventional reactors.
Similarly, no mention was made of the sword-into-plowshares concept where nuclear weapons can provide fuel for power plants.


A Headline Not Apt
To the Editor:
I was distressed, as a Jew, by the headline "The Shekels of Christmas" (Dec. 13) on an article about the increased crowds and revenues at Biltmore Estate because of its Christmas attractions.
Shekel is a Hebrew word denoting Israeli currency and is used in Yiddish to denote money.
To link this with Christmas is to me blasphemous.
ANNA KATZ BRENNER  New York, Dec. 18


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
DECISIONS, DECISIONS
A six-part series of discussions focusing on the United States Supreme Court's decision-making process will begin Saturday at 2 P.M. at the Hartford Public Library, 500 Main Street.
Every other Saturday through March 20, participants will meet to explore landmark constitutional cases.
The series, for which there is no charge, is sponsored by the League of Women Voters of West Hartford.
Recommended reading between sessions will be available at the library .
The series leads off with "Being Supreme: Early Power Struggles 1776-1868," followed on Jan. 23 with "Comes Now the Pauper: The Right to Counsel." The subject on Feb. 6 will be "Dangerous Words: Freedom of Speech," and "In Black and White: Equal Protection of the Laws" will be covered on Feb. 20.
The final programs on March 6 and March 20 are "Public Practices: Freedom of (and From) Religion" and "Home Alone: Privacy and the Court."


POSTINGS: A Shell of a Saloon; Hard Times For Old House
Manhattan's third oldest structure, a brick house at 273 Water Street, has not had an easy couple of centuries.
And things are not getting any easier.
Built in the 1770's by Capt.
Joseph Rose, the building was a notorious saloon in the mid-19th century where dog fights were staged.
The city seized it in 1976 for failure to pay taxes.
Today, it is a shell.


Conversations/Allan G. Lindh; Is 1993 the Year of the Big One? Rumblings from a California Prophet
ALLAN G. LINDH looks the part of a latter-day Jeremiah, with a long russet-and-white beard, a piercing gaze and an absent-minded mien.
And he sounds the part when he warns Californians that the recent earthquakes in the Mojave Desert, among the largest in state history, are a "final warning" that the Big One on the southern end of the San Andreas Fault is just around the corner and that "it's time to act as if the damn thing will happen tomorrow."


Susan R. Gates, M. H. Pottinger Jr.
June wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Moore Gates Jr. of Princeton, N.J., for their daughter, Susan Roberts Gates, and Michael Howard Pottinger Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Pottinger of Louisville, Ky.
Ms.
Gates, 29, is a counselor at the Tillicum Middle School in Bellevue, Wash.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University and received a master's degree in counseling from the University of Vermont.
Her father is a partner with Gates, Wilmerding, Carper &amp; Rawlings, an investment counseling firm in Princeton.


Bean Dishes to Fight the Chill
THIS is not the time of year for tuna brochettes with salsa.
Hearty, old-fashioned food is what you want when the weather gets cold; anything simmered or braised in a delicious sauce will do, especially when it comes with a comforting heap of beans.
Lamb shanks braised with white beans is a classic French peasant dish.
The shanks are an inexpensive cut and come out meltingly tender, the meat almost falling off the bone.
The shanks are mixed in with the beans, sprinkled with bread crumbs and baked, uncovered, for about 30 minutes before being sprinkled with parsley.
This dish is also good topped with thinly sliced baby artichokes fried in olive oil until crisp.


Barbara Smith and Dan Gasby
SEVEN years ago, Barbara Smith, a model and an actress, opened B. Smith's Restaurant at West 47th Street and Eighth Avenue, next to a closed-down movie theater and across the street from a row of dilapidated tenements.
Until Ms.
Smith arrived, the block was one of New York's bleakest.
Some people now consider her corner a landmark.
As Edward J. Robinson, an interior designer and a regular customer at the restaurant, said: "Anyone who comes in from out of town, I must take them to B. Smith's, then to the Statue of Liberty. There's always the possibility of seeing someone famous or in the news or in the know."


No Headline
Dr.
Frank J. Rauscher Jr., a former director of the National Cancer Institute who discovered one of the most-studied of animal cancer viruses, died on Thursday in a Nyack, N.Y., hospital.
He was 61 and lived in Weston, Conn.
Dr. Rauscher suffered a heart attack, said one of his sons, Dr. Frank J. Rauscher 3d.


Fondness for Fur Is Unfashionable
To the Editor:
In a new era of awareness about the environment and the treatment of animals, your On the Street column "Wearing Fur, Walking Fur" (Dec. 13) showed a blatant disregard for a trend that is sweeping the rest of the civilized world but seems to have left New York City behind.


This Week's Numbers
Monday
Nov. construct. spending, percent change
1.1
0.3
Dec. purchasing managers index
55
57.7
Wednesday
Late Dec. auto sales, annual rate (millions)
6.2
6.7
Thursday
Nov. wholesale trade, percent change
-1.0
0.3
Dec. Univ. of Michigan confidence
91.4
95
Friday
Dec. unemployment rate, percent
7.5
7.4
Late Dec. non-farm payrolls, thousands
105
85
Dec. change in consumer credit, in billions
$0.2
0.5
Tuesday -- Congress convenes *
New European Commission holds first meeting in Brussels  Thursday -- Chain stores report sales *
Bundesbank Council meets


Foreign Affairs; Surprise, Surprise, Surprise
A year ago, almost everyone was proclaiming democracy's triumph and heralding Western European unity and a major free-trade agreement.
At year's end, prospects for all three have plummeted.
In early 1992, hardly anyone gave a thought to Bosnia or Somalia.
Within months, they were called sites of genocide and ignited dramatic debates about using force for humanitarian ends.
In January 1992, few Americans recognized the Arkansas Governor's name.
Ten months later, Bill Clinton was elected President.
Events sometimes confound us because of honest miscalculation or wishful thinking.
Judgments counter judgments, and hope clouds history.
Such all-too-human ways explain our failure to look hard enough at obvious historical hurdles.
Democracy has rarely fared well against nationalism, nor European unity or world trade against narrow national interests.


OFF THE COUCH
Dr.
Roger MacKinnon is right: there will always be a need for the "healing of the soul." But managed-care companies increasingly are dictating whose souls get healed and how much healing they get.
Psychoanalysis is, sadly, being marginalized to a treatment for the very rich.
JAMES MC CREATH
Hawthorne, N.J.


GENDER DE PLUME
It occurs to me that the publishers of "Catholic Girls" might sell additional copies of the paperback anthology with an ad promotion: "One of these 52 writers proved to be a male. Can you tell which story he wrote?" LEIGH B. SMITH
Vineyard Haven, Mass.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
A LIFE IN MUSIC By Daniel Barenboim.
Edited by Michael Lewin.
Robert Stewart/Scribners, $23.


Rebuilding the Republican Party
Political parties learn from defeat.
A smart or lucky one can purge itself of tired ideas, outdated alliances and candidates who do not quite have it.
It happened to the Democrats during the 80's.
Walter Mondale, an otherwise serviceable candidate, showed with his crushing loss in 1984 that the Democrats could no longer depend on their old blend of labor, minorities and the big-city machines.
Too many of their voters had moved to the suburbs and become less dependent on the programs and patronage they needed in less prosperous times.
In 1988, the shopworn ideology and charmless manner of Michael Dukakis marked the last gasp of the old Democrats.


A Few Good Meals
The story of eating in America didn't begin in 1972.
However, it was right about then, about the time that dress codes were defied and war was being resisted, that the nation's taste buds stood up, too.
As if aroused from a long, dull sleep, America experienced a great awakening of taste, and the New American Gourmet reeled from trend to trend as if each were a cup of coffee sorely needed.
Now, 20 years later, food trends are passe.
Which is not to say that the food sophisticate will slip back into somnolence.
Rather, in our decades-long quest for the Epicurean Grail, our expectations have changed.
Instead of grasping at food trends and racing from one new restaurant to another, today's cognoscenti can be found at home, over quiet dinners, basking in the quiet wonder of how long -- and how many food fads -- it took for American taste to come full circle.


Stormy Whether - or Not?
This department is blessed not merely by the existence of the Lexico graphic Irregulars, with shock troops of the Gotcha!
Gangsters, but also by a more irenic quartet of advisers: the On Language Board of Octogenarian Mentors, acronym'd Olbom.
What a crew: Jacques Barzun, author of "The House of Intellect" and "The Modern Researcher"; Alistair Cooke, just retired as host of "Masterpiece Theater" and long the interpreter of America to the mother country; Allen Walker Read, the etymologist of American English who found the origin of
O.K.,
and Frederic G. Cassidy, editor of the Dictionary of American Regional English, our answer to Sir James Murray of the Oxford English Dictionary.
Their collective ages, projected backward in time, would take us to 1649.


Auguring Well: The New Gadgets; High Technology For Air Boredom
Life is getting closer to imitating Star Trek.
The technology for beaming people up is still in its infancy, but beginning this year, silicon addicts will be able buy the Apple Newton, a minuscule pen-based computer with the capacity to fritter away executive time more conveniently than is currently possible.
This will thrill those tired of lugging around tiny but immensely powerful notebook, sub-notebook and palmtop computers.


Choice for National Security Adviser Has a Long-Awaited Chance to Lead
As a youth working during the summer on a Connecticut farm, W. Anthony Lake would walk behind tractors and toss bales of hay into a wagon.
"One day," he often promised himself, "I'm going to drive the tractor."
For several years, as a gentleman farmer raising 28 head of cattle on his 140-acre farm in Worthington, Mass., Mr.
Lake has fulfilled his wish.
Now, as President-elect Bill Clinton's choice to become national security adviser, he is about to climb into the driver's seat in his other field of endeavor: foreign policy.


Andrew Gardner, Kimberley Harris
Kimberley Patricia Harris, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
T.
R.
Harris of Kimberley, Ontario, Canada, was married on Thursday to Andrew Tobias Gardner, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan D. Gardner of Katonah, N.Y.
Rabbi Richard S. Chapin performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Ms.
Gardner is a research assistant at the Wilkerson Group, a health-care consulting company in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Harvard University.
Her father is the vice president of finance of Canadian Shipbuilding and Engineering Ltd. in St.
Catharines, Ontario.


America Veers Into 1993 Saying It Expects Better
"NOW," said Satan, "you have seen your progress down to the present, and you must confess that it is wonderful -- in its way." Thus at the very beginning of this century did Mark Twain, wary celebrant of humanity, feel obliged to imagine Satan urging mankind to spare a moment for gloating darkly over the negative feats of human history, especially the purer malice of war and famine that, he predicted then, would ever trouble us in new forms, as now in Serbia's war and Somalia's starvation.
These calamities last into the new year and serve as reminders that Twain's optimism is still to be preferred for the human planet's cycle across time, but that his secret, caustic fears also remain apt.
A reporter, free to wander America last summer and autumn, had to wonder what grotesque parodies of Huck Finn liberty might Twain find now in the urban American specter of young men with automatic pistols warring nightly on one another.
"I'm not talking about urban America in the abstract," said Jack Calhoun, an appalled bystander in the machine-pistol combat on his tree-lined street in Washington.
"I'm talking about my daily life, the gunfire, two killings in the last two months."


The Ups and Downs Of the Silver Dollar
A FEW decades ago, silver dollars were still pretty common.
Their large size (almost 1 1/2 inches in diameter) and heaviness (almost an ounce) made them a little inconvenient as pocket change, but a lot of people had one or two that they carried around for luck.
And silver dollars were a favorite birthday present from grandparents.
But collecting them has proved tricky.
Although the United States began producing silver dollars in its first years and still recognizes them as currency, there have been periods, including the present, when none were produced at all.


RECORD BRIEFS
'Ben Bagley's Rodgers and Hart Revisited -- Volume V'
Painted Smiles PSCD-140; CD only.


Corrections
Because of a cable programming schedule change, highlight entries on pages 3 and 30 of the Television section today, for MTV on Wednesday at 10 P.M., are outdated.
The program to be shown is "Most Wanted." The cable station plans to reschedule "Unplugged: Neil Young."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  A PROPOSAL TO REMAP BOSNIA  Leaders of factions involved in the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina met in Geneva and began discussing plans to redraw the map of the former Yugoslav republic into 10 provinces.
Creation of these regions, to be dominated in various areas by each of the combatants or in combination, would be an attempt to recognize territorial demands without formally engaging in ethnic partition.  1  Guests dodged snipers to attend a New Year's lunch in Sarajevo.  6  IN TOKYO, LESS WINING AND DINING  Japan seems to be turning away from its conspicuous consumption of the late 1980's.
Sales of Cognac and designer handbags are declining, and some say the trend may last.  1  U.N.
PLANS SOMALI PEACE TALKS  Secretary General Boutros-Ghali is in Somalia today, between stops in neighboring Ethiopia, where he is to convene a meeting of leaders of many of Somalia's battling factions in the hope of restoring some measure of civil authority. 3  BUSH ARRIVES IN MOSCOW  Keeping President Yeltsin's weak domestic position in mind, the United States made significant concessions in a nuclear arms reduction treaty with Russia, Administration officials said.
President Bush arrived in Moscow to sign the pact.  8  PANEL OPPOSES NEW KENYA VOTE  An election-monitoring group said that fraud marred Kenya's balloting last week.
But it declined to endorse calls for a new vote.  3  Lithuania's new Foreign Minister says policy has been too insular.  7  Afghanistan's new President pleaded for unity after a disputed vote. 9  Archeologists find the model of an early horse in Syria.  10  Russian defector says faulty radar doomed Korean airliner in 1983.
What it needs now are prisoners.  14  PSYCHIATRY AND THE CHURCH  The long period of rocky relations between psychiatry and the Roman Catholic Church appears over.
Indeed, many leaders of the profession who will meet with the Pope tomorrow are themselves Catholics.  22  A robot's descent into a volcano was called off when a cable broke.  15 Metro 23-28  FIGHT OVER APPROACH TO AIDS  Earlier this month, St.
Vincent's Hospital abruptly cancelled its annual observance of World AIDS Day.
The move offered a glimpse into a tug-of-war between the Roman Catholic Church and the public health establishment over how to prevent new infections.  1  ARMORED BUT NOT INVINCIBLE  They are entrusted with the ultimate in valuables.
But the largely unregulated courier services that deliver billions of dollars in the New York area are dismayingly vulnerable to theft, officials say.  23  Methods differ for transporting cash.  26  The watch for the Messiah in Crown Heights.  23  Obituaries 30  Neediest Cases 28


Profile/Peter Middleton; A Contemplative Master at Lloyd's
PETER MIDDLETON, the new chief executive of Lloyd's of London, says his colleagues at the venerable insurer should not be surprised if they walk by his office and see him doing nothing.
"The British disease is that people are wholly task-oriented, and success is moving one pile of paper from an 'in' tray to an 'out' tray," Mr.
Middleton explained.
"Some people feel uncomfortable just sitting at a desk thinking. They should be doing it, and they should be doing it for a more signficant part of their day. Otherwise, how do you say to yourself that you're giving the right direction and the right emphasis to the things you're doing?"


Ethics of Giving AIDS Advice Troubles Catholic Hospitals
Last month, St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan planned, then abruptly canceled, its annual observance of World AIDS Day.
Hospital administrators rejected most of the educational material to be handed out in the lobby, saying it promoted the use of condoms and referred to acts that "were not in keeping with the teachings of the Catholic Church."
The clamp-down baffled the hospital's AIDS workers, who said that the same brochures and pamphlets had been allowed in previous years.
In defiance, a few of them took to the sidewalk to give the prevention literature to passers-by.


World Markets; Some Opportunities Abroad for 1993
FOR international equity investors, 1992 was largely a forgettable year, the third straight in which returns on American stocks outpaced gains in foreign markets.
Chances are slim that 1993 will produce a similar result, according to a sampling of portfolio managers here and abroad.
Despite the mediocre returns of foreign markets, these professionals maintain that investing in them still makes a great deal of sense.


Psychiatrists to Meet With the Pope
Dr.
Joseph T. English, president of the American Psychiatric Association, will lead a delegation of prominent psychiatrists to meet with Pope John Paul II in the Vatican tomorrow.
But he can remember a time when such an audience would have seemed unlikely, if not absurd.
Dr.
English was a student in a Roman Catholic high school in Philadelphia in 1947, when Msgr.
Fulton J. Sheen gave his famous sermon attacking Freud's work as based on "materialism, hedonism, infantilism and eroticism." Monsignor Sheen later complained that his remarks were misrepresented as an attack on psychiatry in general, but they became a symbol of the wariness and outright hostility that long marked relations between the church and the profession.


Charles Falker and Elizabeth Swire
Elizabeth Emery Swire, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Swire of Larchmont, N.Y., was married on Wednesday to Charles F. Falker, the son of Robert Falker of New York and Monica Warner of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Harry Hoehler, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Union League Club in New York.
Mrs.
Swire Falker, 26, graduated from Wellesley College.
She is a student at Benjamin N. Cardozo Law School.
Her father is a senior partner at the Townley &amp; Updike law firm in New York.
Her mother, Edith W. Swire, is the director at the Serpentine Strings School, a music school in Larchmont.


Mary-Jane Foster, Jack McGregor
Mary-Jane Foster, an actress in television and radio commercials in New York, was married yesterday to Jack E. McGregor, the president and chief executive of the Aquarion Company, a public water supplier and environmental testing laboratory in Bridgeport, Conn.
The Rev.
Thomason Newcomb, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the bridegroom's home in Easton, Conn.
Ms.
Foster, who is keeping her name, graduated from Bennett College and is studying law at Quinnipiac College.
She is the daughter of the late Dr. and Mrs.
John M. Foster of Denver.
Her father was a surgeon and a professor emeritus of surgery at the University of Colorado Medical School in Denver.
Her mother, Patricia Foster, founded Foster &amp; Son, a jewelry store in Denver.


OFF THE COUCH
The traditional but nonetheless specious distinction between mind and brain has spawned an equally false dichotomy between psychotherapy and psychiatric medications ("Off the Couch," by Elizabeth Stone, Dec. 6).
According to this flawed view, only medications redress the chemical imbalances that cause behavioral, cognitive or emotional problems.
The biochemical disturbances associated with mental illness, presumably, are untouched by the various forms of "talk" therapy.
However, recent discoveries in neuroscience have started to reveal the neuroanatomical and chemical changes that learning produces.
The stunning implication is that, once inside the brain, words and medications are substantively equivalent.


Who Are Really The 'Social Engineers'?
A builder, Wilbur F. Breslin, wants to dump a giant mall and housing project on the pine barrens and its aquifer, Long Island's last hope of good drinking water.
"Developers' Nightmare, Environmentalists' Hero"  [ Nov. 22 ]  states that Mr.
Breslin and other megadevelopers have been trying to paint Richard L. Amper Jr., executive director of the Long Island Pine Barrens Society, as a social engineer, not the committed environmentalist we know him to be.
The developers have put their shoe on the wrong foot.
Social engineering, persuading people by various means to act in designated and predictable ways, has shaped both the creation of the modern shopping mall and its daily functioning.


Title No. 12 Comes Easily
So how many national championships has Alabama won?
The Crimson Tide now claims 12, but only the last 2 have been considered by unanimous choice.
Alabama's 10 other claims are drawn from a complex assortment of at least 15 barometers that have defined and confused the history of the game as far back as 1889.


Eagles Look Back Only to December
It has been a season of tragedy, anger and redemption, and now, having survived the regular season on the upbeat, the Philadelphia Eagles must cast off their recent history of folding in the playoffs.
"It's not just me," said an edgy Randall Cunningham, the quarterback with the quick feet, strong arm, and an 0-3 playoff record.
"There's 17 guys who have lost all three playoff games. But I'll take the pressure. We've been having fun lately."


A Headline Not Apt
To the Editor:
I wish you had not used the word shekels in your headline.
Why use a Hebrew word to tie into Christmas?
Why not any of many words that could be equally acceptable, such as assets, wealth, riches, revenue or dollars?
JOAN P. CAMENSON  Cypress, Texas, Dec. 23


Lynda Fuhrman, Joshua Rovine
Mr. and Mrs.
Lionel Fuhrman of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lynda Beth Fuhrman, to Joshua Benjamin Rovine, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur W. Rovine, also of New York.
A March wedding is planned.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Dec. 19  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village  $457,500
1 Fifth Avenue (8th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, expanded kitchen, Washington Square view; maintenance $1,395, 55% tax-deductible (Brokers: Kanelba &amp; Robilotti-Ann Weintraub Realty)  TriBeCa  $677,500
65 North Moore Street  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,058-sq.-ft. penthouse loft condo; elevator, dining room, exposed-brick walls, 5 skylights, c/a, 1,600-sq. ft. of private roof space; common charge $483, taxes $10,288 (Brokers: Tabak Real Estate-Ambrose Mar Elia)  Upper East Side  $255,000
325 East 72d Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,150-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, fireplace, beamed ceilings, gardens; maintenance $1,036, 33% tax-deductible (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  Upper West Side  $315,000
400 West End Avenue (79th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,450-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, eat-in kitchen, 2 exposures; maintenance $926, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Halstead Property Co.)  West Side  $775,000
150 West 56th Street  (City Spire)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. 2-year-old condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, Central Park view; common charge $950, taxes $1,050 (Broker: Corcoran Group)  BRONX  Eastchester  $170,000
1458 Arno Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, hospitality suite in basement, 1-car garage, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: ERA/Best Match)  Spuyten Duyvil  $155,000
750 Kappock Street  (Glenbriar)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, balcony, Hudson River view, parking space; maintenance $906, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Charles G. Brophy)  BROOKLYN  Park Slope  $153,500
344 Sixth Avenue  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; dining area, recreation room, private garden, 2 exposures; maintenance $618, 65% tax-deductible (Broker: Warren Lewis Real Estate)  Park Slope  $198,000
101 Eighth Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,050-sq.-ft. co-op in a former brick mansion; 20- by 30-ft. mahogany-paneled living room, fireplace, herringbone floors, common garden; maintenance $616, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  Sheepshead Bay  $250,000
2655 East 21st Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 1-car garage, 60- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,651 (Broker: Maryl Real Estate)  QUEENS  Astoria  $322,500
22-63 37th Street  2-family, semi-attached brick house; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each unit; finished basement, 2-car garage, 27- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,214 (Broker: Century 21/Tri-Boro Terrace Realty)  Bayside  $142,000
1 Bay Drive  (Bay Club)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 900-sq.-ft. condo; 24-hr. doorman, eat-in kitchen, health club, Long Island Sound view; common charge $250, taxes $2,170 (Broker: Agranoff Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Annadale  $145,500
59 Berry Avenue West  3-bedroom, 3-bath, one-family semi-attached frame house; dining area, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 32- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: RE-MAX Preferred)  Dongan Hills  $255,000
241 Seaview Avenue  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 2-family detached colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 50- by 99-ft. lot; taxes $2,800 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/Schlott Realtors)


Like Ya Nev-ah Seen It Before
In one of the trio of TV movies about Amy Fisher, an auto mechanic covered in grease theorizes that prolonged exposure to Long Island may have driven the 17-year-old to shoot a Massapequa housewife in the head last May.
He insists that his co-worker, the victim's husband, Joey Buttafuoco, never had an affair with Miss Fisher, who says otherwise.
"It's the wires," he explains to a TV reporter in tonight's CBS movie, "Casualty of Love." "The wires aren't buried underground like in other parts of the country, so with all this electricity in the air, it fries some people's brains. Mid-island syndrome -- that's what Amy's got," he says with considerable conviction and a facial expression suggesting that he may be similarly afflicted.


Miss Schecter, Mr. Mayhew
Elizabeth Joan Schecter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Schecter of Winnetka, Ill., was married on Thursday to Timothy Peter Mayhew Jr., the son of Mrs.
Arnold D. Bucove of Millbrook, N.Y., and Mr.
Mayhew of Brooklyn.
Judge Bruce M. Kaplan of Family Court of the State of New York officiated at the Stanhope Hotel in New York.


The California Touch in Roslyn Heights
SAY hello to Long Island dining, 1990's-style.
Yesterday's red-meat shrines are folding, and new-wave California cuisine restaurants are multiplying.
Exit the Steer Barn in Roslyn Heights, and enter Adam's Grill.
There are still steaks and chops aplenty at this new spot, but they are more than matched by fish and seafood, innovative salads, crackly skinned chicken straight from the rotisserie and even a vegetable lasagna special.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on Dec. 20, about accommodations for gay vacationers, included an outdated schedule for the Gay Games of 1994, in New York.
The dates -- now June 18 to 25 -- have been moved ahead a week, so the games will precede Stonewall 25, the observance of the 25th anniversary of the Stonewall Inn clashes on June 27, 1969.


Crime
The elegiac theme of social exile haunts THE HANGING VALLEY (Scribners, $20), the fourth rural police procedural in Peter Robinson's evocative series set in the north of England and featuring his thoughtful copper, Chief Inspector Alan Banks.
When a decomposed corpse is discovered fouling the pure country air of Yorkshire, Banks settles into the village of Swainshead to puzzle out the connection between the dead man, a Canadian schoolteacher named Bernard Allen, and an earlier unsolved murder of another stranger.
The locals provide Banks with intriguing psychological material -- the detective is especially taken with the innkeeper's wife, who puts him in mind of Tess of the d'Urbervilles -- but no explanation for their obvious abhorrence of outsiders.
It takes a field trip to Toronto for Banks to understand the character of the victim and what he represented to the Hardy esque residents of the valley.
"At least Bernie died in the place he wanted to live," Banks is told at one of the many snug pubs where he conducts his most productive research.
Cold comfort, one might think; but not in the context of this emotionally rich novel, in which death seems preferable to life in endless exile from the "green and pleasant land" of one's home.


GENDER DE PLUME
Since there was no intention to deceive, I believe that Moore should be complimented for writing so eloquently on the female experience.
Isn't that what we feminists want -- for men to be more sensitive?
Let's praise him for his camaraderie.
We need more men like him BERNADETTE BATTAGLIA
Chicago


Airline Smoking
To the Editor: Your article on banning smoking on airplanes is right on point.
My question for the airlines is, why wait until 1996?
Why does anyone need government or International Civil Aviation Organization approval or "technical safety studies" to ban smoking?
Any airline wishing to ban smoking on its international flights could do so tomorrow.
It would merely have to publicize the fact, impose the rule and make provisions for any diehard smokers who held nonrefundable tickets.
I am a frequent international traveler who spends a lot of time in airplanes, mostly on long international flights.
I spend $50,000 to $70,000 per year on airplane tickets to foreign destinations.
I find smoking and the requirement that I breathe recycled, smoke-contaminated air to be obnoxious at best and dangerous at worst.


How to Reduce Drug Crimes
To the Editor:
In "Crime Control, City by City" (Op-Ed, Dec. 19), Steven Goldsmith and Kurt Schmoke recommend to the Clinton Administration, among other things, tailor-made combinations of economic development and tougher law enforcement, involving collaboration between communities and the police.
However, it is surprising, particularly given the views of Baltimore's Mayor Schmoke on this matter, that they did not address the issue of decriminalization of drugs.


Caroline Cooke, C. T. MacEachern
Caroline Jean Kent Cooke, the daughter of Mrs.
Pete Rozelle of Rancho Santa Fe, Calif., and Ralph K. Cooke of Lexington, Ky., was married yesterday to Craig Taylor MacEachern, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack P. MacEachern of Covington, La.
The Rev.
C.
Coryand Randall performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church in Del Mar, Calif.
Mrs.
MacEachern, 32, is a film and television producer at Reding &amp; Rozelle Productions Inc., a television production company in Los Angeles.
She graduated cum laude from New York University.
Her father is the executive vice president of Elmendorf Farms, a thoroughbred horse farm in Lexington.
Her mother, Carrie Rozelle, is the founder and chairwoman emeritus of the National Center for Learning Disabilities, a nonprofit organization for children with learning disabilities in New York.


The Charger Who Left and Wouldn't Come Back
A persistent rain could not dim the enthusiasm of the fans who packed Jack Murphy Stadium yesterday afternoon for the Chargers' first playoff game in a decade.
San Diego's opponent, the Kansas City Chiefs, were an old nemesis from the American Football League, having won 33 games to the Chargers' 31 with one tie in their series.


Come Join the Fight
To the Editor:
I was distressed to see myself listed in "Calls to Restrict Immigration Come From Many Quarters" (The Week in Review, Dec. 13) as a sponsor of a constitutional amendment that would deny United States citizenship to American-born children of undocumented parents.


A Four-Season Maintenance Schedule
JUST like a car or other vehicle, houses need regular inspections and care to operate smoothly and prevent small problems from becoming large ones.
Organizing a year-round schedule is a key to keeping up with repairs.
A season-by-season approach assures that work will be time for the best results.
SPRING As early in the season as possible, make a thorough tour of the exterior.
Look out for damage caused by winter weather and be prepared to make spot repairs to roofs and siding before leaks appear.
They are common during spring rains.


Preceding Abbott
To the Sports Editor:
Ira Berkow is wrong in stating ("A Most Extraordinary Fella," The Times, Dec. 25) that Jim Abbott, recently acquired by the Yankees from the California Angels, is "the first and only one-handed pitcher in baseball history."


At a Lunch in Sarajevo, Muslims Try to Fathom the Hatred
Of all the places to be in Sarajevo on the first afternoon of 1993, one of the best and worst was the junction of Marshal Tito and Djure Djakovic Streets, at almost the dead center of this city.
The junction is unprotected from the area across the Miljacka River to the south, where Serbian snipers lurk 300 yards away in the upper floors of what used to be an appliance store.
A double stack of bullet-punctured shipping containers athwart the intersection's south side offers only partial protection.
Anybody crossing is advised to note the scribbled cardboard sign that says "Pazi snajper" ("Watch out, sniper").


Carla McCrie, Hajime Kobayashi
Carla Alexandra McCrie, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert D. McCrie of New York, was married on Monday to Hajime Kobayashi, the son of Ambassador Tomohiko Kobayashi and Mrs.
Kobayashi of Brussels.
The Rev.
Scott Campbell, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the International Protestant Church of Brussels.
Mrs.
Kobayashi, 24, graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
She is an account executive at Eva Laurel Inc., a women's clothing manufacturer in New York.
Her father is a professor of security management at John Jay College of Criminal Justice and the publisher and editor of Security Letter, a newsletter, both in New York.
Her mother, Fulvia McCrie, is the office manager of Security Letter.


Cash Theft Shows Risks of Armored Car Business
They are routinely entrusted with the ultimate in valuables, prize cargoes more coveted than jewels or furs, antiquities, truffles or narcotics.
But the largely unregulated courier services that collect and deliver billions of dollars of other people's money in the New York region and around the nation every day are dismayingly vulnerable to theft, particularly inside jobs, law-enforcement officials and industry experts say.
In the wake of last Sunday's suspiciously smooth robbery of $8.2 million from the Brooklyn depot of Hudson Armored Car and Courier Service -- the 31st time in the last two years that an armored car company or vehicle was hit in or around the city -- Federal investigators and company officials described an industry fraught with problems.
Lower Costs, Lessower Security
There are no Federal or local regulations in the New York region on who may transport money or how, and many in the industry have long opposed such controls.
Security guards require state licenses in New York, and New York City applicants for licenses to carry handguns for work are screened by the police.
But otherwise, experts say, the money-courier business is free of outside supervision or regulation.


Arena Presents a Revue of Music From Movies
The Arena Players Repertory Company is rounding out its year with a nod to a pastiche of title songs, background music and hit singles from Hollywood's music mill.
The show is "Blame It on the Movies," conceived and partly written by Billy Barnes, and it is having its Long Island premiere on the Arena Main Stage in East Farmingdale through Jan. 17.


Ancient Clay Horse Is Found in Syria
A craftsman 4,300 years ago molded the clay figurine of a horse, only five inches long and three inches high, but exquisite in detail.
It has now been uncovered in northern Syria by archeologists who call it the oldest known sculpture of a domesticated horse and one of the finest ancient representations of a horse ever discovered.
Experts said the discovery provided new evidence that the horse played an earlier, more important role in the rise of ancient empires of the Middle East than many scholars had thought.


No Headline
After you have time to think it over it's not such a bad thing.
It's not a smokestack industry.
It's a renewable resource. -- DALE LIEN, of Appleton, Minn., which built a prison to boost the local economy.  [ 14:4. ]


Schools Push to Meet Spending Limit
THE town of Seymour recently had to add $137,000 to its $13 million school budget in order to meet the minimum expenditure requirement for spending per pupil set by the General Assembly.
But some town officials think that being forced to spend the money on education could hurt education more than it will help.
First Selectman Robert J. Koskelowski said the state requirement has polarized people into anti-education and pro-education forces.


On Sunday; The Watch For Messiah In Crown Hts.
ALL day, the Hasidic Lubavitcher Jews in black hats and long coats come to the locked storefront on Kingston Avenue in Crown Heights, wait to be buzzed in, then pronounce the words in Yiddish that have become rote among this religious people.
"Ich vil kayfun ah Moshiach beeper," said Rabbi Joshua Pinson, pulling out his checkbook.
Or: "I want to buy a Messiah beeper."
They need the beepers so they will know immediately when the Messiah has arrived.
"There's an expectation that any moment there will be a revelation," said Chaim Halberstam, the audio-visual expert who oversees Messiah beeper sales.
"People are very tense waiting."


Packages Set For Wimbledon
Sportsworld Travel, a tour company in Atlanta, has been reappointed offical tour operator for 1993 in North America for the Wimbledon tennis championships next June 21 to July 4 and is offering packages with Center Court tickets.
There is a choice of 14 packages of three-, four- and five-night accommodations with tickets for two, three or four days.
Prices vary according to hotel and date of Wimbledon tickets and range from $619 a person for three nights (based on two sharing a room) with two tennis days at the beginning of the tournament to $3,925 for four nights with the last three tennis days -- including seats for both men's singles semifinals, and the men's and women's singles finals, among other matches.
The eight hotels offered are all in central London and range from the Vanderbilt, in South Kensington, near the Gloucester Road Underground station, at the low end, to the Hyde Park, on Knightsbridge.


Tech Notes; Sun Microsystems' Global Greeting Card
MOST of this season's holiday greeting cards are by now part of Christmas past, but at Sun Microsystems employees are talking about their chairman's greetings as a preview of things to come.
On Dec. 15, at 10 A.M. any of Sun's 13,000 employees sitting at their work stations could open a 2.5-inch square window on their screens and watch the computer maker's chief executive, Scott McNealy, wishing them holiday greetings from his Palo Alto, Calif., office.


BALKAN FACTIONS BEGIN NEW TALKS
Leaders of five factions involved in the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina today began preliminary discussions of a proposal to redraw the republic based on a detailed map that carves it into 10 provinces.
In presenting the just-completed map, Lord Owen of Britain, co-chairman of the talks here, told the leaders of three separate Bosnian delegations representing Serbs, Croats and Muslims, and representatives from Croatia and Serbia, that the proposal was based on an attempt to "arbitrate" the conflicting territorial claims of the three ethnic groups.
A Demilitarized Sarajevo
Under the plan, Bosnia would relinquish most governmental functions to the provinces.
Lord Owen said that if the plan was accepted, Sarajevo would be demilitarized and the new provinces would be "areas as geographically coherent as possible, taking into account ethnic, geographical, historical, communication, economic viability and other relevant factors." .


Gloria McLennan and Marvin S. Arons
Gloria Whiston McLennan, the director of personnel services of Yale University, and Dr.
Marvin S. Arons, the chief of plastic surgery at the Hospital of St.
Raphael, both in New Haven, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Frederick J. Streets, a Baptist minister, officiated at Dwight Memorial Chapel at Yale.
Mrs.
Arons, who is also a fellow of Jonathan Edwards College at Yale, graduated from Albertus Magnus College.
She is a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
James Whiston.


Business Diary
COMPANIES Dawn at Last for a Troubled Economy
Recessions are like colds.
They may linger a while, sufferers may curse them, but sooner or later they do get better.
According to the Commerce Department's index of leading indicators, released last week, the economy's fever has all but passed.
The index rose 0.8 percent in November, its second straight monthly advance and its largest gain in 10 months.
The index forecasts economic activity six to nine months hence.
Its increase "is a very convincing sign that a self-sustaining economic expansion is under way," said Norman Robertson, chief economist at the Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh.
Together with other recently released indicators, it means the prospects are good for gross domestic product "to grow at between 2.5 percent and 3 percent for 1993 without any fiscal stimulus," he said.
That's good news for the nation's business leaders.
Which industries will fare best in 1993?
"The capital goods sector, primarily computers and high-technology goods. The strong upswing in spending will also mean a pickup in the industrial equipment sector."


Auguring Well; This Time They Really Mean It
Another year, another attempt to erase the deficit.
It has already avoided the knives of Messrs.
Gramm, Rudman and Hollings twice, as well as Presidential blades.
Fiscal 1993, already under way, is heading toward a deficit of more than $300 billion.
Surplus by 1984


Come Join the Fight
To the Editor:
I was distressed to see myself listed in "Calls to Restrict Immigration Come From Many Quarters" (The Week in Review, Dec. 13) as a sponsor of a constitutional amendment that would deny United States citizenship to American-born children of undocumented parents.


A Special Reading of a Classic Work
On university campuses and in neighborhood pubs, marathon readings of high-brow literary works, like James Joyce's "Finnegans Wake" or Gertrude Stein's "The Making of the Americans," have become vogue, and they are generally surrounded by an air of intrigue and mischief.
The organizers choose dense, renegade works of 20th-century authors, and the participants bring sleeping bags and drink pints of whisky.
But this New Year's weekend, at the Palisades Community Church in Northwest Washington, a small crowd flowed through the sanctuary for a rarer, more sober engagement: a marathon reading of the Old and New Testaments.


Dinkins to Propose 15 More Beacon Centers
As part of his State of the City Message, Mayor David N. Dinkins will propose financing 15 more Beacon community centers that will offer a mix of social services ranging from recreation and job training in New York City public schools after school hours.
The Mayor's proposal would bring the number of Beacon community social-service centers housed in the public schools to 36, guaranteeing at least one for each of the city's 32 community school districts, city officials said yesterday.


The Snail Wars
EIGHT LITTLE PIGGIES
Reflections in Natural History.
By Stephen Jay Gould.
Illustrated. 479 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company.


So Unreconciled to So Much
AROUND THE CRAGGED HILL
A Personal and Political Philosophy.
By George F. Kennan. 272 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $22.95.


Organized Roller Hockey Comes to the Junior Set
THE wind was swirling around a park rink in Carlstadt, and the temperature hovered in the 20's, but the Glen Rock Lightnings and the Carlstadt Flames were about to scrimmage.
Out from duffel bags came the gear: the knee, elbow and shin pads, the padded gloves and the helmets.
Then the teams lined up, an air horn sounded and play began with the face-off.
But this was hockey with a difference: the players were wearing not ice skates but in-line roller skates; the puck was a hard rubber ball, and the rink was made of macadam, not ice.


Is Hope On the Horizon?
To the Editor:
John J. O'Connor's perceptive, although despairing, article about the perils of survival for quality programming on the American commercial networks  [ "Still Trapped in a Vast Wasteland," Dec. 13 ]  deserves applause.
It is despairing because if Laurence Tisch, the chairman of CBS, can do nothing about "Brooklyn Bridge," then who of us can?


New &amp; Noteworthy
TALKING IT OVER, by Julian Barnes. (Vintage International, $11.) High on the list of wedding disasters would be the best friend of the groom falling in love with the bride.
That's just what happens when rakish and irresponsible Oliver attends the nuptials of fusty but reliable Stuart.
Each of the parties to the triangle narrates some of the story, which is "more than credible; it's moving, it's funny, it's frightening," Josephine Humphreys said here in 1991.
C.
S.
LEWIS AT THE BREAKFAST TABLE: And Other Reminiscences, edited by James T. Como. (Harvest/ Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $12.95.) C. S. Lewis was both a fiction writer and a theologian, taking refuge from the modern world in his celebrated children's stories and his ardent Christian polemics.
This book, originally published in 1979, is a collection of memoirs and anecdotes by those who knew him.
Although our reviewer, Samuel Hynes, found few insights into Lewis's character, he said, "Many of the contributions are entertaining." The same publisher has also reissued ALL MY ROAD BEFORE ME: The Diary of C. S. Lewis, 1922-1927, edited by Walter Hooper ($14.95).
This book reveals Lewis when he was an Oxford student and still an atheist.
In 1991 one critic called it "an agreeable depiction of a writer's private life."


Auguring Well: That Was Then, This Is Then.; Watching Grass Grow, And Other Headlines
Consider these front-page headlines: "Pollution Curbs Pressed." "Dutch Approve Role for Married Priests." "Deficits Await New Governors." "Lebanese Moslems Are Leery Of Peace Talks and the Future."
Sounds sort of like 1992, right?


Woman, 18, Shot to Death
The police are investigating the shooting death of an 18-year-old Harlem woman who was found in her bedroom, a spokesman for the department said yesterday.
Andito Dingle was found at 9:50 P.M. on Friday in her home at 301 West 128th Street with a gunshot wound to the head, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
She was pronounced dead at the scene.
The sergeant said investigators were trying to determine a motive for the shooting.
No weapon was recovered at the scene, the police said.


Mindy Schneider, Bruce Ashkinos
Mindy Schneider, an account manager at Marke Communications, an advertising agency in New York, was married on Thursday to Bruce Ashkinos, the vice president and the editor of Duck Soup Video, a videotape editing company in New York.
Rabbi Marc Gellman performed the ceremony at North Shore Synagogue in Syosset, L.I.
Mrs.
Ashkinos, 28, and her husband, 27, graduated from the University of Maryland.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Schneider of Melville, L.I.
Her father is the president of Consolidated Loose Leaf Inc., a maker of loose-leaf binders in New York.


GIRL TALK
In "Girl Talk" (Dec. 6), Susan Ferraro says "feminists find the popularity of baby sitters as role models disheartening." Are we so insecure about women's traditional pursuits?
At a time when increasing numbers of children are being abused, neglected or abandoned, should we be worried that girls who baby-sit may become women who -- horrors -- make the care of children an important part of their adult lives?
BONNIE CORIALE FIGGATT
Madison, Conn.


OFF THE COUCH
There is something irrational about a society that devotes enormous public attention to a "war on drugs" when so many use a psychoactive drug -- legally -- at least once a year.
We are drugging our children in unprecedented numbers for "attention" problems, while telling them incessantly to "just say no." NORA L. ISHIBASHI
Wilmette, Ill.


SILENCE OF THE FROGS
I don't know about frogs ("Silence of the Frogs," by Emily Yoffe, Dec. 13), but if the cockroaches start dying we're really in trouble!
DENIS O'NEILL
New York, N.Y.


Watch For . . . Wide-Open Faces
This is the year to think green . . . eye shadow.
It's the color of optimism.
It's serene.
It's fashionably eco-friendly.
And if it doesn't grow on you, don't worry.
There are plenty of options.
Though fashion and beauty these days are still stuck in the 70's -- hair is short, light and layered or long, flat and straight -- the updated message is choice.
"This fall's been about the hippie thing," says the hair stylist Oribe.
"But I think people have had it with the hippies, as far as hair goes. You have to be perfect to look good with a middle part. Individual style is what works in the 90's. If a bouffant looks good on you, that's what you should have."


Mayoral Race Detours to Puerto Rico
With voters of Puerto Rican origin expected to play a pivotal role in next year's mayoral race in New York, Mayor David N. Dinkins and his main Democratic rival both came to Puerto Rico today to pay respects to the island's newly elected Governor.
Mr.
Dinkins and the City Council President, Andrew J. Stein, attended the inauguration of Dr.
Pedro Rossello, a 48-year-old physician who won the governorship last November with a conservative message by the political standards of the island.


McBroccoli Might Meet Gluten
To the Editor:
About "What's Next? McBroccoli?" (Business Diary, Dec. 13): peas, carrots and potatoes are nice, but the future is gluten.
Separate starch from flour -- whole wheat is best -- and reap a fibrous mass that can be manipulated like meat.
That's gluten.
Non-vegetarians and vegetarians alike might satisfy their sensual dimensions by kneading and squeezing the stuff, which is typically made at home. (That doesn't mean most vegetarians would not welcome gluten ready made.)


Connecticut Couple Finds Japanese Niche
DAVID E. GORDON and his fiancee, Susan Brown, may be better known in Japan, where their work was introduced 18 months ago and has attracted a following, than they are in their own hometown.
But that is likely to change.
Six months ago Mr.
Gordon, a printmaker, and Ms.
Brown, a jewelry designer, decided to establish Gallery Cannondale at 444 Danbury Road in Wilton as their showcase.
Their break onto the international scene came about by chance.
Two summers ago, a Japanese businessman, in Philadelphia to tour the galleries, stumbled on an art show at Rittenhouse Square, stopped by Mr.
Gordon's booth and showed an interest in his limited-edition silk-screen prints.


Washington's Vatican Exhibits
Manuscripts, illustrations, books and maps from the Vatican Library can be seen at a new exhibit scheduled to open Friday at the Library of Congress in Washington.
"Rome Reborn: The Vatican Library and Renaissance Collections" which runs through April 30, will feature 200 items, many never shown in the United States, from the 2.5 million in the library in Rome.
The show explores the Vatican Library's role in the Renaissance and the growth of Western culture.
The oldest work in the exhibition is a fifth- or sixth-century Latin manuscript of Virgil's "Georgics and Bucolics," a collection of poems.
Other highlights include love letters from King Henry VIII to Ann Boleyn in English and French; drawings of sunspots by Galileo from 1612; the Urbino Bible, a two-volume 15th-century book known for its beautiful illuminations, and Bernini's 17th-century architectural drawings for the Piazza di San Pietro, the plaza in front of the Vatican.


Leslie Perry, Tom Goldstein
Leslie Perry, the accountant for Backen, Arrigoni &amp; Ross, an architectural firm in San Francisco, was married yesterday to Tom Goldstein, the dean of the graduate school of journalism at the University of California at Berkeley.
Judge Jay Gold, an acting justice of the State Supreme Court in Manhattan, performed the ceremony at his home in New York.
Mrs.
Goldstein graduated from San Francisco State University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arch E. Perry of Belmont, Calif.
The bride's father is the director of public works in San Mateo, Calif.


Data Update
*4*BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Nov. 92
Oct. 92
Nov. 9
New York
2,101
2,333
2,008
New Jersey
1,128
1,164
1,821
Connecticut
788
845
817
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.37
8.46
8.51
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.47
5.49
6.18
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.24
8.28
8.45
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.31
5.29
6.03
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.25
8.34
8.43
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.08
5.15
6.01
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.38
8.49
8.58
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.98
5.92
6.84
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.64
3.76
4.17
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.49
7.40
8.43
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Miss Lovejoy And Mr. Petty
Katherine Seymour Lovejoy, a daughter of Dr.
Thomas E. Lovejoy 3d and Charlotte S. Lovejoy, both of McLean, Va., was married there yesterday to David Bruce Petty, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Petty Jr. of Rockville, Md.
The Rev.
William Meyers performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Petty, 24, is a teacher at the Montessori School in St.
Louis.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is an assistant secretary of external affairs at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington.
Her mother is a respiratory therapist at Arlington Hospital, Arlington, Va.
The bride's paternal grandfather, the late Thomas Lovejoy Jr., and her great-grandfather, the late Mr.
Lovejoy, were chief executives of Manhattan Life Insurance Company in New York.


Roger Halle, 74, Dies; Aided Design for U.N.
Roger Halle, a research architect who devoted himself to reducing the cost of construction, died on Thursday at Hartford Hospital.
He was 74 and lived in Salisbury, Conn.
Mr.
Halle died from a stroke a week after undergoing coronary bypass surgery, said his son, Peter Halle.


Opening the Gates of a Russian Mystery
With all the remarkable exhibitions to be seen, it is easy to overlook the one now at Princeton University's Art Museum; a display of Russian icons has a hard time competing for attention with the likes of Matisse.
Yet "Gates of Mystery: The Art of Holy Russia" should not be missed.
It scans some 700 years of Russian art, from the 11th to the 18th century.
Many of the works have a simplicity and abstractness that can seem utterly modern; not surprisingly, early-20th-century avant-gardists like Natalia Goncharova and Kazimir Malevich were deeply influenced by medieval icons.
The coincidence of "Gates of Mystery" and the gigantic overview of Russian avant-garde art at the Guggenheim Museum in New York is fortunate, because each exhibition casts light on the other.


Sally L. Rubin, Arthur Applbaum
Sally Louise Rubin, a management consultant with Telesis, a corporate strategy and management consulting concern in Providence, R.I., was married Monday to Arthur Isak Applbaum, an associate professor of public policy at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University in Cambridge, Mass.
Rabbi Murray Grauer performed the ceremony at the Harvard Faculty Club.
Ms.
Rubin, 31, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard and received a master's degree in music and a master's degree in public and private management from Yale University.
She is also a professional flutist in Boston.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan A. Rubin of Washington.
Her father is the president of the National Park Foundation, a private group in Washington that supports the national parks.
Her mother, Elisabeth F. Rubin, is the vice president of Foresight Science and Technology Inc., a consulting company in Washington.


Watch For . . . The Free Spirits
The easy part of covering fashion is spotting the good stuff coming down the runway.
The hard part is ducking all those hand-painted vests featuring rock's greatest moments.
The best part is stumbling on style in unexpected places.
It could be winking out at you from the window of Amalgamated's West Village storefront.
Or, like John Bartlett's fresh sportswear, it could be manufactured in a one-bedroom apartment.
The men and women pictured here do not command attention because of their craftsmanship -- though they could -- but because of their individuality.
If any one of them woke up tomorrow and decided to open a restaurant, he or she would still be worth watching.
LAINEY KEOGH's sweaters are for walking on the beach at sunset or spending the whole day happily at home.
Their lush romanticism seeps through the skin more effectively than collagen.
"When you make something by hand," says Keogh, who lives and works in Dublin, "you feel there are no boundaries between you and your creation. You can invest your mood -- and we Irish are a very moody people -- your feelings
and
your fantasies.
It's a sexy way to knit, yes?" Yes. Keogh's sweaters are sold at Bergdorf Goodman Men and Barneys New York.


The State of the Union in the Kingdom of Pan
One of the great themes of Western music criticism is how bad things have become, how drastically composition and performance have declined, how little can be expected from contemporary musical life compared with the glories of the Golden Age.
Such complaints could have been heard in Monteverdi's time.
No doubt Bach felt similarly, observing the rococo amusements of his sons' generation.
Berlioz was almost obsessive on this theme, parodying the conditions of the orchestra and the opera house in sardonic prose.
But those were the Good Old Days.
What about today?
Here, before 1992 lists give way to 1993 listlessness, is some of the good news as well as the bad news about the current musical scene.


Decision Seen In Airline Suit
A decision is expected this month on a proposed settlement of a class-action lawsuit accusing eight domestic airlines of price-fixing, according to Pitts Carr of Carr, Tabb &amp; Pope of Atlanta, lawyer for the plaintiffs.
The settlement was due to be approved or turned down by the Federal District Court in Atlanta on Oct. 19, but many objections were raised about the terms and Judge Marvin H. Shoob postponed his decision.
The settlement involves awards to travelers who flew on any of the eight airlines to, from or through any of 34 major hub airports between Jan. 1, 1988, and June 30, 1992, and who file a claim.
In mid-December, Judge Shoob changed the deadline for filing claims, postponing it to March 31 from Feb. 15.


Results Plus
N.B.A.
Cavaliers Stay Hot Craig Ehlo scored 8 points during a 16-5 run at the start of the fourth quarter that carried the Cleveland Cavaliers to a 106-91 victory over the Los Angeles Lakers last night in Richfield, Ohio.
The victory was the Cavaliers' third straight and their 10th in 11 games.
The Lakers have lost six of eight.
Cleveland entered the fourth quarter protecting a 76-69 lead.
The Cavs then sank their first six floor shots -- and 10 of their first 11 -- extending the margin to 92-74.
Larry Nance led seven Cleveland scorers in double figures with 18 points.
Ehlo scored 17. (AP) HOCKEY Streak Stays Intact Dimitri Khristich scored one goal and set up another as the Washington Capitals extended their home unbeaten streak to nine games yesterday by tying the Chicago Blackhawks, 2-2.
Chicago, the best defensive team in the National Hockey League, put the clamps on a Washington attack that had been averaging six goals over its last three games. (AP) Canada Wins It All Canada routed Japan, 8-1, to clinch the world junior championships in Gavle, Sweden, with one round left in the round-robin event.
It was the sixth junior title for Canada, which has dominated the tournament in the early 1990's.
The United States helped Sweden clinch the silver medal by defeating Russia, 4-2.
The Americans, now 3-3, moved to fifth in the standing but could still finish third. (AP) COLLEGE FOOTBALL  Heritage to Grambling Eric Gant ran for 128 yards and a touchdown and Alex Perkins passed for two scores as Grambling beat Florida A&amp;M, 45-15, in the Heritage Bowl in Tallahassee, Fla., yesterday.
With Gant leading the way, Grambling (10-2) rushed for 277 yards.
Grambling went ahead on the game's fifth play when the 255-pound Gant went 35 yards for a touchdown.
Perkins's 18-yard pass to Ron Dyson with 3 minutes 23 seconds left in the third period pushed Grambling's lead to nine points after Florida A&amp;M had closed to 17-15.
Kelvin Raddix's pass interception two minutes later set up a 28-yard touchdown pass from Perkins to Dexter Butcher. (AP) GOLF  Our Can't-Miss Brooks Mark Brooks shot a bogey-free 68 yesterday to take the second-round lead of the Pebble Beach Invitational.
His eight-under-par 136 is good for a one-stroke lead over Duffy Waldorf heading into today's final round.
The tournament was reduced from 72 holes to 54 holes after Friday's round was rained out. (AP) CROSS COUNTRY A Triumph for Tulu Derartu Tulu, the Olympic 10,000-meter champion, broke away from a field that included silver medalist Elana Mayer of South Africa to win a 5.2-kilometer race by some 40 yards yesterday in Durham, England.
It was the first time since the Olympics that the Ethiopian had raced against Mayer.
Mayer ended up third, with Paula Radcliffe of Britain finishing second. (AP) HORSE RACING This Looks Familiar  Just as they did two weeks ago in the Queens County Handicap, two Pete Ferriola horses -- Shots Are Ringing and A Call to Rise -- finished 1-2 in Aqueduct's $87,750 Aqueduct Handicap yesterday.
Federal Funds finished third.
The victory, with John Velazquez aboard, was the seventh in 50 career starts for Shots Are Ringing, who covered one and one-sixteenth miles in 1:442/5 and earned $52,650.
The winning entry returned $3.60 for $2 to win. (AP)


Recent Sales
Blue Point  $72,500
40 Madison Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, enclosed porch; taxes $1,400.
East Norwich  $210,000
30 Gilbert Court  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room; taxes $3,600.
Mill Neck Estates  $375,000
770 Connecticut View Drive  5- bedroom, 3-bath, 27-year-old contemporary; family room, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $5,000.
North Patchogue  $142,000
12 Pepperidge Court  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 22-year-old farm ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $4,200.
Searingtown  $340,000
47 Edgemere Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 34-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement; taxes $8,200.
Syosset  $371,000
363 Cold Spring Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 2-car attached garage, 1 acre; taxes $8,900.
OTHER AREAS Newington.
Conn.  $128,000
68 Liberty Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 37-year-old ranch; new windows, fireplace, 0.33 acre; taxes $1,736.S White Plains, N.Y.  $440,000
10 Fairway Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 56-year-old colonial; foyer, fireplace, family room, formal dining room, eat-in kitchen, water view; taxes $4,387.
Edison, N.J.  $193,500
24 Midwood Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 15-year-old bi-level; skylight in kitchen, deck, pool; taxes 2,942.


Riley's Complaint Should Be Ignored
To the Sports Editor:
Last year, during the first month of the National Basketball Association season, Coach Pat Riley of the Knicks went through the media to criticize the league about the "unfair" treatment his star player, Patrick Ewing, was receiving from the league's officials.
His complaint was that Ewing was being assessed too many fouls, thereby forcing Riley to sit him down through long and critical parts of the game.


No Headline
Because of holiday production requirements, the main news pages are printed today in one section.
The Metro Report begins on page 23.


Cresskill Journal; Borough Challenged on Speed Limit
At 9:15 on the night of Oct. 17, Larry Manus was driving along Hillside Avenue, a road that runs west from Route 9W in Alpine into the borough of Cresskill.
In Alpine, the speed limit was 40 miles per hour.
But in Cresskill, the speed limit was 25 m.p.h.
Just after crossing into Cresskill, Mr.
Manus, who is a Borough Councilman in Alpine, was pulled over by a Cresskill police car.
A few minutes later, Mr.
Manus was back on the road, clutching a ticket he had been issued that charged him with traveling 50 m.p.h. in a 25 m.p.h. zone.


Scouts Debating Potential Land Sale
TWENTY-FIVE years ago, William O. Field, an ardent environmentalist and director of exploration for American Geographic Magazine, found the perfect buyer for his 1,400 acres of wilderness in Putnam County.
Although state officials wanted the site to add to their adjacent parkland, Mr.
Field chose the Boy Scouts of America and gave them a reduced price because the Scouts promised him that the land would remain forever wild.


When Good Things Happen for Taskmasters
Barring an upset, General Manager George Young will interview Tom Coughlin in the next few days and anoint him quickly as the Giants' head coach.
There seems no question that Coughlin is highly qualified, especially after a good stint as a Giants assistant from 1988 through 1990 and his two years of successful rebuilding since as the head coach at Boston College.
But why is he the favorite for the Giants' job?
Why not such former head coaches as Bill Parcells or Dan Reeves or such bright young assistants as Dave Wannstedt?


Tide Wins With 6 Key Plays
The coach's message had been the same in front of the television lights as it had been in front of his players.
The understated philosophy of Alabama Coach Gene Stallings was consistent throughout the season:
"We have to make 55 to 60 plays for the privilege of making three or four plays that make the difference," he repeated again today, the morning after Alabama's 34-13 victory over Miami in the Sugar Bowl.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 3, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The death of a woman leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
2
4
THE WASTE LANDS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) The third volume of "The Dark Tower," a series about time travel and a heroic quest.
3
49
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
4
38
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
5
10
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (Pocket, $4.99.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
6
7
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) An American probes a mysterious balloon accident in the Alps.
7
9
HIDEAWAY, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is haunted by visions of evil.
8
9
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $9.95.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
9
1
MCNALLY'S SECRET, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A sleuth's pursuit of a stolen block of priceless stamps uncovers scandals on Florida's Gold Coast.
10
2
FUGITIVE NIGHTS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Bantam, $6.50.) Three people on the trail of a dangerous fugitive in Palm Springs.
11
15
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a family that operates a large industrialized farm in the Midwest.
12
6
ANGEL, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A young woman enjoys a torrid romance while visiting a Texas ranch in the late 19th century.
13
1
COMPELLING EVIDENCE, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A woman charged with murdering her husband is defended in court by her former lover.
14
24
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
15
13
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $6.99.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
6
DIANA: Her True Story, by Andrew Morton. (Pocket, $5.99.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
3
9
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world.
4
9
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Vintage, $11.) Essays about the recent political and cultural scene.
5
12
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
6 *
1
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President-elect discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save the earth.
7
71
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
8
478
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
9
85
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
10
133
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday matters.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
73
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
15
THE INDISPENSABLE CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of previously published cartoons.
3
4
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1993. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
4
8
COWS OF OUR PLANET, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Far Side" cartoons.
5
25
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


UP AND COMING: Moira Kelly; Playing Two Roles in 'Chaplin' While Dreaming of Joan of Arc
"They used to say I was a younger Winona Ryder," says Moira Kelly, "and that always made me laugh because I'm three years older than she is."
The 24-year-old actress's performance in Richard Attenborough's "Chaplin" may put an end to Hollywood's comparison shopping.
Ms.
Kelly plays two characters, both of whom figured largely in Charlie Chaplin's preoccupation with pretty young things: the unrefined Irish showgirl Hetty Kelly, whom he loved and lost early on, and the doting Oona O'Neill, whom he found and married late in life.


The High Art of Organizing Your Life
OF all the New Year's resolutions, getting organized may be second in popularity only to losing 10 pounds, and with the right personal organizer, it may be a lot easier.
For the technologically able, the answer to a well-ordered 1993 may be one of the new electronic wizards, some of which hold 3,000 telephone numbers and can receive faxes.
But the pocket computers don't offer the tactile rewards of loose-leaf organizers, like those made by the English company Filofax (which bought out its English competitor Lefax three months ago and intends to continue producing both, with Lefax as the top of the line).
And Filofaxes don't have street maps of Barcelona, wine vintage charts or Chinese horoscopes, like the ones that Lefax offers among its 400 refill inserts.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
124.83129.30
124.65
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6207
1.5997
1.5435
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2711
1.5240
1.1461
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5105
1.2613
1.8490
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$333.00
$330.00
$350.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Thurs. NY Close


Britain's Film Archivists Hunt for the Missing Links
Interested in seeing Alfred Hitchcock's "Mountain Eagle," an Anglo-German co-production from 1926 that happens to be the master director's second film?
Or the 1934 "Bella Donna," a romantic drama representing one of the first English-language film appearances of the German actor Conrad Veidt?
So, too, is a team of British archivists, who have cited these films as just two of a hundred important British movies that may be lost forever -- films known primarily through movie literature, since the prints themselves seem to have vanished.


Correction Officer Wounded in Scuffle at Rikers
A Rikers Island inmate shot a correction officer in the leg yesterday with a gun that apparently was smuggled into the prison, correction officials said.
The officer was trying to stop a scuffle among inmates watching a televised football game.
This is the first time an officer has been shot on the island, officials said.
Saying there are insufficient search procedures at Rikers, the Correction Officers Benevolent Association yesterday renewed its call for metal detectors in the housing area in addition to those in the corridors.


The Calling Card
They loiter outside telephone booths, eyeing you with the cool intent of a guy on Broadway who wants your change.
They will pursue you on the Champs-Elysees, at train stations and at Sunday flea markets.
You may imagine that these hustlers seek your money.
They do not.
Their target is your telephone card.
To be chic was never a simple affair in the French capital.
The right label, the right scent, the right coiffure are not enough in this city, which reserves its most haughty disdain for those who imagine that money alone can buy style.


Fondness for Fur Is Unfashionable
To the Editor:
In a new era of awareness about the environment and the treatment of animals, your On the Street column "Wearing Fur, Walking Fur" (Dec. 13) showed a blatant disregard for a trend that is sweeping the rest of the civilized world but seems to have left New York City behind.


Trout Habitat Returned to Its Bucolic Past


Louise Metcalf, John Wellemeyer
Louise Anne Metcalf, a recruitment manager for the Laurentian-Milldon Company, an insurance company in London, was married yesterday to John Charles Wellemeyer, a managing director in London for Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, the investment bank.
The Rev.
Elizabeth Rechter performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Wellemeyer, 29, graduated from St.
Andrews University in Scotland.
She is the daughter of Ann B. Metcalf of London and the late Christopher D. Metcalf.
The bride's father was the director of quality control and a partner at Caps Holdings Ltd., a pharmaceutical company in Harare, Zimbabwe.


Miss Marcuvitz, Joseph M. Ellner
Michele Beth Marcuvitz and Joseph Matthew Ellner, candidates for M.B.A degrees at Washington University in St.
Louis, plan to marry in May.
Miss Marcuvitz, 24, graduated from the University of Michigan.
She is a daughter of Alan and Rita Marcuvitz of Milwaukee, where her father is a partner in the law firm of Weiss Berzowski Brady &amp; Donahue.


Q and A
Bangs in the Building Question: We moved into a co-op in June 1991.
Our building does not have a basement, so the water pumps are in the garage.
Unfortunately, the pumps can be heard in our apartment all day.
They activate with a bang at three-minute intervals and stay on for a minute.
We were informed by the superintendent that it is not a new problem.


A Bridge Over Troubled Waters
To the Editor:
I am a recently retired elementary school teacher.
Each week I delighted in watching "Brooklyn Bridge." I loved the simple (and not so simple) stories, filled with caring people of all races.
I am now furious.
"Brooklyn Bridge" was so special.
Families could watch it together, learn together and grow together.
It was the one program I watched on CBS.
Too bad, CBS -- you've lost me.
BETTY LEE GRAYSON Syosset, N. Y.


The Media Business: Advertising -- Addenda; Accounts
*
Lunar Group, Florham Park, N.J., was awarded three accounts in that state with combined billings estimated at $1.25 million: The Record, Hackensack; Summit Medical Group, Summit, and Timepiece Jewelers, Dover.
The Record was previously handled by Gianettino &amp; Meredith Advertising, Short Hills, N.J.; the other two accounts had no previous agencies.


Abroad at Home; The Soul of Justice
Thirty years ago this March, in the case of Clarence Earl Gideon, the Supreme Court held that a poor person charged with crime must be given a lawyer for his defense.
It was a celebrated decision, and today's more conservative Court still honors it while limiting other constitutional rights of criminal defendants.
But does the Gideon rule really assure the poor what the rest of us would consider an adequate legal defense?
Is it meaningful in the crowded criminal courtrooms of the nation, or is it just a lofty abstraction?


Books of The Times; 3 Enduring Journalists and Why They Endured
Theodore H. White at Large The Best of His Magazine Writing, 1939-1986 Edited by Edward T. Thompson 681 pages.
A Cornelia and Michael Bessie Book/Pantheon Books. $35.
Forward Positions The War Correspondence of Homer Bigart Edited by Betsy Wade Illustrated. 240 pages.
University of Arkansas Press. $24.95.
The Swamp Root Chronicle Adventures in the Word Trade By Robert Manning Illustrated. 431 pages.
W.
W.
Norton. $24.95.


Six-Day-a-Week Opening of All Libraries Is Offered
Mayor David N. Dinkins will propose in his State of the City message today that service at all 205 branches of New York City's three public library systems be extended to six days a week for the first time since 1947, officials in his administration said yesterday.
The initiative, which would draw up to $15 million from the fiscal 1994 budget if approved, would be completed by September, officials said.


Folksiness at the White House
Bill Clinton has invited 50 un-famous, un-rich Americans to lunch in Washington on the eve of his inauguration this month -- another sign he means to be a President with an ear for what's on people's minds.
But he is not the first to cast a populist image at the outset of his Administration.
What counts is what he does in the Oval Office.
Jimmy Carter introduced America to the South's easy informality with nicknames; he took the oath of office as "Jimmy," not "James Earl." And then, leaving the inaugural platform at the Capitol, the new President proceeded to walk down Pennsylvania Avenue hand-in-hand with his wife -- the very image of a regular fellow.
He even took questions on an "Ask President Carter" call-in broadcast with Walter Cronkite, years before Ross Perot teamed up with Larry King.


Review/Music; A Full Evening of Bach, Played With Enthusiasm
More often than not, festivity works against precision.
The Amor Artis Chamber Choir and Orchestra, under the direction of Johannes Somary, celebrated New Year's Eve at St.
Jean Baptiste Church, on the Upper East Side, with a program of famous sacred and secular works by Bach.
The performances had a fair amount of enthusiasm, but the sound was often a bit disheveled.
The Cantata No. 51, "Praise God, All Ye People," which opened the program, gave the most trouble.
Cynthia Richards Hewes, the soprano soloist, had some difficulties in the faster-tempo sections; all the notes were there, but not always in the right places.
The ensemble sounded ill focused, as it did throughout the evening; the church's messy acoustics were probably to blame.
But Martin Berinbaum gave a virtuosic rendition of the solo trumpet part.


Cable Break Forces NASA to Scrub Trek By Robot in Volcano
Scientists called off the robot Dante's mission of climbing down into an Antarctic volcano on Saturday after a crucial communications cable linking the machine to its control station broke.
The robot, which on Friday started its trek down the volcano, Mount Erebus, had inched about 24 feet into the crater when it ran into problems.


If Happiness Is 2 Acres, Life Shouldn't Fence It In
IN this state of rolling hills and farms embedded into the countryside as if they'd sprouted there, Jim Hunter is having a hard time scaring up two acres of farmland.
All he wants is a place to sit in the dirt and write his thoughts, to plant enough vegetables to carry him through the winter, and to someday leave to his grandchildren.


Sports of The Times; The Saints' Hex Is Becoming World-Level
BUILD them the biggest paper sack in the world.
Make it large enough to cover the entire state of Louisiana.
Saints fans are in seclusion.
They are not receiving visitors.
One of sport's most compelling local complexes was reinforced yesterday in ghastly fashion.
The Saints, who had never won a playoff game, still have not.


Dollar Played a Key Role In Investors' Bond Return
Japan turned out to be the best-performing bond market for American investors last year, but not because of high yields.
The interest rate on that nation's 10-year bond is now around 4.5 percent, while the yield on the American 10-year Treasury note is 6.68 percent.
Rather, the return for Americans was enhanced as falling Japanese rates produced healthy capital gains, and the profits did not suffer from conversion into dollars, which remained steady against the yen.


SUMMIT IN MOSCOW: Bush and Yeltsin Sign Pact Making Deep Missle Cuts; It Would Reduce Atom Arsenals About 75%
With a flourish of oratory and a dash of wistfulness, Presidents Bush and Boris N. Yeltsin signed a treaty today calling for the most significant rollback yet in the formidable nuclear arsenal of the cold war.
The signing ceremony in the richly embellished St.
Vladimir Hall of the Grand Kremlin Palace was the centerpiece of a two-day "working visit" that also marked Mr.
Bush's last curtain call in the East-West drama that defined so much of his presidency.


SUMMIT IN MOSCOW: Bush and Yeltsin Sign Pact Making Deep Missile Cuts;  A Last Treaty Of Its Kind
If nostalgia enveloped George Bush on his 25th and probably final foreign adventure as President, there was also some nostalgia for the old sureties of traditional arms control.
Given its very sweep, the second Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, known as Start II, is likely to be the last agreement of its kind.
It represents both the triumph and the limit of two-way negotiations on arms control in a world that is no longer bipolar.


Dome Proposed
The New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority is proposing installation of a collapsible dome for certain events at Giants Stadium, a published report said yesterday.
Discussions with the New York Giants and the New York Jets are centered on constructing a temporary, helium-filled roof that could be put up and removed as needed, the authority's president and chief executive officer, Robert Mulcahy 3d, told The Star-Ledger of Newark.


Schott Gives Money
The Cincinnati Reds' owner, MARGE SCHOTT, who has been accused of using racial and ethnic slurs, has started a college scholarship fund at a predominantly black school.
The Cincinnati Academy of Physical Education will administer a $100,000 fund for needy female students, The Cincinnati Enquirer reported yesterday.
MICHAEL BRANDT, superintendent of the Cincinnati Public Schools, would not confirm the scholarship amount but said it was "generous and sizable." The school's principal, DORIS FRYE, said the academy has students from all over the city in grades 6 through 12 and is 63 percent black.


The Media Business: Advertising -- Addenda; Pizza Hut Resumes Swipes at Domino's
Pizza Hut Inc. is resuming ads that attack its rival Domino's Pizza Inc. by name, but the attacks are now less extensive.
In a commercial scheduled to run through January, Pizza Hut promotes a new Steak Lover's Pizza by noting that it is not available at Domino's.
The spot, created by BBDO New York, begins with enthusiastic Pizza Hut employees responding to customers' telephone orders for home delivery with affirmative replies like "Yes, we are the home of the Steak Lover's Pizza." Alternating with them are lethargic Domino's delivery employees responding to the same questions with remarks like "No steak, no lover's, no nothing like that. We're Domino's."


Hogue Is Tres Bien, And Quite A Center
Communication is a code word for many things in sports, often used to describe the relationship between a coach and his players.
With the Islanders, the verbal communication between Al Arbour, the coach, and Benoit Hogue, the emerging star, occurs on parallel linguistic tracks.
If the message is routine, or complimentary, Arbour speaks to Hogue in English, the primary language for most players on the team, but a second language for Hogue, a native of suburban Montreal.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; 'That Cosmopolitan Girl' Won't Be a Girl Anymore
BID farewell to one of the best-known, most lauded, most damned figures ever to appear in media advertising: the Cosmopolitan girl.
Actually, the smartly dressed, sensual, take-charge character is not being banished from trade ads for the Hearst Magazines publication.
Rather, the label she has borne for almost 28 years will undergo a significant change in a print and outdoor campaign to be introduced next Monday by Cosmopolitan's new agency, Cox Landey &amp; Partners in New York.
The agency also handles trade advertising for two other Hearst magazines, Harper'sBazaar and Country Living.


Whose Language? Bilingualism in the Schools -- A special report; School Programs Assailed As Bilingual Bureaucracy
Vanessa Correa, a bashful 7-year-old whose missing baby teeth give her a jack-o'-lantern smile, was born in the United States, just a few blocks from the Sunnyside, Queens, walk-up where she now lives.
Yet, when she entered kindergarten two years ago, officials at Public School 199, noticing her Hispanic surname, gave her an English test and then assigned her to a bilingual class where instruction was mostly in Spanish.
When Vanessa's parents, both fluent English speakers, protested, school officials gave her the alternative of taking English as a second language, a program intended for immigrants.
She stayed in the class for a year, taking English as a second language when her first and only language was English.


In the Speech by the Mayor, the Message Will be in the Margins
WHAT is the state of a city that allowed a 5-month-old boy to die of neglect, despite warnings, and a Bronx storekeeper to be gunned down defending his family?
Mayor David N. Dinkins's State of the City speech today promises to address two related themes: the welfare of children, who represent the city's future, and the plight of small businesses, which are taxed to subsidize the growing proportion of New Yorkers who cannot afford to pay for municipal services.
Yet any agenda that neglects the consequences of guns and drugs can only marginally improve the lot of children or of small businesses in New York.


What a Motley Bunch, These Chargers
The populace of this town, including its football team, may have an image of being on incessant vacation.
But today the San Diego Chargers are preparing for another playoff game.
The team is a kaleidoscope of has-beens, will-bes and bald defensive backs.
For two months, the Chargers have quite simply lulled the rest of the National Football League to sleep.


Bit Players of Inaugural Scurry for Their Places
Well before the New Year's clamor faded, the tent sellers and the limousine drivers, the ringers of bells and the hawkers of buttons were all looking forward to the inaugural celebration that begins in two weeks.
As President-elect Bill Clinton's inaugural committee puzzles out how to make a $20 million extravaganza a down-home affair, the bit players are busy rehearsing their parts.
While the discussions in some quarters concern symbolism, politics, music and manners, in others the players are consumed with more practical questions, like where to get the canvas for the tents, where to obtain permits and most often, how to make a buck out of the whole business.


In the Speech by the Mayor, the Message Will be in the Margins
WHAT is the state of a city that allowed a 5-month-old boy to die of neglect, despite warnings, and a Bronx storekeeper to be gunned down defending his family?
Mayor David N. Dinkins's State of the City speech today promises to address two related themes: the welfare of children, who represent the city's future, and the plight of small businesses, which are taxed to subsidize the growing proportion of New Yorkers who cannot afford to pay for municipal services.
Yet any agenda that neglects the consequences of guns and drugs can only marginally improve the lot of children or of small businesses in New York.


Chronicle
Former Presidents JIMMY CARTER and RONALD REAGAN were awarded the nation's first Spark M. Matsunaga Medals of Peace yesterday by the United States Peace Institute for giving hope "to people throughout the world who suffered under tyranny," The Associated Press said.
The award, created by Congress to honor Senator Matsunaga of Hawaii, who died in 1990 and was a proponent of peace education, carries a $25,000 stipend.


SUMMIT IN MOSCOW: Bush and Yeltsin Sign Pact Making Deep Missile Cuts;  A Last Treaty Of Its Kind
If nostalgia enveloped George Bush on his 25th and probably final foreign adventure as President, there was also some nostalgia for the old sureties of traditional arms control.
Given its very sweep, the second Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, known as Start II, is likely to be the last agreement of its kind.
It represents both the triumph and the limit of two-way negotiations on arms control in a world that is no longer bipolar.


Under Calm Surface of 1992's Indexes Lay Waves of Turbulent Stocks
Philosophers going back to Heraclitus have said that behind seeming permanence lies constant flux, and the course of last year's stock market bears them out.
The Dow Jones industrial average set a record for tranquillity, with the narrowest margin in history between high and low.
For the first time since 1986, the Dow had no 100-point days.
Yet individual stocks caromed around like so many overheated molecules.
Onetime favorites, like I.B.M., collapsed; others, like Chrysler, whose shares had once shriveled to single digits, flourished and were among the leading gainers.


SUMMIT IN MOSCOW: Bush and Yeltsin Sign Pact Making Deep Missile Cuts;  It Would Reduce Atom Arsenals About 75%
With a flourish of oratory and a dash of wistfulness, Presidents Bush and Boris N. Yeltsin signed a treaty today calling for the most significant rollback yet in the formidable nuclear arsenal of the cold war.
The signing ceremony in the richly embellished St.
Vladimir Hall of the Grand Kremlin Palace was the centerpiece of a two-day "working visit" that also marked Mr.
Bush's last curtain call in the East-West drama that defined so much of his presidency.


Senate to Begin Informal Hearings on Clinton's Cabinet Nominees
Although none of President-elect Bill Clinton's Cabinet choices can officially be nominated until he takes the inaugural oath on Jan. 20, Senate committees will start conducting informal confirmation hearings this week.
Democrats hope that most can be confirmed by the full Senate on the 20th itself or the next day.
But Republicans, still irritated over the Democrats' defeat of John G. Tower, President Bush's choice for Secretary of Defense four years ago, have not committed themselves either on the prospects of hard fights against any particular selections or on whether they will accommodate the Democrats' hopes for fast action.
Democrats still control the Senate, but the chamber's rules make child's play of delay.


NASA Photographs an Asteroid Giving Earth a Close Shave, Sort Of
The first close-up photograph of a speeding asteroid whose path in space crosses Earth's orbit, raising the possibility of a fiery collision on some far-off day, was made public yesterday by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
The image of the four-mile-long asteroid, named Toutatis, was made by ground-based radar on Dec. 8 as it zipped past Earth at a distance of 2.2 million miles, a near-miss by celestial standards.


Medical Bills Are Top Concern of Nation's Poor, Report Says
Even more than finding a job or paying the rent, low-income Americans worry most about paying doctors and hospital bills, according to a new survey of families who make less than $20,000 a year.
The study also found that the nation's poor embraced attitudes toward welfare very similar to those of wealthier Americans.


The Talk of Hollywood; Hollywood Totals Up A Holiday Season Of Mixed Blessings
Producers and executives straggled back to town today from holiday vacations and they confirmed some chilling news.
The disappointments and big-budget flops of the holiday season outweighed the successes.
Virtually everyone had received daily faxes and phone calls about the holiday box office at homes and hotels in Sun Valley, Maui, Jamaica and, of course, Aspen, which has been the target of a boycott by gay rights supporters. (The Aspenites spoke awkwardly and discreetly about the holiday, as if it had been spent in rehab.)


Books of The Times; 3 Enduring Journalists and Why They Endured
Theodore H. White at Large The Best of His Magazine Writing, 1939-1986 Edited by Edward T. Thompson 681 pages.
A Cornelia and Michael Bessie Book/Pantheon Books. $35.


We Need to Know What's Happening in Bosnia; Already a War Crime
To the Editor:
In "Rape -- and Soldiers' Morale" (editorial, Dec. 7), you implicitly endorse a proposal that the Geneva Conventions should be revised to designate rape as a war crime.
We agree.
The systematic rape of Bosnian Muslim women (often, gang rapes) by Serbian militia forces is but the most recent indication of the need to make civilized society's condemnation of such atrocious practices explicit in international law.


How the Music Stopped For the Record Hunter
People still meander up to the entrance of the Record Hunter on Fifth Avenue between 42d and 43d Streets.
They pause before the locked door, and some notice a scrawled sign saying that mail-forwarding forms have been sent to the postmaster.
A few read a photocopied statement in the window telling of the financial tailspin of a store beloved by fans of jazz and classical music.
Posted 11 days before Christmas, it tells of overexpanding during a bitter recession that has seen a drop-off in sales of all types of recordings, of mounting losses and shrinking inventories.
It speaks of the sadness of closing after 47 years.
It ends with a wish: "May you always keep the sound of music alive."


Bronx Woman, 89, Is Found Strangled In Her Apartment
An 89-year-old woman was found strangled Saturday night in her apartment in a stately old Bronx building where she had lived about 40 years, the police said yesterday.
The body of Norma Podell, a small, frail woman, was discovered by an ambulance crew about 6:30 P.M.
Saturday in the bedroom of her fourth-floor apartment at 2043 Holland Avenue in the Van Nest section, near Pelham Parkway.


I.B.M. Remains a Leader in Innovation
To the Editor:
"I.B.M. Aims to Cut 25,000 More Jobs; Sees Record Loss" and your accompanying news analysis (front page, Dec. 16) could leave readers with an unbalanced view of our commitment to technological leadership and the main-frame computer.
We want to correct the record.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Construction Spending Nov.
Tuesday  None Wednesday  None Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  Employment Dec.


1992's Battles in Trenton Give Way to Cooperation
Mindful of a presidential race in which voters weary of governmental gridlock turned against a seemingly invincible George Bush, and facing an election in 11 months, Gov.
Jim Florio and the Republican legislative leaders begin the new year as uneasy and unlikely allies.
After protracted battles over spending, taxes, education and insurance, the Democratic Governor and the Republican leaders reached compromises on several major issues in the last months of 1992.
Driven by political expediency, both sides are expected to continue their cooperation this year.


The Devils' Top Scorer, and Agitator
Trade rumors always surround a hockey team that is performing below expectations.
The New Jersey Devils are such a team, and Lou Lamoriello, the team's president and general manager, is apparently feverishly at work to fashion a deal.
The center position is the Devils' Achilles' heel, and Lamoriello has already failed twice in efforts to improve at that position, missing John Cullen when he went from Hartford to Toronto and Ed Olczyk when he was stolen away from Winnipeg by the Rangers last week.


Donations Continue To Neediest
The recession that has dug in its heels in New York City has not only driven the unemployment rate to more than 10 percent, forcing thousands of people out of work for the first time in their lives.
It has also left many of those who still have jobs with gnawing doubts: Is my company safe?
Will the economy improve?
Do I have enough savings if I am laid off?
With anxiety blanketing the region, many charities are facing declining donations because those who have contributed before are giving more cautiously.
But some people are so concerned about the poverty sown by the economic slump that they are disregarding their own worries and giving money to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9 U.S. AND RUSSIA SIGN ARMS PACT
Presidents Bush and Yeltsin signed a landmark treaty in Moscow that calls for their countries to eliminate almost three-quarters of their nuclear warheads by 2003.
A1 NOSTALGIA FOR THE OLD ORDER
News analysis: The signing of the Start II treaty was a poignant final adventure in George Bush's Presidency.
Adding to the nostalgia was a sense that the world is more volatile than it was during the cold war.
A1 President-elect Clinton welcomes an early meeting with Mr.
Yeltsin.
A9 America invades Moscow with fast food and videocassettes.
A8 SOMALI CROWD ATTACKS U.N.
Rock-throwing protesters besieged the United Nations compound in Somalia's capital.
It was the second country in a week to protest the arrival of Secretary General Boutros-Ghali on a peace mission.
A1 The Marines leisurely came to the rescue of the U.N. leader.
A6 Somalia's warring factions are to open talks today in Ethiopia.
A6 The U.N. will pull aid workers from a port where one was killed.
A6 SHELLS ISOLATE 400 PALESTINIANS
Shells landed near tents in southern Lebanon where about 400 Palestinians are living after being expelled by Israel.
The Palestinians said Israelis were trying to prevent people from bringing them food.
A2 An Israeli intelligence agent was slain in Jerusalem.
A2 WITH A MAP, BOSNIAN FOES MEET
Radovan Karadzic, leader of the Serbian nationalists who have seized two-thirds of Bosnia, met in Geneva with Bosnia's Muslim President, Alija Izetbegovic.
They gave conflicting reports of their talks.
A3 Germany's Economics Minister resigns over aid to a cousin.
A3 Svaty Jur Journal: Cut off, Slovaks search for their identity.
A4 National A10-13, B12 CLINTON FILLS ECONOMIC SEAT
Responding to pressure to name a prominent mainstream economist to his Council of Economic Advisers, Bill Clinton has offered a seat on the council to Alan Blinder of Princeton University, and Mr.
Blinder has accepted, Clinton aides said.
A1 NAVIGATING THE TV DIAL
Plans by a cable television company to expand its systems tenfold in some cities provoked the lament, "500 channels and nothing on." But a more fundamental problem remains: how would anyone know?
Simply figuring out what's on television is becoming skilled labor.
A1 COURT TEST FOR THE PRESS
The case of a reporter and an abused child is headed for the Supreme Court, possibly leading to a major First Amendment decision.
A10 NUTS AND BOLTS OF INAUGURATION
Apart from the lofty issues of symbolism and politics involved in an inauguration, vendors are consumed with practical problems like how to connect electrical systems and how high to build bleachers, in addition to how to make money.
A12 CONFIRMATION HEARINGS SET
Senate committees will start conducting informal confirmation hearings of Clinton's Cabinet selections this week.
A12 SNOW SHUTS DOWN RESORT TOWN
Tahoe City Journal: Vacationers and merchants dug out from one of the worst winter storms to hit the Sierra Nevadas in a decade.
A10 CONCERN OVER MEDICAL BILLS
According to a new survey, low-income Americans are most concerned with paying doctors and hospital bills.
A13 ROBOT MISSION CANCELED
Scientists called off the robot Dante's mission of climbing down into an Antarctic volcano when a communications cable broke.
A13 ASTEROID PHOTO RELEASED
The space agency made public the first close-up photograph of a speeding asteroid whose path in space crosses Earth's orbit.
B12 Metro Digest B1 BILINGUAL-EDUCATION DEBATE
Two decades after bilingual education was introduced into the New York City school system, its effectiveness is the subject of debate.
Champions of bilingual education assert that teaching immigrant children in their native tongues is essential to their progress.
But critics say the program has developed serious flaws.
A1 Sports C1-9 A COMEBACK TO REMEMBER
As soon as Steve Christie's field goal sailed between the goal posts, the yelling and cheering began.
Buffalo was celebrating one of sports' most historic comebacks.
A1 Football: The Bills beat the Oilers, 41-38, in overtime.
C1 Eagles first rally then dominate Saints, 36-20.
C1 How the Oilers let it slip away.
C7 Basketball: Seton Hall's Dehere a late, but fragrant, bloomer.
C9 Kentucky defeats Indiana, 81-78.
C9 The Barkley era in Phoenix.
C3 Columns: Vescey on the Saints.
C6 On Pro Football C5 Hockey: Rumors of a Hull trade preoccupy Rangers.
C4 Islanders' Hogue excels at center.
C4 Sports People C2 Business Digest D1 Neediest Cases B8 Arts/Entertainment C11-16 Talk of Hollywood.
C11 Struggling artists.
C11 Film: "Unforgiven" wins critics' award.
C14 Music: Wei Hai-Ming Chinese Theater Troupe from Taiwan.
C11 Amor Artis in Bach.
C12 Brazilian-Caribbean songs.
C13 Word and Image: 3 enduring journalists.
C14 "Americas" on PBS.
C16 Obituaries B14 Dr.
Frank J. Rauscher Jr., leading cancer researcher.
Johnny Most, sports broadcaster.
Jerome S. Hardy, created Time-Life books.
Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15 Editorials New Year's in the city.
A huge rate hike for Empire.
Folksiness at the White House New York's loss: Timothy Healy.
Letters Anthony Lewis: The soul of justice.
William Safire: Peeping Tom lives.
Alexander Abrams and David Lipsky: The boomlet generation.
Osha Gray Davidson: Farming the system.


Buckeye to Enter Draft
Tailback ROBERT SMITH -- who once quit the team saying he had been told to skip classes to practice football -- will forgo his final two years of eligibility at Ohio State to enter the National Football League draft, The Cleveland Plain Dealer said.
The newspaper yesterday quoted Coach JOHN COOPER as having said Smith told him of the decision after the Buckeyes lost, 21-14, to Georgia on Friday in the Florida Citrus Bowl.
"Robert talked to me very briefly after the game and told me he was going to leave," Cooper said Saturday after returning from the game in Orlando, Fla.


Bazaar With the Feel of Bombay, Right in Queens
A decade ago, when V. N. Prakash began selling jewelry there, 74th Street in Queens was a modest, unhurried shopping district -- a neighborly cluster of delis and groceries, a tailor, a shoemaker and a stationer, and a bakery that was, to the locals anyway, a landmark.
These days, though, this two-block street in Jackson Heights has become the nation's largest shopping center for immigrants from India -- a bazaar that could be in Bombay, where the smell of masalas wafts from restaurants and groceries, and thousands of people course through store after store buying saris, spices and jewelry and appliances to send to India.


Sports of The Times; For Buffalo, a Victory for the History Books
As soon as Steve Christie's 32-yard field goal sailed between the yellow goal posts, the yelling, cheering and shouting began.
Buffalo was celebrating one of the greatest comebacks in sports history and the greatest ever in the National Football League.
After trailing the Houston Oilers, 35-3, early in the third quarter today, the Bills produced a theatrical 41-38 overtime triumph in the first round of the Super Bowl XXVII playoffs.
"Way to go, Buffalo," a man in a red-white-and-blue Bills jacket was yelling above the din.
"Way to gooooooo, Buffaloooooo."


Ballot Results on Tap
Chants of Reg-gie, Reg-gie are expected to be heard when the 1993 Hall of Fame balloting is announced tomorrow.
REGGIE JACKSON, STEVE GARVEY and PHIL NIEKRO were among 14 first-time candidates who appeared on the ballot mailed last month to more than 400 10-year members of the Baseball Writers Association of America.
In addition to the latest eligibles, 18 holdovers remained on the ballot.
A player must appear on 75 percent of the ballots to gain election.


An Asteroid Close Up


Article on Child Custody Case Is Grist For High Court Test of Press Freedom
In this part of Florida, Charlotte May Puffinberger, a little girl whose half-sister was beaten to death, and Tim Roche, a newspaper reporter who is threatened with jail for an article he wrote about her custody case, are often mentioned together.
Now their story is headed to the United States Supreme Court in a confrontation between the courts and the press that could lead to a major First Amendment decision.
To reporters, prosecutors and media lawyers around the nation, the case from Stuart is becoming a test of when reporters can be forced to name their confidential sources.


The Media Business; Turner Mines the Licensing Treasure of Its Cartoon Cache
When Turner Broadcasting acquired the Hanna-Barbera program library a year ago for $320 million, Ted Turner's network drastically expanded another critical asset: its list of characters that it can market as everything from collectible dolls to images on plastic keychains.
In 1988, "at our first licensing show, all we had was a small booth and a couple of Scarlett O'Hara dolls and Tom and Jerry stuffed toys," said Steve Chamberlain, executive vice president of Turner Home Entertainment, which handles the company's licensing and marketing.
"It was very difficult to get manufacturers such as Mattel or Hasbro to return our phone calls."


Dinkins on TV
Mayor David N. Dinkins's State of the City message, which is expected to begin at noon today and last about a half-hour, will be televised live on New York 1, the cable news station, and on WNYC-TV, according to the Mayor's office.


Bills Heed Message To Never Say Never
Bills linebacker Darryl Talley, a pink scab covering a scar on the bridge of his nose, has the look of a man who has been in a few tough fights before.
He said he has always taken one bit of advice from his father into each of his endeavors.
"My old man told me that if you give up once, you'll give up again," Talley said.


Bet You Thought It Was Boccie


A Huge Rate Hike for Empire
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield is going broke fast.
That's why Salvatore Curiale, New York's Superintendent of Insurance, approved a whopping 25 percent average rate increase, effective Jan. 1, for Empire's 1.4 million individual and small group customers.
Some subscribers will be hit with rate hikes of almost 60 percent.
Such drastic increases could drive hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers to drop health insurance -- a catastrophe for them and and a costly burden for the insured, who will eventually pick up the tab for an influx of non-paying patients in emergency rooms.


PRO FOOTBALL: Bills and Eagles Turn Mountains Into Molehill; Buffalo Erases 32-Point Deficit
In something akin to scaling Mount Everest with a 50-pound rock strapped to one's back, the Buffalo Bills overcame a 32-point third-quarter Houston lead to beat the Oilers, 41-38, this afternoon in a wild American Football Conference playoff game.
It was the greatest comeback in National Football League history.
A 32-yard field goal by kicker Steve Christie 3 minutes and 6 seconds into overtime here at Rich Stadium completed the Buffalo victory and a rally that surpassed one in a Dec. 7, 1980, game between San Francisco and New Orleans.
In that game, the 49ers overcame a 28-point deficit to defeat the Saints, 38-35.


Jerome Hardy, 74, Life Publisher and a Mutual Funds Executive
Jerome S. Hardy, a salesman and promoter of commodities ranging from securities to books and magazines, died Thursday at the Cambridge Manor nursing home in Fairfield, Conn.
He was 74.
He died from the complications of Alzheimer's disease, said a son, Douglas Hardy.


Essay; Peeping Tom Lives
When President William Jefferson Clinton is briefed by the Secret Service about the security available to him, he will be shown a "secure" scrambler telephone on which he can talk to other heads of government.
Only one problem: Western intelligence agencies were shocked last year to learn that conversations between world leaders had been intercepted and overheard by unauthorized persons.
At this moment, it may be that there is no such thing as a 100 percent secure diplomatic or military line.


Review/Pop; Adding Some Caribbean To a Native Brazilian Stew
Among the many performers who have appeared at the Ballroom (253 West 28th Street, Chelsea) over the last three years as part of the club's yearly festival of Brazilian music, Rosa Maria exhibits the strongest tug toward American soul styles.
The singer, who recently opened the club's popular winter series for the second consecutive season, has a lithe, darkly textured alto and a brash improvisatory style that suggests a Brazilian answer to Chaka Khan, with a dash of Tina Turner.
Her taste in material runs to upbeat samba music that is heavily flavored with the same Caribbean influences that have seasoned New Orleans soul music since the 1950's.
When Rosa Maria opened the same series a year ago, the singer, who speaks fairly fluent English, bent over backward to appeal to American audiences by singing English-language renditions of 1960's pop hits like "Monday, Monday" and "California Dreamin'." In her return engagement, which extends through Jan. 17, the focus has shifted decisively back to Brazil, with a special emphasis on Caribbean-Brazilian blendings.
The program includes three songs each by Caetano Veloso and Antonio Carlos Jobim and two by Joao Bosco.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 3:
MONDAY
Carolina Fght  Central Vt PS  National City  Oxford Inds  WEDNESDAY  Houston Inds  THURSDAY
American Wtr Wks  Orange &amp; Rockland Utils  Rite Aid  Sierra Pac Res  FRIDAY  Clarcor  Flowers Inds  NY St E&amp;G  Travelers  SUNDAY
Mercury Fin


Charles Edward Fletcher, Veterinarian, 87
Dr.
Charles Edward Fletcher, a prominent veterinarian, died on Friday at his home in Riverdale, the Bronx.
He was 87.
He died in his sleep of natural causes, said his son, Charles E. Fletcher Jr., of Manhattan.


We Need to Know What's Happening in Bosnia; It's Only Women
To the Editor:
Struck by the contradiction between the need for humanitarian aid to Somalia and the lack of it for Bosnia and Herzegovina, I read with horror "Rape After Rape After Rape" (Op-Ed, Dec. 13), about the brutal rape of Muslim and Croatian women, estimated at 50,000, by Serbian militia soldiers.


How the Music Stopped For the Record Hunter
People still meander up to the entrance of the Record Hunter on Fifth Avenue between 42d and 43d Streets.
They pause before the locked door, and some notice a scrawled sign saying that mail-forwarding forms have been sent to the postmaster.
A few read a photocopied statement in the window telling of the financial tailspin of a store beloved by fans of jazz and classical music.
Posted 11 days before Christmas, it tells of overexpanding during a bitter recession that has seen a drop-off in sales of all types of recordings, of mounting losses and shrinking inventories.
It speaks of the sadness of closing after 47 years.
It ends with a wish: "May you always keep the sound of music alive."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  BILINGUAL EDUCATION 20 YEARS LATER


A Key Minister Quits, and Kohl's Coalition Is Further Eroded
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's coalition Government suffered a setback today when the Economics Minister, Jurgen W. Mollemann, announced that he would resign because of a growing scandal over letters he had signed to help a cousin's business.
Mr.
Mollemann also said he was no longer a candidate for the leadership of his Free Democratic Party, the coalition partner of Mr.
Kohl's Christian Democratic Union.


PRO FOOTBALL: Bills and Eagles Turn Mountains Into Molehill; Philadelphia Blitzes Saints
Just when the umbrellas were twirling to the music and a long-awaited celebration in the Louisiana Superdome was about to begin, the Philadelphia Eagles helped the New Orleans Saints find a way to cancel a premature start of Mardi Gras one more time.
The only existing National Football League franchise without a playoff victory lost a 13-point third-quarter lead forever when Heath Sherman's 6-yard touchdown run, with 6 minutes 48 seconds to play, became the decisive score in Philadelphia's 36-20 wild-card victory today.


Books of The Times; 3 Enduring Journalists and Why They Endured
Theodore H. White at Large The Best of His Magazine Writing, 1939-1986 Edited by Edward T. Thompson 681 pages.
A Cornelia and Michael Bessie Book/Pantheon Books. $35.


SUMMIT IN MOSCOW: Reporter's Notebook; Yet Another American Arrives In Moscow
In the old days, whenever Soviet and American leaders met, the Communist propaganda machine would jam up with a special kind of American fare.
Old Hollywood movies appeared on television, magazines featured happy American faces, newspapers were full of quotes from the world press "assessing positively" the Kremlin's latest move toward peace.
This weekend, when President Bush landed here for his first and last official visit to a democratic Russia, there was no orchestrated welcome, not even an honor guard to greet him at Sheremetyevo Airport.
This summit meeting came and went with so little fanfare that many Russians, celebrating the beginning of a long winter holiday, were barely aware it had taken place.


Summit in Moscow: Comes the Next Generation; With Yeltsin Overture, Clinton Backs Early Meeting
Responding to an invitation for an early meeting with President Boris N. Yeltsin, President-elect Bill Clinton said today that he looked forward to meeting with the Russian leader soon and indicated his support for the arms treaty signed today between the United States and Russia.
But he said he had made no decision as to when and where such a meeting would take place.
Speaking to reporters at the Hilton Head airport just before returning to Little Rock, Ark., after a six-day family vacation, Mr.
Clinton said he was "very pleased" to have received the invitation from Mr.
Yeltsin but added: "I have not made a decision about when we're going to meet and where we're going to meet. I think that is going to depend in part on the timetable of the Congress and the work that I have to do here on the problems of America."


SUMMIT IN MOSCOW: Bush and Yeltsin Sign Pact Making Deep Missile Cuts;  A Last Treaty Of Its Kind
If nostalgia enveloped George Bush on his 25th and probably final foreign adventure as President, there was also some nostalgia for the old sureties of traditional arms control.
Given its very sweep, the second Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, known as Start II, is likely to be the last agreement of its kind.
It represents both the triumph and the limit of two-way negotiations on arms control in a world that is no longer bipolar.


Mitzi Berger Hamovitch, Professor, 68
Mitzi Berger Hamovitch, an English professor who taught at Queens College for more than 30 years, died on Thursday at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
She was 68 and lived in Great Neck.
She died after heart surgery, said her husband, William Hamovitch, a retired economics professor and provost at Queens College.


SUMMIT IN MOSCOW: Bush and Yeltsin Sign Pact Making Deep Missile Cuts;  It Would Reduce Atom Arsenals About 75%
With a flourish of oratory and a dash of wistfulness, Presidents Bush and Boris N. Yeltsin signed a treaty today calling for the most significant rollback yet in the formidable nuclear arsenal of the cold war.
The signing ceremony in the richly embellished St.
Vladimir Hall of the Grand Kremlin Palace was the centerpiece of a two-day "working visit" that also marked Mr.
Bush's last curtain call in the East-West drama that defined so much of his presidency.


In the Speech by the Mayor, the Message Will be in the Margins
WHAT is the state of a city that allowed a 5-month-old boy to die of neglect, despite warnings, and a Bronx storekeeper to be gunned down defending his family?
Mayor David N. Dinkins's State of the City speech today promises to address two related themes: the welfare of children, who represent the city's future, and the plight of small businesses, which are taxed to subsidize the growing proportion of New Yorkers who cannot afford to pay for municipal services.
Yet any agenda that neglects the consequences of guns and drugs can only marginally improve the lot of children or of small businesses in New York.


Chronicle
The last time Peter, Paul and Mary sang for a President of the United States, Lyndon B. Johnson was in office and everyone assembled at the trio's White House performance knew the words to "The Times They Are a-Changin'."
PETER YARROW, whose voice makes up a third of the legendary folk group, says he has even fonder memories of performing at a ball honoring President John F. Kennedy.
At a private party afterward, Mr.
Yarrow said, President Kennedy sat on the floor cross-legged and sang along with the group on "Puff the Magic Dragon."


The Media Business; From Some 2,000 Alternative Magazines, a Digest
Just behind the reception desk at Utne Reader's Minneapolis headquarters is a dramatic interior window giving on to a room filled with racks and racks of magazines.
The more than 2,000 publications have names like Z Papers, Factsheet Five, Hungry Mind Review, Changing Men, and Woman of Power.
It is one of the nation's best collections of alternative magazines -- those offbeat, arcane, often passionate journals of opinion that are part of the lifeblood of the nation's press.
Here, the journals are read, analyzed, summarized, excerpted, quoted from and reprinted in the sprightly Utne Reader, which calls itself the Reader's Digest of the alternative press. 'Window Into the World'
"New ideas tend to surface first in these publications," said Eric Utne, who founded the magazine in 1984.
"These magazines are a wonderful window into the world.


Down and Slipping? Believe, Says Pitino
When Rick Pitino gathered his Kentucky players into the huddle, he showed no signs of concern save the sweat soaking through his designer shirt.
Just over six minutes remained in the game at Freedom Hall, and, for the first time since the early minutes, Pitino's Wildcats trailed Indiana, having fallen behind by 67-65.
He told his players not to worry, that the momentum would shift back and Kentucky would win.
They believed him.


Gores Get the Ball Rolling
It was just another busy Saturday night at Nick Rinaldi's Bowling Lanes in Alexandria, Va., except that the three people in the lane off to the right were the Vice President-elect and his family.
But few bowlers even recognized Al Gore, his wife, Tipper, and their son, Albert 3d.
The only clue that someone noteworthy was in the alley was the half-dozen Secret Service agents, conspicuous for their earphones and their lack of bowling shoes.


Wachtler Seeking New Delay in Court Case
Sol Wachtler, the former Chief Judge of the New York State Court of Appeals, has requested a new delay in court proceedings stemming from his November arrest on harassment and extortion charges, arguing that he needs more time for "medical testing and treatment."
A Federal prosecutor endorsed the request to delay a hearing scheduled for Wednesday until Feb. 5, and Federal Magistrate Stanley R. Chesler is likely to approve the motion, said Charles A. Stillman, Mr.
Wachtler's lawyer, adding, "I would fall down in shock if he didn't approve this."


With Barkley, Suns Are Stars
Charles Barkley sat in the press room of the HemisFair Arena tonight, basking in Randall Cunningham's fourth-quarter glow that was emanating from the television screen.
"Can you believe this, can you believe it?" Barkley said to no one in particular.


Tipping for Holidays
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 25 article on tipping for the holidays brought back memories of my own experience parking in a garage where names of customers and how much they tipped were prominently displayed.
About a month before Christmas, I received a card in the mail wishing me a merry Christmas, signed "The boys at the Garage." I failed to reply promptly.
A week before Christmas, I received another card.
Below the handwritten "The boys at the Garage" were the rubber-stamped words "Second Notice."  GEORGE LEVINE New York, Dec. 28, 1992


How the Music Stopped For the Record Hunter
People still meander up to the entrance of the Record Hunter on Fifth Avenue between 42d and 43d Streets.
They pause before the locked door, and some notice a scrawled sign saying that mail-forwarding forms have been sent to the postmaster.
A few read a photocopied statement in the window telling of the financial tailspin of a store beloved by fans of jazz and classical music.
Posted 11 days before Christmas, it tells of overexpanding during a bitter recession that has seen a drop-off in sales of all types of recordings, of mounting losses and shrinking inventories.
It speaks of the sadness of closing after 47 years.
It ends with a wish: "May you always keep the sound of music alive."


Jody N. Rosen, Zachary Knower
Jody Nan Rosen, a daughter of Barbara and Herbert Rosen of New York, was married yesterday to Zachary Stewart Knower, a son of Rosemary and Barry Knower of Upper Marlboro, Md.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman performed the ceremony at the Hudson Theater in New York.
Mrs.
Knower, 26, graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and is studying law at New York University.
Her father is a vice president of operations for the Lewmar Paper Company, a distributor of paper products in New York.
Her mother is the vice president of Arnell Construction Corporation, a general contractor in Brooklyn.


New Year Brings New Road Projects to Test Commuters' Patience
Imagine how much worse your daily traffic jam could be.
If, for instance, the construction that is causing a backup on your route were left undone and your road or bridge deteriorated so badly that it was eventually closed altogether.
Of course, such long-term consequences are for engineers and planners to worry about -- it is the rare commuter who would sacrifice even a few minutes today for a smoother drive some years from now.
A commuter wants to get home.
Fast.


Bosnia's Bitter Enemies Sit Down and Talk in Geneva
The leaders of the Bosnian adversaries in the republic's fratricidal war met face to face today for the first time since the conflict began nine months ago.
Radovan Karadzic, leader of the Serbian nationalists who have seized two-thirds of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Bosnia's Muslim President, Alija Izetbegovic, talked for more than three hours.
Afterward, Cyrus R. Vance, co-chairman of the conference on the former Yugoslavia, said, "I think we have made considerable progress."


Business Digest
The Markets at Year-End
The Dow Jones industrial average set a record for tranquillity in 1992, with the narrowest margin in history between high and low.
For the first time since 1986, the Dow had no 100-point days.
Yet individual stocks caromed around like overheated molecules.
Onetime favorites like I.B.M. collapsed, and others that had seemed washed up, like Chrysler, made impressive gains.  [ Page D1. ]  Forecasts of lower long-term interest rates are less surprising than the reasons for such projections.
Some forecasters are considering what was once unthinkable: a year of low inflation and credible efforts to reduce the Federal budget deficit.  [ D1. ]  Japan turned out to be the best-performing bond market for American investors last year, but not because of high yields.  [ D5. ] The Economy
Under pressure to select a prominent mainstream economist, President-elect Clinton has offered a seat on the Council of Economic Advisers to Alan Blinder, and Mr.
Blinder is said to have accepted.
The Princeton economist would serve under Laura D'Andrea Tyson, whose appointment has been criticized.  [ A1. ]  A record number of boycotts have been called against cities and states.
A recent target, Colorado, may have lost $20 million in business since November, when voters approved a measure that prohibits special civil rights protection for homosexuals.  [ D1. ] International
A Berlin painter is living an inventor's dream come true: goo scraped from his truck removes graffiti almost instantly.  [ D1. ]  Germany's Economics Minister will resign.
Jurgen W. Mollemann was caught up in a growing scandal over letters he had signed to help a cousin's business.  [ A3. ] The Media Business
As cable systems expand, figuring out what's on TV is becoming skilled labor.
Several companies are competing to provide the next generation of electronic program guides.  [ A1. ]  People were reading newspapers last year in numbers large enough to suggest the reversal of a long readership slide.
William Glaberson: Press Notes.  [ D12. ]  Acquisition of Hanna-Barbera's program library expanded a crucial asset of Turner Broadcasting: characters that can be marketed as everything from dolls to keychain images.  [ D12. ]  The Utne Reader has one of the best collections of alternative magazines, which it analyzes, excerpts and reprints.  [ D12. ]  The Cosmopolitan "girl" is a woman now.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D13. ] Today's Columns
A trend toward ever-more-powerful patent claims may be reversing after a decade in which the balance of power shifted toward patent holders.
Edmund L. Andrews: Patents.  [ D2. ]  The outlook for the securities industry is not so promising in 1993, after a year of record profits.
Market Place.  [ D4. ]


At U.N. Compound, in Due Course, Marines Ride to Rescue
The Marines came to the rescue in the end as they usually do, but not before arousing suspicions that they might quite enjoy prolonging the discomfort of a United Nations entourage trapped here.
While Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali was whisked by helicopter to a refugee feeding center, the four white cars filled with officials and reporters who had flown from Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, with him began heading for the United Nations compound.


SUMMIT IN MOSCOW: Bush and Yeltsin Sign Pact Making Deep Missile Cuts;  It Would Reduce Atom Arsenals About 75%
With a flourish of oratory and a dash of wistfulness, Presidents Bush and Boris N. Yeltsin signed a treaty today calling for the most significant rollback yet in the formidable nuclear arsenal of the cold war.
The signing ceremony in the richly embellished St.
Vladimir Hall of the Grand Kremlin Palace was the centerpiece of a two-day "working visit" that also marked Mr.
Bush's last curtain call in the East-West drama that defined so much of his presidency.


SOMALI CLAN CHIEFS ARE TO MEET TODAY
Members of Somalia's most powerful political factions plan to meet here on Monday for talks that are intended to give them a sense of joining in the rescue of their country, the United Nations Secretary General said today.
The fundamental aim of the talks is "to make Somalis feel they are participating in their own national rehabilitation and that the thousands of soldiers and relief workers in their country are not a foreign army of occupation," Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali told reporters who flew to Mogadishu with him for the day.


Boycotts Affect Travel Industry
At one time, choosing a travel destination involved little more than deciding where to go, how much to spend and the availability of reservations.
These days, though, many travelers must also consider whether their destination meets with the approval of family, friends or business colleagues.
Disputes over sexual orientation, reproductive rights, racial slights and other social and environmental issues have spread far beyond the courts and legislative chambers and now involve a record number of boycotts against cities and states.


After a Tough Loss, Will Nets Go Blank?
The Nets might not want to erase all of their memories from the weekend.
But they might choose a selective form of amnesia so they could at least forget about their heart-breaking loss to the Charlotte Hornets on Saturday.
But as forward Derrick Coleman said, it could take some time to forget.


The Media Business: Press Notes; Amid Newspapers' Gloom, The Readers Start to Return
Conspiracy theorists in the newspaper industry have long suggested that publishers slyly emphasize signs of gloom.
Then, goes the thinking, they can justify cutbacks, price increases and general Scrooge-ishness.
Unfortunately for publishers wedded to the doomsday scenario, 1992 brought some really good news for the news business.


He Didn't Come In Until Darkness Fell
Every so often, Terry Dehere goes home to Jersey City and stops by the playground near his home to bounce the ball on the hard concrete and shoot a few baskets.
Just for the memories.
Most of them are good.
In the summers, Dehere rose from his bed, ran out the front door and reached the court just three doors down the block on Garfield Avenue.
In the cold of winter, he shoveled snow from beneath the basket so there was enough room to keep dribbling and shooting.
Usually alone, always until dark.


Southern Cal Hires Robinson as Coach
Southern Cal reached back into its football past yesterday by rehiring JOHN ROBINSON as coach.
Robinson, 57 years old, had a 67-14-2 record in seven seasons during his first tenure with the Trojans, winning three Rose Bowls and three times guiding them to a No. 2 final ranking.


PRO FOOTBALL: Bills and Eagles Turn Mountains Into Molehill; Philadelphia Blitzes Saints
Just when the umbrellas were twirling to the music and a long-awaited celebration in the Louisiana Superdome was about to begin, the Philadelphia Eagles helped the New Orleans Saints find a way to cancel a premature start of Mardi Gras one more time.
The only existing National Football League franchise without a playoff victory lost a 13-point third-quarter lead forever when Heath Sherman's 6-yard touchdown run, with 6 minutes 48 seconds to play, became the decisive score in Philadelphia's 36-20 wild-card victory today.


From a Mighty Special-Teamer To the Redskins' Overachiever
After playing quarterback at Southwestern Louisiana and displaying legs that were as strong as his arm, Brian Mitchell was drafted by the Washington Redskins in 1990, and he immediately offered Washington's coaches a predicament.
Where should he play?


Bruce K. Binder, Fashion Adviser, 51
Bruce K. Binder, the top fashion adviser for Macy's stores in the East and a company vice president, died on Friday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 51 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from AIDS, said Gloria Kreisman, a Macy's spokeswoman.


Bridge
It is generally true that officials burdened with tournament cares are not winners.
But it was not true at the Greater New York Bridge Association's Winter Regional Championships at the Vista International Hotel, World Trade Center, over the weekend.
Bill Rosenbaum of Manhattan was elected on Saturday to a second term as the association's president, and a day earlier he had won the Flight A Pairs title with Glenn Eisenstein of Roslyn, L.I.
Other winners Friday and Saturday were:


No Headline
It is not every century that history gives us an opportunity to witness and participate in an event that is so significant in scale and consequences. -- PRESIDENT BORIS N. YELTSIN of Russia, on signingthe arms treaty.  [ A1:6. ]


Film Critics' Society Honors 'Unforgiven'
"Unforgiven," the epic, ruminative western that represented a high point in the career of Clint Eastwood, its star and director, was voted the best film of 1992 by the National Society of Film Critics yesterday.
The 35-member group of critics from New York, Los Angeles, Boston, Chicago and other cities, also voted Mr.
Eastwood best director.
The film's screenplay, by David Webb Peoples, was also cited, as was Gene Hackman's supporting performance as a corrupt sheriff.


Burglary at Bronx Bank
Burglars cut a hole in the roof of the Bronx branch of the Bank Leumi Trust Company sometime over the four-day holiday weekend, lowered themselves into the vault, stole an estimated $400,000 in cash and looted an undetermined number of safe deposit boxes, the police said.
Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman, said the burglary was first noticed about 5:30 P.M. yesterday at the two story Leumi branch at 301 East Fordham Road at Tiebout Avenue near Fordham University.


For New York City, Filtration Isn't Best Way to Protect Water
To the Editor:
Further to your Dec. 20 report on new Federal pressures for New York City to protect its water supply: The city should do all it can to avoid filtration for a compelling reason besides the environmental and financial benefits of watershed protection.
Quite simply, filtering the Catskill-Delaware reservoirs could be the death knell for the city's low- and moderate-income housing.


Svaty Jur Journal; Family Sails for Unknown: 5 Million in Same Boat
As Czechoslovakia began disintegrating last fall into Czech and Slovak nations, Frantisek Gaher was gripped by a desire to trace his family roots.
A 69-year-old Slovak who had always felt "of the Czechoslovak persuasion," Mr.
Gaher immersed himself in the dusty archives of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, searching for clues in the past that would help his progeny understand their future.


Princeton Economist to Be Named To Clinton's Council, Aides Say
Responding to pressure to name a prominent mainstream economist to the Council of Economic Advisers, President-elect Bill Clinton has offered a seat on the council to Alan Blinder of Princeton University, and Mr.
Blinder has accepted, aides to Mr.
Clinton and others familiar with the appointment said over the weekend.
Mr.
Blinder, whose appointment is likely to be announced this week, would serve under Laura D'Andrea Tyson, a Stanford University economist.
Some economists have criticized Ms.
Tyson's appointment, arguing that her speciality, industrial and trade issues, has not given her the broad skills needed by a chairman of the council.


Review/Television; From Mexico South, a Changing Postwar World
"Americas" draws attention to the problems and promises of the area from Mexico to the Malvinas, which is now supplying the United States with what will soon be its largest minority.
The 10-part series, arranged more or less by theme and country, offers serviceable accounts of the region's post-World War II history, largely through the eyes of people directly affected.
The first hour of tonight's two-hour opener focuses especially on the shake-up in Argentina's traditional class structure by the Peronista phenomenon, which took power from the long-dominant landowners and established a political base among the growing working class.


We Need to Know What's Happening in Bosnia
To the Editor:
"A Diary of Disgrace" (editorial, Dec. 20) sets forth in devastating detail the pattern of avoidance and denial that has characterized our response to the Serbian Government-sponsored blockade of Sarajevo.
May I note that the United States Government has imposed a blockade of its own?
In this case, designed to prevent members of Congress from seeing the horror for themselves.


Dr. Frank Rauscher Jr., 61, Dies; Discovered Animal Cancer Virus
Dr.
Frank J. Rauscher Jr., a former director of the National Cancer Institute who discovered one of the most-studied of animal cancer viruses, died on Thursday in a Nyack, N.Y., hospital.
He was 61 and lived in Weston, Conn.
Dr. Rauscher suffered a heart attack, said one of his sons, Dr. Frank J. Rauscher 3d.


A Bag of Feed Doesn't Cost Tuppence Any More


Review/Music; Troupe From Taiwan Helps Celebrate Chinatown
"Farewell to the King" at Alice Tully Hall on Saturday night was one of those loosely festive occasions by which Lincoln Center and corporate sponsors -- in this case, Con Edison -- welcome segments of New York free of charge and celebrate their cultures.
The rubric here was "Viva Chinatown," and the specific event a presentation by the Wei Hai-Ming Chinese Theater Troupe from Taiwan.
There were brief speeches and several service awards, then a re-enactment of a story from the Chin Dynasty in the second century before Christ.
The impression was of carefully prepared singing, playing and choreographed gesture deposited amid a decidedly ad hoc setting.
Beautiful costumes, fierce masks and outsized beards operated next to musicians in street clothes operating to one side of the stage.
As the suicidal Lady Yu, Wei Hai-ming made small nuances of every hand gesture, sang in shallow piercing tones and danced in an odd mixing of reticent dignity and near-flamboyance.


New Year's in the City
The new year brings hope and fear to the people of New York City.
Hope that after 12 years of neglect, urban America will get new help from Washington.
And fear that the campaign for mayor will exacerbate the city's ragged race relations and consume the energies needed for renewal.
The two moods are intimately bound.
Without more generous and coordinated assistance from Washington, the quality of urban life will worsen.
If it does, so will destructive demagogy and the search for scapegoats.


Market Place
THE securities industry enjoyed record profits in 1992, but as the new year's trading begins, the outlook is not so promising.
Many securities analysts are forecasting lower 1993 earnings for the public brokerage and investment banking firms.
While last year's final totals are not in yet, member firms of the New York Stock Exchange that deal with the public probably reached highs in pretax profits, with estimates ranging to as much as a total $7 billion.
That compares with $5.9 billion the previous year.
For 1992's first nine months alone, pretax profits grew to $5 billion from $4 billion in the year-earlier period.


Chronicle
Dr.
JEFFREY W. GILGER, an assistant professor of psychiatry at the Veterans Administration Medical Center in North Little Rock, Ark., has been awarded a $20,000 grant from the Rita G. Rudel Foundation to support his research on the genetic analysis of immune disorders and their relationship to dyslexia.
The foundation, based in Manhattan, was founded in 1985 by the conductor Julius Rudel in memory of his wife, Rita, who died in 1984.
Dr.
Rudel, the former head of neuropsychology at Presbyterian Hospital, devoted much of her clinical research to child neurology and the assessment of patients with brain damage.


SUMMIT IN MOSCOW: Bush and Yeltsin Sign Pact Making Deep Missile Cuts;  It Would Reduce Atom Arsenals About 75%
With a flourish of oratory and a dash of wistfulness, Presidents Bush and Boris N. Yeltsin signed a treaty today calling for the most significant rollback yet in the formidable nuclear arsenal of the cold war.
The signing ceremony in the richly embellished St.
Vladimir Hall of the Grand Kremlin Palace was the centerpiece of a two-day "working visit" that also marked Mr.
Bush's last curtain call in the East-West drama that defined so much of his presidency.


Oilers' Season Ends; Sleepless Nights Begin
The Buffalo Bills didn't achieve their historic victory by themselves today.
The Houston Oilers will be remembered as the losers when people talk about the greatest comeback in National Football League history -- theirs was the greatest collapse.
The Oilers led by 35-3 in the third quarter.
On the bench, they told themselves not to let it get away, to pour it on.
They knew they had lost many leads in the past.
The 41-38 overtime playoff loss today, however, continued the unfortunate tradition.


PRO FOOTBALL: Bills and Eagles Turn Mountains Into Molehill; Philadelphia Blitzes Saints
Just when the umbrellas were twirling to the music and a long-awaited celebration in the Louisiana Superdome was about to begin, the Philadelphia Eagles helped the New Orleans Saints find a way to cancel a premature start of Mardi Gras one more time.
The only existing National Football League franchise without a playoff victory lost a 13-point third-quarter lead forever when Heath Sherman's 6-yard touchdown run, with 6 minutes 48 seconds to play, became the decisive score in Philadelphia's 36-20 wild-card victory today.


Its Man Slain, Unicef Pulls Out
The United Nations Children's Fund announced today that it was withdrawing from the southern port of Kismayu after the killing of one of its relief officials there.
The official, Sean Devereux, a 28-year-old Briton who was chief of Unicef's operations in Kismayu, was the first relief worker to be killed in Somalia since troops from the United States and other countries arrived three weeks ago to protect aid shipments from looters and gunmen.
Kismayu is one of eight places where the international force has moved in to establish regional centers for relief operations.


INSIDE
The Markets at Year-End
The Dow Jones industrial average ended 1992 up 4.2 percent, with no 100-point day for the first time since 1986.
In the credit markets, low interest rates are expected in 1993.
Page D1.
Warning: Congestion Ahead
Maps of the long-term road repairs planned for 1993 point to traffic tie-ups in the New York region.
Page B8.


Israeli Artillery Strikes Near Camp That Houses Expelled Palestinians
Shells slammed near a tent camp Saturday night in southern Lebanon where more than 400 Palestinians are living after being expelled by Israel, Lebanese security officials said today.
A spokesman for the Palestinians said that the camp had been hit by shrapnel but that no one had been wounded.
In Jerusalem, the Israeli Army said soldiers had opened fire about two miles west of the camp after they spotted "suspicious movement by several figures moving from north to south toward the security zone," the buffer strip that Israel has imposed in southern Lebanon.


Tahoe City Journal; Getting Too Much of a Good Thing
The filling stations here are pumping gasoline again.
Clerks at the Lucky and Safeway supermarkets have restocked shelves stripped of eggs, milk and bread by panicky holiday travelers.
And as the skies cleared from a battering of blizzards, ski lifts that had been closed because of high winds and poor visibility resumed their climbs to the loftiest slopes.
All around the Lake Tahoe area, thousands of vacationers and merchants are digging out from the fiercest winter storms to hit the Sierra Nevada in a decade.


Carol Schatz, Richard Papper
Carol Schatz, the editorial director for the Childcraft/Walt Disney mail-order catalogues in New York, was married yesterday to Richard Nelson Papper, a vice president and senior attorney at Citibank in New York.
Rabbi Clifford Kulwin performed the ceremony at the Mark Hotel in New York.
Ms.
Schatz, who is keeping her name, graduated with honors from Yale University and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Edith B. Schatz and Walter B. Schatz, both of West Hartford, Conn.
Her father is a partner in the Hartford law firm of Schatz &amp; Schatz, Ribicoff &amp; Kotkin.


Brother of Missing Girl Arrested in Assault
The 16-year-old brother of a missing 10-year-old Mastic girl was arrested today and charged with beating his mother in what the Suffolk County police described as a domestic dispute.
The mother, Marilyn Beers, asked her landlord to call the police about 12:50 P.M., after a verbal dispute with her son, John, escalated into violence, said Officer Salvatore Yovino of the Suffolk County Police.
He said the boy had admitted to police officers that he punched his mother several times.


Cuomo Eyes Washington For New Set of Reasons
As he prepares to deliver his 11th State of the State Message on Wednesday, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo stands at one of the most awkward junctures of his political life.
With Bill Clinton's inauguration just over two weeks away, even Mr.
Cuomo's most loyal lieutenants concede that the Governor, a Democrat, has diminishing relevance as a national spokesman for his party and his region.
All eyes will be focused on Washington this year, with only an occasional glance toward Albany.


Vivien Goldbaum, Norman Feder
Vivien Biss Goldbaum, a lawyer in New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Norman Feder, a dentist in East Meadow, L.I.
Rabbi Richard S. Chapin performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Ms.
Goldbaum, 49, is an associate at Paganini &amp; Herling.
She graduated from Hunter College and received a law degree from St.
John's University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Egon J. Biss of Hallandale, Fla.


We Need to Know What's Happening in Bosnia; Guilt Enough for All
To the Editor:
Leslie H. Gelb bases his arguments for military intervention in Bosnia in "Never Again" (column, Dec. 13) on the notion that the Serbs are the sole group guilty of atrocities.
He invokes the dangerously ill-informed trio of Margaret Thatcher, Ronald Reagan and George Shultz in support.


Blue Cross Rates Pose Peril to Small Businesses
Already hit hard by the recession, tens of thousands of small businesses in New York State face a heavy new burden in 1993: immediate increases of up to 22.5 percent in the cost of health insurance for employees covered by Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield.
For many, it will be the last straw.
Coming atop other large rate increases in recent years in a system many believe has spiraled out of control, the new rates for small groups and their families -- 650,000 people, mostly employed in some 50,000 small businesses in 28 counties in the state's eastern half -- offer a choice of evils for many New Yorkers.


Stephen Harvey, 43; A Writer On Movies And a Film Curator
Stephen Harvey, associate curator of film at the Museum of Modern Art, died on Friday.
He was 43 and lived in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Harvey died of AIDS-related complications, said Mary Lea Bandy, the director of the department of film at the museum.


With 500 Channels, How Could Anyone Learn What's On?
Plans by the nation's largest cable television company to expand its systems tenfold in some cities provoked the lament last month "500 channels and nothing on!" But an even more fundamental problem is: How would anyone know?
As cable systems expand, introducing a host of new programs and services, simply being able to figure out what's on television is becoming skilled labor.


Struggling Artists -- A periodic look at the quest for success in New York.; Living the Life of Audition After Audition
One recent Monday, Mark Guin, a 28-year-old actor who moved to New York over the summer, woke up in his third-floor Manhattan walk-up in Clinton, put on in boots, tight jeans and a denim jacket -- "Macho and sensitive at the same time," he explained -- and went to four auditions.
After the first, a call back for an out-of-town production of Jon Robin Baitz's "Substance of Fire," he felt energized.
"We got in 40 minutes of work," he said.
"It was almost like a rehearsal. It feels good to get that long a run at something."


New York's Loss: Timothy Healy
Timothy Healy, the warm, erudite Jesuit priest who died of a heart attack Wednesday, was a native New Yorker who rejoiced in the city long at the center of his life.
Named president of the New York Public Library just as the economy declined, Dr.
Healy badgered city officials to come up with more money, recession or no recession.
They did.
Starting today, all 82 branches of the New York Public Library will be open at least five days a week for the first time in more than a decade.


Guy Warren Botts, 78; Led Bank in Florida
Guy Warren Botts, the former chairman of Barnett Banks Inc. who shaped the acquisitive strategy that made the bank the nation's 17th largest, died Friday at his home in Jacksonville, Fla.
He was 78 years old.
His son-in-law, Robin Fawsett, said yesterday that he had died of an aneurysm.


Results plus
GOLF Brooks Wins Easily Mark Brooks shot an even-par 72 yesterday and cruised to a five-stroke victory over Bob May in the $250,000 Pebble Beach Invitational in Pebble Beach, Calif.
Brooks finished at eight-under-par 208 for the three-round event, which was shortened from 72 holes to 54 when Friday's second round was rained out.
Defending champion Loren Roberts and Duffy Waldorf tied for third at two-under 214. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL Milestone in Missouri  Missouri's Norm Stewart became the 14th Division I coach to reach the 600-victory mark as the Tigers beat North Carolina-Asheville, 99-56, at home yesterday behind 24 points by guard Mark Atkins.
Stewart beat Indiana's Bobby Knight to the milestone as the Tigers (7-2) won while the Hoosiers lost to Kentucky.
Stewart became the fourth active coach to reach 600 career victories.
His record in 32 seasons is 600-294, including 503-252 in 25 seasons at Missouri.
The Tigers led, 52-43, early in the second half before blowing the game open with a 42-5 run, putting them up, 94-48, with 3 minutes 30 seconds remaining.  (AP) California 84, Texas Southern 69: California now knows that basketball can be a struggle on both coasts.
Coming off back-to-back losses in the Seton Hall-Meadowlands tournament, the No. 19 Bears returned home and beat Texas Southern, 84-69, but the game was much closer than Cal wanted.
Texas Southern (2-7) trailed by just 49-47 with 10:07 to go before Cal regrouped in time to put the game away.
The Bears are now 6-2. (AP)  MARATHON  Kurtis Is First in Hanoi The veteran American Doug Kurtis beat British runner Tim Soutar by more than 10 minutes in Hanoi's first international marathon yesterday, cheered by thousands of Vietnamese.
Kurtis, 40, of Northville, Mich., needed 2 hours 39 minutes 14 seconds on the 26-mile 385-yard course around the scenic Lake of the Restored Sword, through the narrow streets of the old commercial district and past the mausoleum of Ho Chi Minh.
Soutar, 37, a lawyer based in Hong Kong, finished in 2:50:04.
Soutar won last year's Ho Chi Minh City marathon in southern Vietnam. (AP) HORSE RACING Wild Whirl Is Winner R.D.
Wild Whirl took the lead early under Robbie Davis and widened it to four lengths to win Aqueduct's $87,600 Paumonok Handicap yesterday.
The 5-year-old son of Island Whirl-Naughty Rita covered six furlongs on a fast track in 1:093/5 to earn $52,560 for Robert W. Dommel with his sixth victory in his last 12 starts.
Forty Something was second.
R.D.
Wild Whirl returned $7.20, $5.20 and $4.40 for $2 across the board. (AP) TENNIS France Defeats Israel Nathalie Tauziat and Guy Forget scored contrasting victories last night to lift France to victory over Israel and a place in the quarterfinals of the $490,000 Hopman Cup team championships in Perth, Australia.
Tauziat beat Anna Smashnova, 6-1, 6-0, in the opening women's singles match, but Forget had to rally to beat Amos Mansdorf, 6-2, 6-7 (2-7), 7-6 (7-2), after being a service break down in the final set.
France then added a mixed-doubles victory.
The French, seeded fifth, will now meet the fourth-seeded Americans, MaliVai Washington and Mary Joe Fernandez, who had a first-round bye.
Earlier, brother-sister combination Andrei Medvedev and Natalya Medvedeva made a spectacular debut in the tournament, giving Ukraine a 2-1 victory over seventh-seeded Austria. (AP)


Not All Productivity Can Be Increased
To the Editor:
"What Counts Is Productivity and Productivity" (The Week in Review, Dec. 13), a prelude to President-elect Clinton's economic conference in Little Rock, Ark., states that productivity will be the measure of economic success for Mr.
Clinton's Presidency.


The Boomlet Generation
Notice to advertisers: Thanks, but no thanks.
Draw no conclusions from the Grunge Kids featured in Business Week's recent cover story, "Move Over, Boomers," about selling to people under 30, or from the lead article in The Atlantic last month, which proposes to call all of us "Thirteeners" (the 13th American generation, with all the bad luck the number implies).
There are great differences between people who left college in the 1980's and people leaving college now.
If you want to reach our generation, older than 24 and younger than 32, do not address your products to the befuddled characters from the movie "Singles."


Israeli Security Agent Is Slain
An agent of the Shin Bet security service was stabbed and bludgeoned to death today, apparently by an Arab assailant, in a rare attack on a member of Israel's secretive internal intelligence agency.
The body of Haim Nahmani, 25, was found in the stairwell of an apartment building in a Jewish neighborhood in West Jerusalem.
A police statement said Mr.
Nahmani had been "on active duty" when an assailant known to the security forces stabbed him repeatedly and battered him with a hammer.
No further details were released.


The 'Can You Believe It' Outlook for Rates in '93
Looking into 1993, the surprise is not that some analysts are forecasting a drop in long-term interest rates.
The surprise is in their reasons.
Among traders, economists and investors, there is a willingness to believe in themes, like low inflation, and possibilities, like Democrats doing the right fiscal thing, that have not been credible in the past.


Angry Crowd of Somalis Disrupts Visit to Mogadishu by U.N. Chief
A crowd of stone-throwing demonstrators angry at Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali besieged the United Nations compound here in the Somali capital today, trapping United Nations officials and reporters and keeping the Secretary General away from a planned meeting and news conference here.
It was the second time in a week that the Secretary General was greeted by a protest when he visited the capital of a country he was trying to rescue from civil war.


No Gains On GATT
President Bush and President Francois Mitterrand said today that agreement in the long-stalled world trade talks being held under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade was as distant as ever.
"We discussed GATT, but you could hardly say we made any progress," President Mitterrand said at a meeting here.


SUMMIT IN MOSCOW: Bush and Yeltsin Sign Pact Making Deep Missle Cuts; A Last Treaty Of Its Kind
If nostalgia enveloped George Bush on his 25th and probably final foreign adventure as President, there was also some nostalgia for the old sureties of traditional arms control.
Given its very sweep, the second Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, known as Start II, is likely to be the last agreement of its kind.
It represents both the triumph and the limit of two-way negotiations on arms control in a world that is no longer bipolar.


Notion of a Hull Trade Puts Rangers on Spot
While the Rangers were busy Saturday in Pittsburgh turning their three-game road trip into a triple whammy, rumors swirled about a possible big trade involving Brett Hull of St.
Louis.
The usual suspects -- Mike Richter, Tony Amonte, and Darren Turcotte -- were rounded up by theoreticians.
The deal made sense on paper, because both teams are slumping and the Rangers can usually outspend the Devils and anybody else in heated pursuit of a superstar.
But with Neil Smith, the Rangers' general manager, returning yesterday from Sweden, where he was on a scouting mission at the junior world championships, the reports were off base, or at least premature.


Patents; Rolling Back The Power Of Inventors
THE evidence, admittedly, is murky.
But there are hints that 1992 may have been the year when a trend toward ever-more-powerful patent claims began to reverse itself.
Such a reversal is hardly in full swing, as evidenced by some of the multimillion-dollar patent settlements that were reached last year.
But after a decade in which the balance of power shifted decisively toward patent holders, there are signs of a change in sentiment both in the courts and at the Patent and Trademark Office.


SUMMIT IN MOSCOW: Bush and Yeltsin Sign Pact Making Deep Missile Cuts;  A Last Treaty Of Its Kind
If nostalgia enveloped George Bush on his 25th and probably final foreign adventure as President, there was also some nostalgia for the old sureties of traditional arms control.
Given its very sweep, the second Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, known as Start II, is likely to be the last agreement of its kind.
It represents both the triumph and the limit of two-way negotiations on arms control in a world that is no longer bipolar.


Treasury To Sell Bills
Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
Traders said that by the close of the New York cash market on Thursday, the rate on the three-month bill outstanding was 3.07 percent and on the six-month bill, 3.27 percent.


Richard Bandfield, 65, A Financial Planner
Richard W. Bandfield, the president of Bandfield Associates, a financial planning company, died on Friday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 65 and lived in Port Washington, L.I.
He died of cancer, said Patricia Drivanos, a business partner.


Chronicle
How does it feel to face the prospect of being roasted?
"Absolutely terrifying," said JOHN MACK CARTER, the editor in chief of Good Housekeeping who is the target of one to be put on by the Advertising Women of New York on Friday.
"Any words of lesser import would probaby not reflect my real feelings."
Mr.
Carter, the only man to have served as the editor of Good Housekeeping, The Ladies' Home Journal
and
McCall's, didn't feel that way when he was first approached in July.
"First, there is the thrill of saying, 'I've been selected, and this is a great honor,' " he said yesterday.
"And then you realize that you're going to put your head through a blanket and people will throw pies at you."


Corrections
An obituary on Dec. 19 about the actor Dana Andrews referred incorrectly to his second marriage, to Mary Todd, who survives him.
It did not end in divorce.


Results Plus
TENNIS France Beats U.S.
Guy Forget and Nathalie Tauziat combined for an emphatic mixed-doubles victory yesterday, giving fifth-seeded France a 2-1 victory over No. 4 United States in the quarterfinals of the Hopman Cup, an exhibition team tournament in Perth, Australia.
Forget and Tauziat defeated MaliVai Washington and an ailing Mary Joe Fernandez, 6-3, 6-2, in doubles, breaking the latter's serve three times in succession.
The hardcourt tournament is warmup to the Australian Open, which begins on Jan. 18 in Melbourne.
In the opening match of the quarterfinals, Fernandez overcame nausea and dizziness to hold off Tauziat, 6-1, 6-7 (4-7), 6-4, in the opening singles match.
The American, who received treatment at courtside, kept her nerve in a roller-coaster match that featured 14 breaks of serve and a remarkable 129 errors -- 77 of them from the wildly inconsistent Tauziat.
Forget had no such problems against Washington, racing to a 6-3, 6-4 victory.
In another quarterfinal, the Spanish brother-sister team of Arantxa Sanchez Vicario and Emilio Sanchez defeated Switzerland, the defending Hopman Cup champion.
Sanchez Vicario defeated Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere, 1-6, 6-0, 6-3, and Sanchez beat Claudio Mezzadri, 4-6, 6-3, 7-6 (7-5). (AP)


Congressional Complicity in the Pardons
President Bush said he had pardoned six Iran-contra defendants so the country could "move on," but the pardons themselves won't permit it.
Not only did the pardons frustrate a full accounting of responsibility for the scandals, but the pardons demand their own accounting, just as they did when President Ford pardoned Richard Nixon.
Mr.
Bush could emulate Mr.
Ford's voluntary appearance before Congress in 1974 to explain that pardon.
But important members of Congress also have some explaining to do.
Among them are Thomas Foley, the Speaker of the House, and Representative Les Aspin, the new Administration's choice for Secretary of Defense.


United Stationers reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Did Coughlin Take Detour In Bid for Giants' Job?
Tom Coughlin, the Boston College coach and the leading candidate for the Giants' head-coaching job, canceled a scheduled trip here for the American Football Coaches Association convention amid speculation that he instead spoke to the Giants.
Reid Oslin, Boston College's sports information director, said that he believed Coughlin left Boston this morning.
"If he's not in Atlanta and not in Boston," Oslin said, "I think there's only one place he can be and you can guess that."


Nuclear Waste Crisis Grows in Our Backyard
To the Editor:
"Shoreham Fuels Nuclear Proliferation" (editorial, Dec. 13) criticizes the decision by the Long Island Power Authority to ship Shoreham's contaminated fuel to France for reprocessing for future use in other nuclear power plants.
While your concern for reprocessing is understandable, your criticism misses the mark.


January Rarely Gets It Wrong
Believers in the January effect can take comfort from knowing that at least since 1986 the direction of the Dow Jones industrial average in January was in fact the direction for the year.
But not too much comfort, please.
Sometimes, investors would have done better selling at the end of January than trying to sit on their gains for the rest of the year.
Remember 1987?


Two Jump to the N.F.L. And Are Sitting Pretty
Two outstanding college players with a year of eligibility remaining decided to turn pro yesterday and were immediately projected to be the top two picks in the college football draft this spring.
All-America linebacker MARVIN JONES of Florida State, winner of the Butkus and Lombardi awards, is a potential No. 1 draft pick by the New England Patriots.
Washington State University quarterback DREW BLEDSOE shapes up as the No. 2 choice, by the Seattle Seahawks.


Intel Leads in Chip Sales
The Intel Corporation, a Silicon Valley computer chip maker, recaptured the leading position in worldwide semiconductor sales in 1992, according to a report issued today by the Dataquest market research firm.
Bolstered by demand for its 386SL and 486 microprocessors, used in most of the world's personal computers, Intel's revenue grew 27 percent, to $5.06 billion, giving it control of 7.7 percent of the world's semiconductor market.


Chronicle
KATARINA WITT, who turned professional after winning back-to-back Olympic gold medals in figure skating, is planning to go for the gold again in the 1994 Winter Games in Lillehammer, Norway.
"I am the sort of person who needs a big mountain in front of me to climb," the 27-year-old German skater said yesterday on the ARD television network in Germany, as reported by The Associated Press.


Oregon Utility Steps Up Closing of Nuclear Plant
Faced with determined opponents and difficult new questions about safety, the Portland General Electric Company in Oregon said yesterday that it would immediately retire its Trojan nuclear plant.
The company had said in August that it would shut the Trojan plant in 1996, when it would have been halfway through its 40-year design life.
But the reactor, in Rainier, Ore., developed a leak in a tiny tube in a heat exchanger in November, and while it was shut for repairs opponents pressed new questions about the likelihood of several tubes' failing simultaneously.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS CITES HIS ACCOMPLISHMENTS  In a 43-minute State of the City address, Mayor Dinkins declared that New York City was a safer, more just and more fiscally secure place than when he took office -- despite a severe recession that has hampered his government.
In a speech that served to lay the groundwork for his re-election campaign, the Mayor defended his record, saying he had delivered on his 1989 campaign promises to be tough on crime and to be a sound fiscal steward.
A1.
THE LIMITS OF COMPASSION  The scale of the initiatives proposed by Mayor Dinkins in his State of the City address demonstrates the large gap between what he would like to do for many poor and working-class New Yorkers and what the constraints of the city's fiscal circumstances will allow him to do.
News Analysis, B2.
NOMINEE FOR SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION JOB
A former New York City construction, housing and planning official is the leading candidate to head the city's School Construction Authority, officials say.
Barry Light would head an authority created in 1988 to cut red tape that for years had delayed construction of new schools.
B3. 11-year-old girl is shot and wounded in Bronx housing project.
B3.
New York City organization helps promote family planning throughout the world.
B3.
Strike by building maintenance workers is on hold, for now.
B3.
REGION SHOWING MERCY TO DYING INMATES  With AIDS now the single greatest cause of death in the New York State prison system, a new state medical parole program may lead to the annual release of about 25 terminally ill prisoners who have the disease.
But critics say the early release program is being set at a cruel trickle rather than some larger, more merciful flow needed to deal with the prisons' appalling rise in AIDS fatalities.
A1.
ALTERNATIVE TO CUOMO'S MEDICAID PLAN  More than a year after Governor Cuomo proposed a state takeover of local Medicaid costs, Senate Republican leaders are poised to offer an alternative plan that would force deep cuts in Medicaid by tying growth in the program to the rise in health-care costs.
Unlike Mr.
Cuomo's plan, the Republican proposal would not require local governments to cede a share of local tax revenues to the state.
B5.
SENATE AIDE RESIGNS BEFORE BUDGET TALKS  Just as the New York State Legislature is preparing for a difficult session of budget negotiations, the top aide to the Senate majority leader has announced that he had resigned to work for a New York City hospital and medical school.
Paul F. Macielak, co-counsel to Senator Ralph J. Marino and a top health-care negotiator for the Republicans who control the Senate, says he will join New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center as a vice president and vice provost later this month.
B5.
FOCUS ON GLEN RIDGE CASE WITNESS  The Glen Ridge sex assault trial has resumed after an 11-day recess with a defense lawyer attempting to discredit a prosecution psychiatrist by dwelling on his fees as an expert witness in the case.
B5.
Neediest Cases B3  Chronicle B4  Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves B5


DEFENDING RECORD, DINKINS SEES CITY AS A SAFER PLACE
Laying the groundwork for his re-election campaign, Mayor David N. Dinkins declared yesterday that New York City was a safer, more just and more fiscally secure place than when he took office despite a severe recession that has hampered his government.
In a 43-minute State of the City address, Mr.
Dinkins defended his record in office, saying he had delivered on his 1989 campaign promises to be tough on crime and to be a sound fiscal steward.
He listed a long scorecard of achievements, from a drop in overall crime rates to attracting the Democratic National Convention to establishing an all-civilian board to review complaints of police misconduct.


Fox's Television Head Abruptly Resigns Post
The Fox Broadcasting Company said yesterday that its president and chief operating officer, Jamie Kellner, had decided to leave his position but would remain associated with the company.
The move stunned many television executives, who said the departure of Mr.
Kellner as head of Fox Broadcasting would be a big loss for the fourth television network.
Mr.
Kellner has been a key force in guiding Fox since its inception in 1985.
Named to the Fox Board
In a statement, Rupert Murdoch, the chairman of Fox Inc., which he controls through the News Corporation, said Mr.
Kellner had been named to Fox Inc.'s board.


No Victory in Debut But All Is Not Lost
Ron Smith's debut as coach of the Rangers last night wasn't quite as successful as management had in mind when it put him in place of Roger Neilson earlier in the day.
But thanks to assists by Mark Messier on the last two goals, it wasn't a complete failure either.
On the positive side, the Rangers rallied from a two-goal deficit for a 3-3 deadlock with the Devils at Madison Square Garden.


Cuomo Role Urged in Case
Advisers to a black man beaten by Hasidic Jews in Crown Heights said yesterday that, as an alternative to the special prosecutor they have sought in the case, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo should meet with the victim and agree to "monitor" the Brooklyn District Attorney's investigation.
If the Governor does so, the man, Ralph Nimmons, would change his position and cooperate with the District Attorney's grand jury inquiry, one of his advisers, the Rev.
Al Sharpton, said at a news conference.
Mr.
Nimmons's advisers have contended that a special prosecutor is needed because District Attorney Charles J. Hynes is too close to the Hasidic community to pursue the investigation impartially, an accusation Mr.
Hynes has rejected.


Iraq Is Reported to Move Missiles Into Areas Patrolled by U.S. Jets
Administration officials said tonight that Iraq had moved surface-to-air-missiles into the enclave in the southern part of the country that is patrolled by United States and allied warplanes.
American officials said they were not sure why Iraq had moved the weapons, described as Soviet-made SA-2 and SA-3 missiles, into the zone, from which Iraqi aircraft are barred.
The United States and its allies established the zone in August 1992 in an effort to protect rebellious Shiite Muslims in Iraq's southern marshlands.


Lawmakers Call Bomb Plant Prosecution Too Lenient
Congressional investigators looking into the prosecution of the Rockwell International Corporation for environmental crimes at the Rocky Flats nuclear bomb plant charged yesterday that the Justice Department was far too easy on the company.
The investigators said some department officials, inexperienced and overly conservative, probably gave up millions of dollars in fines and additional convictions against the corporation and some executives.
The Justice Department was so reluctant to go to trial that it caved in to Rockwell's main goals in negotiations over a plea agreement, the Congressional investigators assert in a report.
Most important, the company refused to plead guilty to any charge that implied that toxic or radioactive materials had escaped from the site, the report says.
This would have left Rockwell vulnerable to civil suits by neighbors of the plant, which is in the northwest suburbs of Denver.
Lobbying by Energy Dept.
The report, by the Investigations and Oversight Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology, also said the Energy Department lobbied the Justice Department to go easy on the company, apparently to limit the possibility of civil suits.


PLUTONIUM CARGO ARRIVES IN JAPAN
After a two-month journey that turned into a diplomatic embarrassment for the Japanese Government, a cargo vessel carrying more than a ton of plutonium from Europe arrived in Japan early this morning under heavy guard and lingering questions about the future of an ambitious nuclear program that has deeply alarmed Japan's neighbors.
The ship, the Akatsuki Maru, pulled into the harbor here 70 miles northeast of Tokyo, ending the largest sealift of plutonium ever attempted.
About 500 demonstrators, organized by Greenpeace International and other anti-nuclear groups, jeered from the shore and from small motorboats off the harbor, but a fleet of circling helicopters, hundreds of riot police officers and a flotilla of dozens of guard ships brought the ship in at dawn this morning without incident.


Dividends Were Better, but Not Great, Last Year
The year just ended brought the first improvement in corporate dividends in years.
But because the numbers were already so low, Wall Street is not popping champagne corks just yet.
In 1992, more companies reinstated dividends, announced higher dividends or gave extra dividends than in either of the previous two years.
But on the other hand, that number is still the third lowest since comparable figures began to be compiled in 1955, the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation reported yesterday.


Books of The Times; Imagining How Time Might Behave Differently
Einstein's Dreams  By Alan Lightman  179 pages. Pantheon Books. $17.


Chess
There are two things you can do facing an opponent known to be adept when entrenched in his favorite defense: Skirt around it or make the demanding effort to create something special against it.
The drawback in avoiding it is that this essentially negative approach can make it difficult for you to develop any kind of initiative.
On the other hand, the drawback of committing yourself to finding a new and potent weapon is that the project takes enormous time and concentration and often bears no fruit.


Emanuel Appelbaum, Disease Specialist, 98
Dr.
Emanuel Appelbaum, a specialist in infectious diseases who served on the staff of Bellevue Hospital for more than 70 years, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 98.
He died of congestive heart failure, said his physician, Dr. Harry Taube.


Los Angeles's New Police Chief Gains Good Will but Even More Difficulties
In his first weeks in office, the city's new police chief, Willie L. Williams, spent so much time visiting citizen groups, political leaders and police roll calls that some members of the Police Commission that appointed him began to worry if he was getting his job done.
But as he reaches the six-month point in his tenure, at the turn of the year, it is clear that Chief Williams has succeeded in generating good will in much of a city that had turned against its police force under the man he replaced, Daryl F. Gates.


Lucas Is Staying Ahead on Two Fronts
As the game begins, John Lucas discovers that he does not fear relinquishing control of his life to five sometimes erratic young men on a basketball court.
Standing in front of the bench, arms folded, awaiting his next nervous burst of kinetic energy, Lucas feels a familiar exhilaration to this experience.
You'd be surprised to whom Lucas has revealed his vulnerability and turned over his trust.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Agreed to terms with Ellis Burks, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
National League


Bridge
The 1992 New York bridge year ended on Sunday, three days late, at the Vista International Hotel at the World Trade Center in Manhattan.
The concluding event at the Greater New York Bridge Association's winter regional championships was the four-session Swiss team championship.
The championship was won by Michael Rosenberg, Gail Greenberg, Jill Blanchard and Debbie Zuckerberg. all of Manhattan, and Steve Zolotow of Las Vegas, Nev., and Richard Pavlicek Jr. of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
These were other winners of events played on Sunday:


Finish Line reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Purge Enforced, El Salvador Says
Seeking to dispel assertions that it is violating the peace accords, the Government of President Alfredo Cristiani said today that it had issued a confidential order carrying out the promised purge of the Salvadoran Army for human rights abuses.
The terse Government communique did not specify when the order was issued, the effective dates, or whether the list contained the names of all 110 officers believed to be on the purge list drawn up by a commission created under the agreements ending the 12-year civil war.


Some Progress Reported in Bosnia Talks
Talks among the belligerent factions in Bosnia and Herzegovina recessed today without a political accord that would enable a cease-fire to go into effect.
But the meeting produced an important concession by the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government on the broad outlines of a possible settlement, and the leaders at the five-sided talks promised to resume negotiations on Sunday.
The greatest compromise was made by the President of Bosnia, Alija Izetbegovic, whose forces have been fighting the better-armed Bosnian Serbs for the last nine months: For the first time, Mr.
Izetbegovic accepted the principle of dividing the country into autonomous provinces loosely controlled by the Government in Sarajevo.


HEI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Chess
There are two things you can do facing an opponent known to be adept when entrenched in his favorite defense: Skirt around it or make the demanding effort to create something special against it.
The drawback in avoiding it is that this essentially negative approach can make it difficult for you to develop any kind of initiative.
On the other hand, the drawback of committing yourself to finding a new and potent weapon is that the project takes enormous time and concentration and often bears no fruit.


North-South Route to Trucking Profit
The North American Free Trade Agreement has not even taken effect yet, but already there is one winner: a little-known trucking company based here that has taken a different route to profitability from the rest of the industry.
Most trucking companies still follow the east-west routes pioneered by the nation's railroads in the 19th century, which, for the most part, are more competitive and therefore less profitable than those crossing the north-south borders.
Contract Freighters Inc. of Joplin has emerged as a renegade, one of the first truly North American trucking companies.


People
*
John Swan, senior vice president and group director at Young &amp; Rubicam New York, was promoted to executive vice president. *
Jennifer Friedberg was named to the new position of senior vice president and director of client services at Rudnick &amp; Miano Advertising Inc., New York.
She was previously a vice president and management representative at McCann-Erickson New York.


Amy Fisher Story a Surprise Smash In 3 TV Movies
Surpassing the expectations of network officials, each of the three made-for-television movies based on the Amy Fisher case and broadcast in the last week was a stunning success, and two of the three are likely to emerge as the most popular television movies of the season.
The NBC movie, which was broadcast on Dec. 28, had a 19.1 rating and was the highest-rated television movie of the season so far.
The ABC movie, broadcast Sunday night, had a 19.4 in the overnight ratings and may top the NBC version's when final figures are released today.
The CBS movie, shown on Sunday at the same time as ABC's, had a 15.8 overnight rating and is likely to be about the seventh-highest-rated movie of the season. (Each national ratings point represents 931,000 homes; overnight ratings are only from the top 28 cities, and each point represents 462,634 homes).


Du Pont Sets A Charge Of $5 Billion
E.
I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company said yesterday that it would take an after-tax charge of $5 billion against its 1992 earnings to cover the anticipated costs of providing health care for its retired employees and their survivors.
The accounting change, which is being made by many companies to conform with revised accounting standards, will apparently produce a loss for the year.
Company profits for 1992 had been estimated by analysts at about $3 a share, or more than $2 billion.


Chief at Thompson Confirms a Report
Burt Manning, chairman and chief executive of the J. Walter Thompson Company in New York, said yesterday that he intended eventually to promote Peter Schweitzer, vice chairman of agency operations, to president, an additional new position.
Mr.
Manning confirmed a report of the appointment this week in Adweek, adding that it had not been determined when Mr.
Schweitzer, who is 53, would move to New York from Detroit.


Mayans Had a Middle Class, Too
Digging deeper, clearing away thickets of misconception and finally deciphering obscure glyphs, archeologists are developing striking new images of the ancient Mayans of Central America as a people with a more richly textured society than previously imagined.
No longer are they idolized as an exceptionally peaceful people; their kings made a habit of bloody wars of conquest.
Their agriculture was not so primitive; they practiced intensive farming sufficient to feed large urban populations.
Their art and technology were not necessarily derived from the powerful cultures of temperate Central Mexico; on their own the Mayans evolved an innovative, vibrant civilization in the tropical lowlands.


G.O.P. Legislative Aide Quits Albany Post to Join Hospital
Just as the State Legislature is preparing for a difficult session of budget negotiations, the top aide to the Senate majority leader announced today that he had resigned to work for a New York City hospital and medical school.
Paul F. Macielak, co-counsel to Senator Ralph J. Marino and a top health-care negotiator for the Republicans who control the Senate, said he would join New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center as a vice president and vice provost later this month.
Mr.
Macielak, who has been a key adviser to state Republican officials for 20 years and was considered one of the most influential people in Albany, is the fourth top legislative aide to resign since last summer.


A Decade of Riding the Rails; Metro-North Celebrates Anniversary Amid Plans to Make Commuting More Pleasant
For most commuters, today meant a reluctant return to work after a long holiday weekend.
But for officials of the Metro-North Commuter Railroad, it was a day to celebrate.
The railroad was created 10 years ago to take over the passenger service run by Conrail.
Its promotion-minded president, Donald N. Nelson, and his staff chose to mark the anniversary by greeting riders at Grand Central Terminal with coupons for free cups of coffee at shops in the terminal.
Conductors in uniform and executives in suits stood at the exit ramps handing out the chits. 'Wanted to Say Thank You'
By most measures, Metro-North has been a success.
Ridership has gone from 85,000 daily in 1983 to 100,000 now, and on-time performance is 96.5 percent, compared with 80 percent in 1983.


Prescription Drug Prices Need Curbing
To the Editor:
You report that President-elect Clinton's transition team intends to limit increases in prescription drug prices as part of any health-care package (news article, Dec. 15).
This follows a powerful precedent set over the border in Canada.


A Whitefly, Certainly, But Not That Whitefly
THE whitefly that has destroyed more than a half billion dollars' worth of crops in California and other states is a different species than had been thought, scientists say, and the discovery could speed the search for a natural enemy to control the insect.
Synthetic pesticides are largely ineffective in attacking the whitefly.
Scientists previously believed that the sweet-potato whitefly was responsible for the crop damage, and they have been searching for the natural enemy, presumably a parasite, in the bodies of a number of strains of outwardly identical sweet-potato whiteflies collected from around the world.
Typically, only one variety of parasite attaches itself to only one variety of whitefly.


American Nursery Products reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Cancun Bus Crash Kills 25, Including 14 Americans
Twenty-five tourists, including 14 Americans, died when their excursion bus crashed Sunday into a high-tension power pole on a slippery road near Cancun, Mexico, United States and Mexican officials said yesterday.
The bus, with 52 tourists, had left Cancun Sunday morning for the Mayan ruins at Chichen Itza, on the Yucatan Peninsula.
It carried 32 Americans and 3 Mexicans, as well as Canadians, Brazilians and Japanese, with two drivers and a guide, according to the Caribe Vision travel agency, which organized the tour.
It was not immediately known whether the drivers or the guide survived.


A Building Of Olympia's Is Seized
The Prudential Insurance Company of America has become the first creditor to seize a commercial building of the Reichmann family's bankrupt Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., once the world's premier real estate company.
Prudential, based in Newark, has taken title to the 28-story Aetna Canada Center, one of the four crown jewels in Olympia's Toronto portfolio.
"All we can say at this point is that we're pleased to have it," said a Prudential spokesman, Rick Matthews.
"We look forward to doing the rehabilitation of the building and leasing it up."


Yankees Consider Lengthy Abbott Deal
The Yankees worked diligently to acquire Jim Abbott from the California Angels last month.
They have worked diligently since then to convince him that New York is a wonderful place to play baseball.
Now they are expected to begin working diligently to sign the pitcher to a multiyear contract.
Joseph Molloy, the Yankees' managing general partner, said yesterday that the team's ownership would convene this week and that the major topic of discussion would be whether to offer the 25-year old Abbott a lengthy contract, thus averting the possibility of a one-year deal determined by arbitration.
With four years in the majors, Abbott is two years away from becoming a free agent, but the Yankees realize that his talent and marquee value make him a smart investment now.


Four Shows Close Out Their Broadway Runs
Four Broadway shows ended their runs with Sunday's matinee performance.
"The Secret Garden," a musical by Marsha Norman and Lucy Simon, closed at the St.
James Theater, 246 West 44th Street.
The show, directed by Susan H. Schulman, ran for 706 regular performances and 22 previews.


Child, 11, Wounded as Two Groups Trade Fire in Bronx
An 11-year-old girl going to a candy store from her home in a Bronx housing project was shot and seriously wounded yesterday after she walked into an exchange of gunfire between two groups of men and was hit by a stray bullet, the police said.
The mother of the child said her daughter, Lindsay Diaz, and the girl's brother, Merlyn, 13, were leaving their building in the Mitchel housing project in Mott Haven at about 5:30 P.M. when two groups of men nearby opened fire.


U.N. CHIEF'S VISIT ANGERS ETHIOPIANS
Violence erupted in the Ethiopian capital today when security forces clashed with students protesting a plan by the visiting United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, to continue on to the northern province of Eritrea, which is expected to vote for independence from Ethiopia in a United Nations-supervised referendum in April.
Witnesses said that about 2,000 students chanting anti-United Nations slogans surged out of the university campus this morning and were met by security forces.
Clashes ensued and shots were fired.
Unofficial reports said that at least one student was killed and that about 40 were wounded, many of them bayoneted.


CLINTON NOMINEES DISTURB SOME JEWS
A few hours after President-elect Bill Clinton nominated Warren M. Christopher to be his Secretary of State, he called several Jewish Senators to ask them to persuade leaders of Jewish groups to support the appointment, even though some were uncomfortable with Mr.
Christopher's connection to Jimmy Carter's foreign policy.
The phone calls were part of the behind-the-scenes wrangling between Mr.
Clinton and Jewish leaders that has been going on during the transition.
Some Jewish groups, transition officials said, have been quietly complaining that Mr.
Clinton has appointed officials associated with female, black and Hispanic causes to Cabinet jobs, but not prominent members of the Jewish establishment.


Earth Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


No Headline
We tried to drag her out, but the fire on the bus was getting too hot and too close and we had to leave. -- MARI SCHRAMM, describing the death of her traveling companion in a Mexican bus crash.  [ A5:2. ]


X-Ray Data Suggest Mass of the Universe May Halt Expansion
An X-ray astronomy satellite has discovered the first strong evidence that the universe may not expand forever, but could someday be brought to a halt by its own mass.
The discovery is important because of the Big Bang theory of how the universe was formed.
This theory predicts that most of the matter in the universe should be in invisible or "dark" form, but so far astronomers have failed to turn up evidence for anything like as much "dark" matter as the theory requires.


Judge Blocks Circle K Plan
An Arizona bankruptcy court judge yesterday refused to approve a reorganization plan filed by a group seeking control of the Circle K Corporation, saying he was not convinced the group had the needed financial backing.
Judge George B. Nielson Jr. stopped short of outright rejection of the proposal submitted by the Commonwealth Oil Refining Company, saying he would be willing to hear from the company again provided it could provide substantial proof it has the finances.


Playing a Game of Numbers; Race For No. 1 Nears End For Taurus and Accord
In the contest to outsell a rival model, the winner is often the auto maker that reports last.
Fearing this, the Ford Motor Company suggested to the Honda Motor Company that the two auto makers exchange sales totals on Wednesday morning to make sure there are no last-minute additions.
Honda's answer: No thanks.


Gretzky Is Returning
WAYNE GRETZKY, the National Hockey League's career leading scorer, has been cleared by Los Angeles Kings team doctors to play and will return to the ice tomorrow night at the Forum in Inglewood, Calif., against the Tampa Bay Lightning.
Gretzky, 31, hasn't played this season because of a bad back.
It was announced at news conference Sept. 22 that he would be sidelined indefinitely.


Review/Music; A Festival of Lessons and Carols for Epiphany
Advent, in the Christian calendar, is a December-long period of penitence, relieved by the celebration of Christmas Day itself.
Epiphany, in early January, marks the coming of the Magi and the introduction of the Christ child to the world.
The first event is more or less eclipsed in the extended carnival that Christmas has become.
For other than faithful Christians, Epiphany becomes lost in the post-holiday hangovers of high winter.
The Festival of Lessons and Carols at Corpus Christi Church on Sunday afternoon positioned itself in the middle of these three observances.
The elegant yet modest interior was subdued by candlelight; nine lessons were read; prayers were said; there were familiar hymns for the congregation and the complex polyphony of William Byrd and Peter Maxwell Davies for a 10-member choir directed by Louise Basbas.


Time to Re-examine Domestic Surveillance
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis's "Maurice the Waiter?" (column, Dec. 14) suggests the Clinton Administration reform Federal Bureau of Investigation and Central Intelligence Agency surveillance policies regarding United States citizens.
I add: Repeal President Reagan's 1981 Executive Order 12,333 and replace it with Congressional legislation requiring warrants for physical searches and electronic surveillance of citizens suspected of spying for foreign powers.


Salomon Settles 2 Pay Claims
Salomon Brothers announced yesterday that it had settled multimillion-dollar compensation claims with two executives who resigned in the wake of the Treasury market bidding scandal in 1991.
But the firm said it had been unable to reach agreement with two other former executives, John H. Gutfreund, the former chairman and chief executive, and Donald Feuerstein, the former general counsel.


Surgery for Stallings
Doctors operated on GENE STALLINGS to repair a hernia yesterday and the Alabama football coach is expected to leave the hospital today or tomorrow.
The operation at University Hospital in Birmingham, Ala., lasted just over one hour and Stallings was listed in satisfactory condition.


Where City History Was Made, a 50's Group Made Art History
No place in Manhattan speaks of time past more than the island's lower tip on a foggy night.
The waterfront streets on the East River, with their few surviving 19th-century buildings, are quiet after Wall Street empties at the end of the day.
The smell of the sea is strong; the muffled sounds of ships' horns and buoys drift in from the harbor.
During the 18th and 19th centuries, this was the heart of New York.
The city's earliest publishing houses were here, as were its theaters, and such writers as Melville, Whitman and Poe walked the streets.
Although the neighborhood went on to become the financial district, as recently as 30 years ago it was still making cultural history: it was home to some of America's most distinguished and radical living artists.


Bill Clinton, Environmentalist?
As Governor of Arkansas, his record on the environment was fair to poor.
As a Presidential candidate he let Al Gore do most of the talking on environmental issues.
Yet many hope that Bill Clinton will become the "environment President" George Bush promised to be but wasn't.
It's more than a hope.
It's a challenge -- maybe even bigger than Mr.
Clinton imagines.
No issue inspires more heat and hyperbole.
No country spends more money -- $130 billion -- and imposes more regulations to keep itself clean.
But money and laws have not achieved consensus.
America is swarming with green activists -- and with energetic critics who believe that the cleanliness crusade exacts too great a toll in jobs and economic growth.


Defense Tries To Undercut Psychiatrist In Sex Case
The Glen Ridge sex assault trial resumed today after an 11-day recess, with a defense lawyer attempting to discredit a prosecution psychiatrist by dwelling on his fees as an expert witness in the case.
With a series of handwritten charts breaking down time spent in meetings, phone calls, report writing and testimony, the lawyer, Michael Querques, showed the jury that the psychiatrist, Dr.
Gerald Meyerhoff, had earned $19,145 since becoming involved in the case in the fall of 1989.
That was about six months after a 17-year-old mildly retarded girl engaged in sex with the four defendants in an episode that the defense says was consensual and the prosecution says was assault.


Vader Group reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Patterns
TV Slips Into Fashion
Annie Flanders, the doyenne of downtown style who founded Details magazine in 1982 with $6,000, has signed on as a contributing editor at TV Guide.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Bruce K. Binder, the top fashion adviser for Macy's stores in the East and a company vice president, omitted a survivor.
He is Mr.
Binder's father, Max Binder of Bayside, Queens.


Senate Republicans Set To Offer Medicaid Plan
More than a year after Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed a state takeover of local Medicaid costs, Senate Republican leaders are poised to offer an alternative plan that would force deep cuts in Medicaid by limiting growth in the program to the rise in health-care costs.
Unlike Mr.
Cuomo's plan, the Republican proposal would not require local governments to cede a share of local tax revenues to the state.
The plan is scheduled to be released publicly on Tuesday.


Observer; Obedient to Peter Pan
There has been a run of boyish Presidents since Eisenhower, who was not boyish by any stretch of the definition, even though he did care about golf.
Neither was Truman, who preceded him, nor Franklin Roosevelt, though Roosevelt could pretend to be boyish when necessary.
Herbert Hoover?
Not boyish.
Nor Coolidge.
Woodrow Wilson?
Wilson wasn't even boyish when he was a boy.
Taft is harder.
He certainly sulked boyishly when Theodore Roosevelt tried to undo him in 1912.
On the other hand, he also sired Senator Robert A. Taft, who couldn't possibly have sprung from boyish genes.


Q&amp;A
Save the Bubbles
Q.
French people say a silver spoon in the neck of an open Champagne bottle makes the bubbles last longer.
Is there any truth to this?


Nuclear Waste Crisis Grows in Our Backyard; To Light the World
To the Editor:
"Shoreham Fuels Nuclear Proliferation" (editorial, Dec. 13) is more a part of the problem than the solution.


315 Physicists Report Failure In Search for Supersymmetry
Three hundred and fifteen physicists worked on the experiment.
Their apparatus included the Tevatron, the world's most powerful particle accelerator, as well as a $65 million detector weighing as much as a warship, an advanced new computing system and a host of other innovative gadgets.


Helene Curtis Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


BMW's Finalists: 2 New York Agencies
BMW of North America said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on the media planning and buying portion of its $85 million account to two New York-based finalists: DeWitt Media and Ally &amp; Gargano.
Thomas O. McGurn, a BMW spokesman in Woodcliff Lake, N.J., confirmed a report of the finalists this week in Adweek.
He said the two were in the running for the account, if BMW indeed decided to separate the media portion of the account from the creative portion.


George L. George, 85, Organizer of Directors
George L. George, a film director whose "Toward Independence" won the Academy Award for documentary short subjects in 1948, died on Thursday at his apartment in Manhattan.
He was 85 years old.
He died of heart failure, said his granddaughter, Emily George.


Banks Must Soon Report Loan 'Fair Value'
Banks will be required in annual reports issued early this year to disclose for the first time their estimates of the "fair value" of their loans -- a change long sought by critics who have contended that overly generous accounting rules allowed banks to hide losses on bad loans.
Banks now carry loans on their books at their original value if the bank expects to be repaid in full, even if a borrower gets in trouble and the bank would suffer a loss from selling the loan.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN REINSURANCE CO., Princeton, N.J., named Albert J. Beer senior vice president.
FLEET BANK N.A., Hartford, a unit of Fleet Financial Group, named Frederick C. Copeland Jr. president and director.


Fox's Television Head Abruptly Resigns Post
The Fox Broadcasting Company said yesterday that its president and chief operating officer, Jamie Kellner, had decided to leave his position but would remain associated with the company.
The move stunned many television executives, who said the departure of Mr.
Kellner as head of Fox Broadcasting would be a big loss for the fourth television network.
Mr.
Kellner has been a key force in guiding Fox since its inception in 1985.
Named to the Fox Board
In a statement, Rupert Murdoch, the chairman of Fox Inc., which he controls through the News Corporation, said Mr.
Kellner had been named to Fox Inc.'s board.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  WHERE GUNS ARE BOUNTEOUS


Aides Meet Today on Dispute Over Sales to Iran and China
The Commerce Department has scheduled an interagency meeting for Tuesday in a final effort to approve the sale of crop-duster aircraft to Iran and jet engines and satellite gear to China before President Bush leaves office, Administration officials said today.
The sales are strongly opposed by the Defense Department, which is worried about increasing the military power of the two countries, and about the precedent the sale could set for the export of even more advanced commercial equipment with potential military applications.


Subsidies For Hospitals Face Threat
A case awaiting the ruling of a Federal judge in Manhattan could threaten the system that New York State has used for nearly a decade to help subsidize hospital care and to give Blue Cross and Blue Shield a modestly more favorable rate than other health insurers.
Several insurance companies and insurance industry associations are challenging the system under a Federal law covering employee benefit programs.
They contend that the 1974 Federal statue pre-empts the complex state formula under which health insurers pay hospitals for patient care.


For Buffalo, Ring Out Miracle and Bring On Steelers
Just how did this happen?
Even the Bills weren't sure 24 hours after they had pulled off the greatest comeback in National Football League history.
The Bills overcame a 32-point deficit to beat the Oilers, 41-38, in overtime at Rich Stadium on Sunday in a game that defies football logic.
How does a team that is missing its starting quarterback and one of its best linebackers, loses its star running back in the second half, and falls behind 35-3 early in the third quarter come back to win?


Copts Are Targets as New Strife Roils Egypt
Breaking a lull in sectarian violence in Egypt, attacks have resumed against Coptic Christians and churches as well as police officials, dealing a blow to official assertions that Muslim fundamentalist terror was brought under control with a security sweep in December.
In separate incidents a few minutes apart this morning, assailants in Dairut, a fundamentalist stronghold 200 miles south of Cairo, shot and killed an elderly Coptic farm manager and wounded a Coptic pharmacist.
On Sunday night, a Coptic church was burned in Dairut, where Copts make up 20 percent of the population.
In Cairo, security officials said that a police car had been burned in suburb of Imbaba, which has been under heavy police surveillance since early last month.
Assurance Was Premature
The attacks came after President Hosni Mubarak and Interior Minister Abdel Halim Moussa had gone out of their way in the last few days to reassure foreign tourists as well as the Egyptian people that Islamic fundamentalist violence had been checked in the security crackdown, the most extensive in two decades.


Contributing From Windfalls To Help the Neediest Cases
The conversation at Gail Furman's dinner party last month was ambling along until it hit a roadblock.
Between bites of veal marsala and sips of Beaujolais nouveau, Joan B. Furman, the hostess's mother-in-law, kept insisting that Lena Horne had been married to Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Dorothy Schwartz disagreed.
The two decided on a friendly bet, with the loser treating the winner to dinner at a fancy restaurant.
Needless to say, Mrs.
Furman soon found herself making reservations at Le Bernadin in Manhattan.
But then she and Ms.
Schwartz reconsidered.
Wouldn't the money be better spent, they thought, if it were sent to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund?


A Typical Town in Russia, Caught in the Market's Web
When Russians complain about the failures of economic reform, they point to cities like Ivanovo.
A large textile center 150 miles northeast of Moscow that once clothed half the army and produced one of every four square yards of fabric in the Soviet Union, Ivanovo is suffering by any measure.
Output has dropped by half, warehouses are empty, cotton and other raw materials are almost unavailable.


'Pride and Determination': Excerpts From the State of the City Address
Following are excerpts from Mayor Dinkins's State of the City address yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times:
. . .
Today I want to talk about how we have heard the voices of this city and how we have kept the promises that we have made.
Our compact was based on my vision of what this city can be.
It is a vision of a government brought closer to the people and their neighborhoods, for throughout my life I have known New York as a community of neighborhoods.
We took our first step toward this vision with our Safe Street, Safe City community policing plan.
But we didn't stop there.
Using the talents of some of the most creative thinkers in government we put together a series of programs that put our people up front and moved the bureaucracy behind.
We promised a government closer to the people and we have kept that promise.
New York has been described as an extraordinary hive of the imagination, the greatest house ever built.
I believe that the role of government is to help shape this extraordinary house of ours while giving our people the resources they need in order to take control of their lives.
It means giving our children, to whom I've dedicated this administration, the love and nurturing they need to take us into the future.
I knew that our city of neighborhoods would flourish and that our children would thrive if we could create a safe city, a compassionate city, a city with a world-class economy.
That is the vision I want to present to you today.
So I come before you filled both with pride and determination, proud that we have laid the foundation to insure that our city's economy remains world class and poised to take us into the next century, proud that New York is safer today than it was before and proud of course, that all the while we never lost our compassion and our commitment to make life better for all of our residents.
We've done much -- thank you -- we've done much and we're determined to do much much more with your help.
Last July we saw the man who would become the nation's President nominated under the dome of our own Madison Square Garden.
Bill Clinton and Al Gore represent the kind of change this country needs and wants.
And we are already seeing the prospect of a very different kind of government in Washington, D.C.
I had the privilege of addressing the Democratic National Convention, speaking on behalf of New York as well as the other great cities of our nation.
At that point of our first term I could think only about the changes that we had begun to see, of how far we had already come and how much further our vision would carry this great house we have built together.
Think back to January of 1990.
Crime soared out of control, the budget we inherited had more holes than a Swiss cheese, a recession stole our jobs, an indifferent Federal Government took away our hope.
Think about how much has changed.
Remember how the words financial control board once dominated discussions of our budget.
Today, thanks to our spirit of reform and renaissance that has been reinventing government for the last three years, the foundation of our fiscal house stands solid.
Of course, while this year's budget is balanced, substantial deficits to remain in the years to come and our next budget will require us once again to make tough decisions, the kind of decisions that define this administration.
While the aftershocks of a recession and the forecasts of deficits will require us to remain ever vigilant, surely we will leave our fiscal house standing stronger than we found it.
Remember how the threat of businesses leaving our city once seemed to plague us.
Over the last three years we've saved over 35,000 jobs by aggressively pursuing established and cutting-edge companies and convincing them to stay in New York.
. . .
This year we have a new partner.
The most important new partner we've gained in a dozen years.
We know that the New York State Congressional delegation led by Congressman Charles Rangel will work closely with Speaker Tom Foley and they will continue to hear our voices, so too, will the new head of the powerful Senate Finance Committee Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
For too long, however, so many of our efforts had been stymied by the hostile Federal administration.
But not only does our new President believe in cities and understand their importance, Bill Clinton knows that New York is the incubator for some of the greatest talent in the country.
That's why he's chosen New Yorkers like Bob Ruben and Donna Shalala and Roger Altman and Cliff Wharton and Ron Brown as part of his team to put people first.
And also joining that team are former Mayors Henry Cisneros and Fredrico Pena who are committed to urban centers as much as anybody I know.
With these new partners, so many of them longtime friends, we can help transform cities like New York into towns called hope.


Cleaners Of Offices Extend Talks On Contract
The threat of a strike by 30,000 cleaners and maintenance employees at 900 office buildings in New York City was put off yesterday, with a new deadline set for tomorrow at 7 A.M.
The union representing the workers, Local 32B-32J of the Service Employees International Union, agreed to extend negotiations after failing to reach a settlement before the original strike deadline of midnight Monday set by the union.


Sihanouk Pulls Out of U.N. Peace Plan, Citing Political Strife
In a setback for the peace effort in Cambodia, Prince Norodom Sihanouk said today that he would no longer cooperate with the United Nations operation there or with the Cambodian Government because of violence against political parties preparing for elections in his country.
The Prince, Cambodia's head of state and its former king, said in a letter to Yasushi Akashi, head of the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia, that he made his decision "in light of the extreme gravity and persistent continuation of the crimes perpetrated" against a political party aligned with his family.


What House Votes for Delegates Mean
To the Editor:
"House Democrats have just awarded themselves five more votes," you state in "Have the House Democrats No Shame?" (editorial, Dec. 29).
The Democratic Caucus has recommended that the delegates from the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands and American Samoa be given a vote in the House Committee of the Whole.
This committee is advisory; its decisions are not binding and become law only when voted by the formal, constitutionally prescribed House, where the delegates will
not
be able to vote.


Get a Jump on Managing Money
FOR those who resolved to manage their personal finances better in 1993, there are several ways a personal computer can help.
The latest versions of the leading personal finance programs, including Quicken, Managing Your Money, Microsoft Money and Moneycounts, have been made easier to use.
Ease of use is built into these programs, and users can make it even easier for themselves by switching to a computerized system early in the year.


Tests Show Infection By AIDS Virus Affects Greater Share of Cells
For years, researchers have debated how the virus that causes AIDS can decimate the immune system because studies seemed to show that only a tiny fraction of a crucial group of white blood cells were infected.
In 1986, initial studies of CD4 cells, white blood cells that seem to be the primary target of the virus, showed that 1 in 1,000 cells were infected.
Then, with better methods, investigators said that perhaps 1 in 100 were infected.
But now, with greatly improved technology, investigators are finding that 10, 20, even 30 percent of white blood cells may harbor the virus.
And other cells are also turning out to be infected.
As a consequence, researchers surmise, direct infection with the virus, H.I.V., should be sufficient to account for the destruction of the immune system in people with AIDS.


Yesterday Appreciated, Tomorrow Recycled


Lojack Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


On My Mind; What Saddam Knows
Pretty soon it will be two years since Saddam Hussein lost the war against the United States and the coalition it put together.
We all know he lost.
The President of the United States said so and anyway we all saw it and read it.
Some of us wrote it.


A Rocky Road To Safety of Data
EVERYONE who regularly backs up your hard drive, raise your hand.
Hmmm.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Emmerling Doubles in Size With an Assist From Lintas
WHEN a top executive leaves an agency with several clients and employees in tow, turmoil and finger-pointing usually follow, not to mention a lawsuit or two.
But in one instance, the departure has been so amicable that the agency involved helped make the migration happen.
Effective this week, Peter Post, the president and chief operating officer of Lintas Marketing Communications, is taking six of the agency's accounts and seven staff members and joining John Emmerling Inc. in New York to create Emmerling Post Inc.
Lintas Marketing, which wants to concentrate on marketing services for its large clients like Coca-Cola, is willingly letting Mr.
Post depart with its smaller advertising accounts, including Midlantic Bank and Continental Insurance.


Pages Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


BRIEFS
Debt *
Cigna Corp., Philadelphia, is offering $100 million of 8.30 percent notes due 2023 at 99.233 to yield 8.37 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The noncallable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service and A+ by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


In an Armed Land, Somalis Live and Prosper by the Gun
Bashir Aynab Ali got his first assault rifle two years ago, when a relative handed him a stolen AK-47 to join the revolt against President Mohammed Siad Barre.
It was his rite of passage into Somalia's world of the gunman, a treacherous universe of Robin Hood-style thieves of some honor, murderers with no honor, and survival by the barrel of the gun.
For the 22-year-old, the gun turned out to be more useful than a baccalaureate.


Wroclaw Journal; Yes, Class, Once Upon a Time This Was Germany
Here, in the largest city of the lands Poland annexed from Germany in 1945, the advent of democracy since the overthrow of Communism has meant even more than in the rest of the country.
A democratic, even quarrelsome, political life has sprung up.
Private stores, loudly advertising the consumer goods of the West, compete for customers along streets whose shop windows for more than four decades hid chronic shortages of nearly everything desirable behind dull, gray displays of empty packages.


Sports of The Times; The Fine For Oakley Was Fair
CHARLES OAKLEY's job is not to hurt people -- well, not exactly.
That's
one
of his jobs, to put bruises on opponents and thereby scar their psyches.
He is also paid a million-plus a season to rebound, set picks, play some defense and shoot only if everyone, including the ushers, are covered.


Jerome Hardy, 74, Life Publisher and a Mutual Funds Executive
Jerome S. Hardy, a salesman and promoter of commodities ranging from securities to books and magazines, died Thursday at the Cambridge Manor nursing home in Fairfield, Conn.
He was 74.
He died from the complications of Alzheimer's disease, said a son, Douglas Hardy.


Educational Development Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Sihanouk Pulls Out of U.N. Peace Plan, Citing Political Strife
In a setback for the peace effort in Cambodia, Prince Norodom Sihanouk said today that he would no longer cooperate with the United Nations operation there or with the Cambodian Government because of violence against political parties preparing for elections in his country.
The Prince, Cambodia's head of state and its former king, said in a letter to Yasushi Akashi, head of the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia, that he made his decision "in light of the extreme gravity and persistent continuation of the crimes perpetrated" against a political party aligned with his family.


The Bills Are Alive, But So Are 7 Others
First there were 28. Then 12. Now eight.
Only eight National Football League teams are left with the chance to gain that elusive and coveted championship ring, and the field offers diversity and intrigue.


Charles Edward Fletcher, Veterinarian, 87
Dr.
Charles Edward Fletcher, a prominent veterinarian, died on Friday at his home in Riverdale, the Bronx.
He was 87.
He died in his sleep of natural causes, said his son, Charles E. Fletcher Jr., of Manhattan.


With Hint of Scandal, New Social Values Are Sold
A 13-year-old bride in India refuses to consummate her marriage, saying she wants to become a lawyer before she has children.
A Filipino man crouches over the grave of his wife, who died delivering their 13th child, and apologizes for not helping to plan their family better.


Florida Proposes Broad Health Plan
Arguing that he could not wait for Washington to develop a national plan to control medical costs, Gov.
Lawton Chiles of Florida today proposed sweeping changes in the state's health-care system that he said were intended to guarantee "full access to quality, affordable health care for every person in Florida" by the end of 1994.
As part of the proposal, called the Florida Health Plan, all 13.5 million residents of the nation's fourth-most-populous state would be offered coverage by nonprofit, state-chartered organizations called Community Health Purchasing Alliances, which would collect health-care premiums and sign contracts with insurers judged to offer the best quality at the best cost.
The organizations would be located throughout the state, forming a network of health-care cooperatives intended to encourage competition among providers statewide.


Tips for Spring: Soft Is In and Hemlines Don't Matter
A fresh wind is blowing through the fashion world, rearranging priorities and changing the way women will be presenting themselves in public.
The old shibboleths are fading.
Structured clothes are disappearing.
The length of skirts, which used to throw women into paroxysms of anxiety, has become a non-issue.
Individualism is one of the few rules.


Cabinet Nominee Makes Rounds as His Confirmation Hearing Nears


HEALTH-CARE COSTS UP SHARPLY AGAIN, POSING NEW THREAT
Spending on health care accounted for more than 14 percent of the nation's total economic output last year, up from 13.2 percent in 1991, the Commerce Department says in a new report.
The rise continues a trend that is increasingly seen as a threat to the country's economic health.
The department now estimates the health-care bill for last year at $838.5 billion while it says health spending will total $939.9 billion this year.
That would be an increase of 12 percent from last year's total, and the department said that medical spending would continue to go up 12 percent to 15 percent a year over the next five years "unless significant changes in the health-care system occur." By contrast the population growth for last year has been estimated at about 1.2 percent by the Census Bureau.
Adding to Business Costs
The latest projections are higher than those offered by the Commerce Department in December 1991, when it said health spending would rise 12 percent to 13 percent a year in the coming five years.
If the new projections are accurate, health spending will easily exceed $1 trillion in 1994.


BPI Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Clinton Will Meet Yeltsin, After a Start on U.S. Issues
President-elect Bill Clinton spoke with President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia today, accepting his invitation for an early summit meeting but cautioning that the date would depend on how quickly he and Congress could get to work on his domestic agenda.
The invitation and Mr.
Clinton's response underscored the sharply different political timetables on which the two leaders are operating.
Mr.
Yeltsin has a strong incentive to bond quickly with the new American administration, and Mr.
Clinton, an incentive not to seem to be following in Mr.
Bush's footsteps by traveling abroad when problems need to be addressed at home.


Newer of the 2 Smiths Gets His Feet on the Ice
Ron Smith felt a bit better about accepting his new position as interim coach of the Rangers after he spoke yesterday morning to Roger Neilson, his mentor and, suddenly, his predecessor.
"He was very, very supportive," said Smith, before his debut ended in a 3-3 tie with the Devils at Madison Square Garden.
"Roger's always been a class hockey guy with me."


Blockbuster President Resigns
The Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation said yesterday that it had undertaken a corporate reorganization that would separate the company into several divisions to manage its recent acquisitions.
In addition, the company said its president and chief operating officer, Joseph R. Baczko, had resigned, effective immediately.
It said Mr.
Baczko planned to form a retailing venture in which Blockbuster, among others, would invest.
Mr.
Baczko did not return phone calls yesterday.


He Blames Messier for Ouster
The war of hockey wills that endured for too long between Roger Neilson and Mark Messier ended yesterday in a curt dismissal.
The Ranger coach was demoted.
The superstar played on.
Neilson was transferred to scouting duties and replaced by his 48-year-old disciple, Ron Smith, coach of the Binghamton farm club.
Before exiting, Neilson finally broke his diplomatic silence to blame Messier for the troubles that ended an ultimately disappointing reign.


Democrats Retreat on Expanding Votes of 5 Delegates to the House
On the day before the 103d Congress convenes, House Democratic leaders today watered down a contentious proposal to grant enhanced voting powers to the five delegates representing the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and three territories.
The original proposal would have allowed those representatives to vote on anything except final passage of a bill.
But today Democratic leaders modified it to prevent delegates from casting the deciding vote on any matter on the floor, a response to criticism from Republicans and conservative Democrats, as well as the public.
Embarrassing Defeat Ahead?
Nonetheless the partial retreat fell short of the complete retraction demanded by Republicans, and it still may not save Speaker Thomas S. Foley of Washington from an embarrassing defeat on the first day of the new session.


INSIDE
New in Business Day
The Times introduces new stock market tables today.
The typeface has been changed for legibility, and the tables highlight unusual activity.
Stocks that have risen or fallen by a substantial amount are shown in bold type, and those that have traded heavily are underlined.
An explanation is on page D1, and the tables start on page D9.
House Democrats Retreat
Democratic leaders in the House watered down a proposal to enhance the voting powers of the five delegates from the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and three territories, all of whom are Democrats.
Page A10.
Journey Ends, But Not Fear
A ship carrying a ton of plutonium reached its destination in Japan, completing a long passage with controversy in tow and protesters waiting at the port.
Page A6.
First Home, Then Abroad
President-elect Clinton put his domestic agenda first, but told President Yeltsin of Russia that they could arrange to meet soon.
Page A2.
Rangers Oust Coach
The Rangers dismissed Roger Neilson as coach, and Neilson blamed Mark Messier, his star player, for the team's troubles.
Page B7.


The Times's Stock Tables Take On a Different Look
The New York Times introduces new stock market listings, providing more information than before in a format designed to make the tables easier to understand and easier to read.
The tables, for the New York and American Stock Exchanges and for the Nasdaq over-the-counter market, use underlining to denote stocks that trade in extraordinary volume, and boldfacing for stocks that show large changes in price.


Lonnie Smith to Pirates
The Pittsburgh Pirates apparently believe that if they can't beat Atlanta, some former Braves should join them.
The Pirates yesterday signed free-agent outfielder LONNIE SMITH, the second former Brave they have acquired since their National League playoffs loss to Atlanta last October.
Earlier the Pirates signed reliever ALEJANDRO PENA, who was coming off an elbow injury and was having trouble landing a major league job.


Walgreen Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Market Place; Speculators Bet On Waste Permit
ONE of the stock market's biggest gainers during the last month has been a little-known company that has bet its future and millions of dollars on a hole in the ground outside Houston.
The company, Hunter Environmental Services Inc., wants to bury toxic waste in a salt dome near Dayton, Tex., beneath rice fields 30 miles from Houston.
With the pro-environmental Clinton Administration headed for Washington, this might not seem like the best time to be in the business of building hazardous waste sites.
Yet Hunter has made real progress toward obtaining the Holy Grail of the hazardous waste industry -- state and Federal approval for a disposal site.


Schott Given Deadline
Baseball's executive council decided yesterday to give the Cincinnati Reds' owner, MARGE SCHOTT, until Jan. 20 to respond to allegations that she made racial and ethnic remarks.
The four-person committee investigating Schott presented its findings to Schott's lawyer, ROBERT BENNETT, on Dec. 23, and Bennett asked to have until the end of January to respond.
The executive council, which is ruling baseball in the absence of a commissioner, said it will await the response before deciding whether to discipline Schott. (AP)


No Headline
The Rev.
Victor R. Yanitelli, a Jesuit priest who was vicar of 35 Manhattan parishes for the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, died on Saturday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 78 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cardiac arrest brought on by chronic pulmonary disease, said his physician, Dr.
John Guck.


Players Caught in a Crack Down the Middle of the Ice
Adam Graves didn't know how to answer the questions about Mark Messier and Roger Nielson.
He would, by his own admission, walk into battle in front of Messier.
He respects Neilson.
And, like every player in the Rangers' dressing room, he knew that the rift between Messier and Neilson played a key role in the Rangers' decision to demote Neilson yesterday and appoint Binghamton's Ron Smith as interim coach.
So Graves had to wonder about his answers.
Should he back Messier, who said the move was necessary?
Or should he back Neilson, and concede that the players -- Messier included -- didn't do their jobs and Neilson took the fall?


Corrections
An article yesterday about an appointment to the Council of Economic Advisers misstated the affiliation of Laura D'Andrea Tyson.
She is an economist at the University of California at Berkeley, not at Stanford.


Was Neilson Ever King, or Just Messier's Pawn?
Among Roger Neilson's sins against Mark Messier was daring to call a meeting of team elders last week and not inviting Messier.
This is one reason Neilson today is the ex-coach of the Rangers and Messier is still the captain.
"Our relationship obviously deteriorated," Messier said yesterday, after Neilson was dismissed.
"Having meetings like that behind my back obviously didn't help."


Corrections
An article yesterday about informal Senate consideration of President-elect Bill Clinton's Cabinet choices referred incorrectly in some editions to the position offered to Donna E. Shalala, chancellor of the University of Wisconsin.
She has been chosen to be Secretary of Health and Human Services, not Housing and Urban Development.


Career Educator Sworn In as Commissioner in New Jersey


Citicorp Sells 2 Quotron Divisions to ADP
Continuing to retrench from its expansion plans of the mid-1980's, Citicorp has sold two small divisions of its money-losing Quotron Systems to Automatic Data Processing Inc.
ADP, a leading provider of computer services, will buy a Quotron unit that provides financial information terminals to customers outside the United States and one that provides record-keeping services to brokerages.
ADP, based in Roseland, N.J., has operations in both businesses.


Anthony, a Go-Getter, Can Be Called a Starter
Greg Anthony has replaced Doc Rivers as the Knicks' starting point guard.
How long Anthony remains a starter depends on how well he plays, and on how well the Knicks play.
But Rivers's separated right shoulder opened the door for Anthony's promotion, and the second-year guard has seized the opportunity.
Although Rivers is expected to return for the game between the Knicks (18-10) and the Cleveland Cavaliers (18-12) on Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden, Coach Pat Riley said the 25-year-old Anthony would continue to start for an indefinite period.


Stephen Harvey, 43; A Writer On Movies And a Film Curator
Stephen Harvey, associate curator of film at the Museum of Modern Art, died on Friday.
He was 43 and lived in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Harvey died of AIDS-related complications, said Mary Lea Bandy, the director of the department of film at the museum.


Electronic Clearing House reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Services for Layton
A memorial service for J. Preston Layton, a former researcher at Princeton University, will be held on Sunday at 1:30 P.M. in the Princeton University Chapel on the University Campus in Princeton, N.J.
Mr.
Layton died Dec. 3.


Ex-Planner May Head School Unit
Barry Light, a former New York City construction, housing and planning official, is the leading candidate to head the New York City School Construction Authority, city officials said yesterday.
The authority, created by the State Legislature in 1988 to cut red tape that had delayed school construction, commands considerable power because it determines who will build new schools and then oversees their construction.
The Board of Education determines the number of schools and where they will be built.


Getting a Stamp of Approval for Signature Game
When a football game transcends the repetitive blur of a long season, as the Buffalo Bills' 41-38 overtime victory over the Houston Oilers did Sunday, one hopes the announcers are up to the grandeur.
Luckily, NBC's Charlie Jones and Todd Christensen were.
"How many people broadcast forever to get a signature game?" Christensen said.
"And one that's the greatest comeback in football history?"


Freeing Inmates With AIDS in Time to Die
AIDS is now the single greatest cause of death in the New York State prison system and the only comfort in that for Evelyn Valentine, as her life ebbs from the disease at the age of 27, is that she has finally been let out to die at home, back in a Lower East Side project with her mother and baby, not inside the prison infirmary she came to fear.
"I'm a little afraid," Ms.
Valentine admitted, bedridden but in her best dress for visitors.
"I'm not getting better." Her dark-eyed stare of confusion brightened at the sight and grasp of George, her 18-month-old son, as she gratefully indulged the free time extended to her under a new state parole program for the terminally ill.


Corrections
An article and a chart in Business Day yesterday about the stock market's performance in 1992 gave incorrect closing prices and percentage changes for the stocks of Walt Disney, Caterpillar, Procter &amp; Gamble and J. P. Morgan, which are among the 30 issues that make up the Dow Jones industrial average.
A corrected chart appears today on page D2.


Sihanouk Pulls Out of U.N. Peace Plan, Citing Politcal Strife
In a setback for the peace effort in Cambodia, Prince Norodom Sihanouk said today that he would no longer cooperate with the United Nations operation there or with the Cambodian Government because of violence against political parties preparing for elections in his country.
The Prince, Cambodia's head of state and its former king, said in a letter to Yasushi Akashi, head of the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia, that he made his decision "in light of the extreme gravity and persistent continuation of the crimes perpetrated" against a political party aligned with his family.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
2.66
3.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.15
3.07
3.85
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.28
3.27
3.86
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.27
6.40
6.46
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.32
7.39
7.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.38
8.59
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.39
6.68
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Gold Contract Prices Drop To Lowest Level in 7 Years
Gold futures prices fell to their lowest level in seven years yesterday, continuing a downward spiral that began in 1990.
Pushed down by a rising dollar, gold for January delivery dropped by $4.70 an ounce on the Commodity Exchange in New York yesterday, to $328.10.
The more actively traded February contract also dropped $4.70, to $328.40.
In London, gold was selling at $328.25 an ounce at the afternoon fixing, a drop of $4.75 an ounce from its close on Dec. 30.


Mercury Finance Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hearing Is Delayed In Wachtler Case
A Federal magistrate in Newark agreed yesterday to delay court proceedings for Sol Wachtler, the former Chief Judge of the New York State Court of Appeals, who was arrested in November on harassment and extortion charges, a spokesman for the United States Attorney's office in Newark said.
The spokesman, Dick Laventhol, said Federal Magistrate Stanley R. Chesler approved a motion by Mr.
Wachtler's lawyers to delay a hearing scheduled for tomorrow until Feb. 5.
Mr.
Wachtler's lawyer, Charles A. Stillman, requested the delay, saying that more time was needed for "medical testing and treatment."


Accused School Head Hadn't Been Screened
To the Editor:
We are deeply saddened by the extremely serious accusations of sexual abuse against the director of an East Harlem junior high school for children at risk (news articles, Dec. 22 and 23).
No one should be able to violate the trust of students.
But it should be noted that the position, teacher-director, held by the person charged with sexual misconduct is a title in violation of both New York State and New York City Board of Education regulations.


Oxygen Loss Causing Concern in Biosphere 2
OXYGEN levels within the miniature world of Biosphere 2 in Arizona have dropped more than 28 percent since four men and four women were sealed inside the ecological experiment in September 1991, and no one knows why.
Project leaders, expecting the decline to continue, have made arrangements to pump tons of pure oxygen into the 3.15 acres of glass domes if the eight inhabitants of the $150 million experiment begin to languish.


Nearer Than Somalia
To the Editor:
Re: "Somalia? In the South Bronx, They Ask Why not Aid Us" (news article, Dec. 14):


From Fly to Man, Cells Obey Same Signal
THE proper study of mankind is man, but molecular biologists have always assumed this goal had to be approached by studying simpler organisms first, like bacteria, worms, fruit flies and mice.
To their surprise and delight, they are now learning that nature has provided a few striking short cuts in the form of mechanisms that are almost identical across the living kingdom from worms to humans.
One mechanism whose universalism has only recently become clear is a vital signaling system in which cells respond to messages controlling their fate.
The system works essentially the same way in determining the development of certain biological functions in worms, mice and humans.
And in each case, the molecules that respond to the signals are also molecules known to cause cancer when they go awry.


Gene Link Seen in Drug Abuse and Depression
IT has long been known that certain forms of depressive illness are genetically transmitted and that addictions to alcohol and drugs tend to run in families.
Now, researchers at the National Institute of Mental Health have found evidence of a genetic link between depression and substance abuse.
The link would mean that if one person in the family suffers from severe depression, other genetically related family members may be at risk not only of developing depressive illness but also of becoming addicted to alcohol or drugs.


Hope and Constraint
The scale of the initiatives proposed yesterday by Mayor David N. Dinkins in his State of the City address demonstrated the large gap between what Mr.
Dinkins would surely like to do for many poor and working-class New Yorkers and what the constraints of the city's fiscal circumstances will allow.
The annual address is traditionally upbeat and self-congratulatory, and seldom more so than in an election year.
The speech provides a mayor with an opportunity to court constituencies by offering bold new programs, often tailored to meet the needs of people whose support could prove crucial in the mayoral primaries in September and the general election in November.


By Design; For Sales Hunters
Shopping at sale time is irresistible.
This year, though, with significant fashion changes in the air, it's necessary to fine-tune your antenna for signals about what fashions will last.
Look for long skirts.
They are here for at least the foreseeable future.
So are designer clothes with long, fluid lines; almost anything from Donna Karan to Karl Lagerfeld fits in this category, as do avant-garde creations from designers like Comme des Garcons or Yohji Yamamoto.


Mr. Dinkins's Hopeful Vision
Mayor David Dinkins of New York laid out some reasonable plans and priorities in his State of the City address yesterday.
Relief from taxes and regulations for small businesses.
Longer library hours.
More after-school community centers.
More community-based health clinics.
More day care, more programs for infants and children, more help for battered women.
The speech was the Mayor's opening re-election shot, and he used it to underscore his long-held priorities -- fiscal stability, public safety, health care and the welfare of children -- and explain how he wanted to build on them.


Rule Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


A '93 That Bulls Might Like to Forget
Forecasts about 1993 are prevalent on Wall Street, and they are generally bullish.
They may be right, but optimistic forecasts have long been staples of financial prognosticating.
The Financial Times of London, celebrating its 100th anniversary of printing on pink paper, yesterday reprinted its first such paper, from Jan. 2, 1893.
"Advices received here from Chicago and Boston are very bullish in tone," wrote the paper's New York correspondent.
"The general trade of the country continues active and the prospects for the coming year are considered brilliant."


County by County, a Fight Against Bias
Pradip Kothari still sees the pickup truck riding around town on its enormous tires now and then, and the truck still carries the hand-drawn sneer in the rear window: Dot Buster.
The message, a reference to the bindi, or marriage mark, that some women of Mr.
Kothari's Hindu faith wear on their foreheads, is one of a number of slurs and attacks Mr.
Kothari has endured over the last couple of years.
Once, pellets were shot through the plate-glass windows of his travel agency here; on two other occasions, the windows were shattered with beer bottles.


Seton Hall Gets Tough In Late Going
At the end of the game, Jerry Walker was pointing to the bruises and cuts he had received, as if they were small badges won during a harrowing skirmish.
But he was smiling broadly.
This is the Big East, just the way Walker and Seton Hall like it.


Corrections
A report in the Press Notes column on the Media Business page yesterday about a lawsuit by The Old Farmer's Almanac against New York magazine referred incorrectly to the Federal judge involved.
He was Pierre N. Leval.


Diner With Empty Seats: New Road Saps Business
YOU can find a seat most mornings now at Spag's Cantina, a rare event when Main Street was a major highway.
Truckers who used to stop in Spag's for coffee on the way to or from Interstate 287 no longer plod through downtown Madison.
They use New Jersey's newest stretch of highway -- which zips past old Route 24 in Chatham, Madison and Morris Township to Interstate 287 just north of Morristown.


Dow Rises 8.11 but Small Stocks Decline
The opening trading day of 1993 immediately reversed the trends that closed 1992, as the Dow advanced yesterday while smaller stocks fell.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 8.11, or 0.25 percent, to 3,309.22, but the Nasdaq composite average of over-the-counter stocks was off 5.15, or 0.76 percent, to 671.80.


Pecota Going to Braves
Infielder BILL PECOTA yesterday agreed to a two-year guaranteed contract with the Atlanta Braves.
The agreement calls for Pecota to get $675,000 in 1993 and $575,000 in 1994.
He could collect $300,000 more in performance bonuses.
Pecota, 32, hit .227 with two home runs and 26 r.b.i. for the Mets last season.
He played mainly third base and shortstop in 117 games. (AP)


Treasury Bonds and Notes Soar
Prices of Treasury bonds and notes soared yesterday on the first day of trading in the new year, sending the yield on the 30-year bond down to 7.32 percent, its lowest level since the beginning of October.
The quick drop in interest rates, if it holds, is likely to spur a surge in new corporate and municipal issues as state and local governments, international agencies and corporations all try to take advantage of the positive environment.
Both the World Bank and the Province of Ontario said yesterday that they were planning new issues as early as this week that could top $1 billion each.


1-Year Pact for Burks
Outfielder ELLIS BURKS, let go by the Boston Red Sox last month, agreed yesterday with the Chicago White Sox on a $500,000, one-year contract with bonus clauses that could raise his income to $2.05 million.


JURY POOL SMALL FOR BEATING TRIAL
Foreshadowing the possible difficulty of selecting a jury in the civil rights trial of four police officers charged in the beating of Rodney G. King, only 230 prospective jurors out of an initial pool of 4,482 said they would be willing to be sequestered in a trial that could last at least two months, a Federal judge said today.
The judge, John G. Davies of Federal District Court, said the positive responses had been received from letters of inquiry sent out last month.


Northwest Is Laying Off 1,043 More to Cut Costs
In a continuing effort to cut costs and conserve cash, Northwest Airlines said yesterday that it was laying off 1,043 workers, or about 2 percent of its work force of 47,000.
The airline, which early last month canceled or deferred the delivery of $6.2 bilion worth of aircraft and arranged $250 million in new loans to strengthen its finances, has been struggling to get through a period of low passenger traffic.


Business Digest
Companies
Salomon settled compensation claims of two former executives who resigned following the Treasury bidding scandal.  [ Page D1. ]


Review/Music; 'Tosca' Has New Singers In All Its Leading Roles
As "Tosca" nears the end of its season's run at the Met on Saturday, there are new singers in all the major roles.
On Friday night, Anna Tomowa-Sintow sang Tosca for the first time at the Met; her performance cannot be counted a success.
The role requires a reserve of power that Ms.
Tomowa-Sintow no longer seems to have available.
She barely got to the end of "Vissi d'arte," producing a weak and colorless tone.
Her acting, uneventful most of the evening, became distractingly peculiar at the end: she shrieked in horror a moment before, rather than after, shaking Cavaradossi's body, then ran up the stairs to the parapet well before her pursuers appeared on stage.
If Tosca had such psychic powers, she would not have got herself into this whole mess.
The other singers did better.
James Morris produced a powerful and slyly nuanced Scarpia, managing to hold his own amid the mayhem of Franco Zeffirelli's first-act staging.
The all-important words "Va, Tosca" were not spat out as usual but enunciated with dandyish precision.
The opera works better if Scarpia is something more than a brutal madman.
Lando Bartolini made for a loud and stiff Cavaradossi, not at all subtle but a marked improvement over the dramatically inept Luciano Pavarotti who sang earlier in the season.


BE Aerospace reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Israelis Say Arab Informant Killed His Shin Bet Handler
The police said today that an Arab informant from the militant Islamic group Hamas was responsible for the slaying on Sunday of an agent of the Israeli security service Shin Bet.
The police did not identify the informant but said he had been scheduled to meet with the agent, Haim Nahmani, who was his handler.
They said several people had been arrested in connection with the attack, including relatives of the informer and of a suspected accomplice.
Shin Bet relies on a network of Palestinian informants to monitor anti-Israeli activity in the occupied territories.


Review/Dance; A Gracious Sugarplum Fairy in a New 'Nutcracker' Cast
George Balanchine's production of "The Nutcracker" worked its magic once again when the New York City Ballet danced it on Sunday afternoon at the New York State Theater.
As usual, the children in the audience gasped at its fantastical stagecraft.
But what made the performance especially interesting for grownups was the opportunity to see a new cast in the leading roles.
The Sugarplum Fairy can be interpreted in several ways.
Some dancers turn her into a dainty sprite.
Monique Meunier, in contrast, resembled a glamorous and gracious hostess presiding over an elegant party.
She was especially at ease in the choreography's grandly scaled sequences.
Although she made the jewel-like steps in her solo clear, they could have been sharper and more sparkling.
But her pas de deux with Erlends Zieminch had a spaciousness marred only by an apparent tension in her neck and shoulders.


Washington State Court Refuses to Halt Execution of Child Killer


Music Notes; Kurt Weill Edition To Fill 45 Volumes
It would be an exaggeration to say that Kurt Weill's nontheatrical works have become comfortably established in the mainstream repertory.
But that prospect is far stronger now than it was at the start of the 1980's, when something of a Weill revival got under way.
And now a new project -- a complete edition of the composer's music, to be published under the auspices of the Kurt Weill Foundation for Music -- could push this rich body of work more firmly into the spotlight.
Over the last decade, several of Weill's stage works -- particularly "The Threepenny Opera," "The Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny" and "Street Scene" -- have taken on new lives in the world's opera houses.
And works that had been fairly obscure, like the two Symphonies, the Violin Concerto and the Cello Sonata, have had multiple recordings.
Other obscure pieces turn up occasionally in chamber, choral and symphonic concerts.
There have also been several scholarly studies of Weill's work, including Kim Kowalke's "Kurt Weill in Europe" and "A New Orpheus," and David Drew's pioneering "Kurt Weill: A Handbook."


DCX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Army Investigating Killings in a Somali Port
The United States Army has begun investigating the killing of a British relief official in the southern port of Kismayu and the discovery of 15 bodies in a grave outside the city.
Diplomats and witnesses say there was a massacre in Kismayu just before American troops landed in Mogadishu, the Somali capital, on Dec. 9.


New Pickup Is Displayed By Chrysler
With a bow to the styling of over-the-road big-rig trucks, the Chrysler Corporation today publicly displayed a prototype of a full-size pickup truck it plans to start building this summer.
The 1994 Dodge Ram pickup will be the first mechanically updated vehicle of its kind from Chrysler in 22 years, a period in which the Ford Motor Company and the General Motors Corporation dominated the pickup market.
Chrysler's new pickup has already received strong positive reviews from several automotive enthusiast magazines, suggesting that it has the potential to be a strong seller.
Chrysler's two previous introductions of all-new vehicles were big successes: the Jeep Grand Cherokee sport utility vehicle early last year and the L/H midsize sedans more recently.
More Affluent Truck Buyers
"Affluent people want to take risks with a somewhat different design, and these are the people who more and more are buying trucks to make statements," said Ken Zino, the Detroit editor of Road &amp; Track magazine.


Talent Hunt for Next Expansion Teams
If the National Hockey League's new franchises in Miami and Anaheim accept a formula that is under consideration, they will benefit from a liberalized expansion draft that is intended to make them respectable and competitive in their inaugural season.
Under the formula, each existing team could protect one goalie, five defensemen and nine forwards.
Teams like the Rangers, who have two highly regarded goalies, would lose one.
Teams like the Islanders and the Devils, who have depth on defense, would risk losing players good enough to play on most teams.
The expansion formula could spark a flurry of trades as teams with stockpiles of talent seek to trade volume for quality.


Baseball; Jackson Makes the Hall of Fame on First Swing
Reggie Jackson, whose productive and prodigious hits backed his boasts of being "the straw that stirred the drink," was elected to baseball's Hall of Fame yesterday on his first attempt.
Jackson, who helped three different teams win 10 division championships in a 12-season span, didn't reach the record 98.8 percent vote Tom Seaver received a year ago, but he was named on 93.6 percent of the ballots, the 10th-highest percentage ever gained in the voting, by members of the Baseball Writers Association.


Aground, Tanker Spills Oil on Shetland Islands Coast
A tanker loaded with 26 million gallons of crude oil was impaled on the rocks off Scotland's remote Shetland Islands tonight, battered by hurricane force winds and heavy seas and spilling oil along a rugged, cliff-lined coast that is home to one of Europe's largest seabird and wildlife colonies.
Rescue tugs and crews flying helicopters into the teeth of 80-mile-an-hour winds managed early today to pluck all 34 crewmen from the decks of the foundering Braer, an 18-year-old tanker, but conservationists said they feared an ecological disaster if oil slicks from the broken ship spread into the craggy bays that offer winter sanctuary to birds and sea otters.


Former Head of New York Library Is Mourned


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.19
3.60
2.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.15
3.74
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.25
3.28
3.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.29
6.27
6.39
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.33
7.32
7.39
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.35
8.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.34
6.35
6.66
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


METRO DIGEST
THE NEW MULTIPLE CHOICE OF HEALTH CARE
In the new era of managed health care, more patients are restricted in their choice of doctors and hospitals, and insurers increasingly tell doctors what procedures are worth doing and limit the fees doctors can charge.
People who must adjust to managed care, like the employees at Randall Decorators, in New Dorp, Staten Island, are reacting with frustration and fear, but sometimes with relief.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY
NEW AIDS DEFINITION RAISES CONCERNS
As New York begins the use of an expanded definition of AIDS, health officials and advocates for people with H.I.V. are debating how to insure not only an accurate count of new AIDS cases, but confidentiality and timely medical treatment for the patients behind the numbers.
The definition is expected to almost double the number of new cases reported nationwide this year, identifying many cases among women and drug users who had been left out under the old definition.
B3.


Three Die in Police Chase
Three motorists were killed about 11 P.M. last night in Queens when a car fleeing from a police chase struck another vehicle in St.
Albans.
Sergeant Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman, said an anti-crime unit was chasing a vehicle believed to have been involved in a robbery.
The car being chased smashed into a second vehicle at Guy Brewer Boulevard and North Conduit Avenue, killing the driver of the first car and two people in the car it struck.


Maybe a Cheaper Way to Scrub Smoke
Acid scrubbers on coal plants are effective but expensive.
They typically need big vessels made of special expensive steel, because ordinary steel would be eaten away by the captured acid.
And it costs money to dispose of the resulting liquid wastes, too.
But the Tennessee Valley Authority believes that a system it is testing at its Shawnee plant, near Paducah, Ky., will cut the cost of acid scrubbers by at least 25 percent.
The technique, called gas suspension absorption, was developed by Airpol Inc. of Teterboro, N.J., and subsidized by the Energy Department's Clean Coal Technology program.


New Tower for Austrian Cultural Institute


Dow Off 1.35, t 3,307.87, in Heavy Trading
Investors fled medical and consumer stocks yesterday for some energetic cyclical and technology issues, but their flight left the market averages little changed.
The Dow fell 1.35 points, to 3,307.87, on heavy volume, but Big Board advances outnumbered declines.


No Headline
Leadership should not be confused with either unilateralism or universalism.
We need not respond by ourselves to each and every outrage of violence.
The fact that America can act does not mean that it must. -- PRESIDENT BUSH.  [ A6:3. ]


New Area Code in Pennsylvania


Review/Television; A Tennessee Williams Period Piece
Written in 1958, Tennessee Williams's "Suddenly, Last Summer" survives today like some threatened species of rain-forest vegetation.
The imagery is lush, the language luscious.
A new BBC production, directed by Richard Eyre of the National Theater, carefully treats the one-act play as if it were preserved under glass, safe from any gusts of invention that might prove fatal.
A "Great Performances" presentation, it can be seen tonight at 9 on Channel 13.
The 1959 movie "Suddenly, Last Summer," starring Katharine Hepburn, Elizabeth Taylor and Montgomery Clift, was an adaptation by Gore Vidal.
Now played by Maggie Smith with her customary steely authority, the wealthy Violet Venable lives in New Orleans, devoted to her dense tropical garden.
She wants a young psychiatrist called Dr.
Sugar (Rob Lowe) to perform a lobotomy on her niece, Catharine Holly (Natasha Richardson).
The previous summer, Catharine had been traveling with Mrs.
Venable's poet son, Sebastian, when he died mysteriously in Spain.
Ever since, according to Mrs.
Venable, Catherine has been babbling horrible lies about Sebastian.
Obviously, the poor creature must be insane, says Mrs.
Venable.


Choice for Commerce Is Reviewed
President-elect Bill Clinton's choice for Commerce Secretary, Ronald H. Brown, plans to disqualify himself from decisions involving companies in which he holds a financial stake or for which he has served as a lawyer, according to a Commerce Department document made public today.
Mr.
Brown will be the first of Mr.
Clinton's prospective Cabinet members to be questioned by Congress; the Senate Commerce Committee has scheduled a hearing on Wednesday to review the nomination.
Mr.
Brown, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, has also been a lobbyist for many major American and Japanese corporations.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  ULTIMATUM TO IRAQ POSSIBLE


Corrections
A credit on Nov. 7 with a drawing of a rejected entry in a competition for a new Staten Island Ferry terminal omitted the illustrator's name.
It is Lee Dunnette.
A letter from the illustrator, dated Nov. 29, was delayed in reaching the editors.


Astronomers Discover Evidence of Black Hole at Galaxy's Core
Astronomers reaching to part the dusty veil obscuring the mysterious mass at the center of the Milky Way galaxy have produced new evidence for the existence there of an extremely massive black hole, something so dense that its gravity prevents the escape of light.
A team of astronomers from the University of Arizona in Tucson reported today that they had detected faint infrared emissions from a point at the galactic core that is the source of a powerful radio signal possibly produced by forces surrounding a black hole.
The scientists said the infrared emissions were consistent with those expected from a black hole with a mass equivalent to a million suns.


Token Clerk Fatally Shot In Subway
A 41-year-old token-booth clerk who spent his spare time caring for his blind wife and refurbishing the house that has been in his family for three generations was found shot to death yesterday in a Brooklyn subway station in what apparently was a robbery, the police said.
The body of Russell Manzo was discovered about 2:30 A.M. by a transit police officer, Richard Handel, in the booth where he worked in the Neptune Avenue-Van Sicklen station of the F line in Coney Island, said Al O'Leary, a transit police spokesman.


TIMEX LICENSES ITS BRAND FOR A LINE OF CLOCK-RADIOS
The Timex Corporation of Middlebury, Conn., has for the first time licensed its name for a line of clock-radio products manufactured by SDI Technologies Inc. of Jersey City, which makes audio equipment sold under the Soundesign brand.
The new Timex line is scheduled for shipment in June.
Timex, the market leader in watches, has manufactured products other than watches, including computers, weight scales and heart monitors, but this marks the first time the company has licensed its brand to another manufacturer.
A spokeswoman for Timex said the licensing agreement reflected a more aggressive marketing strategy at the company.


Campus Journal; Amid Women, a Male Outpost Falls
For nearly a century, women have enrolled at Simmons College seeking what they viewed as the inherent benefits of a single-sex education: classrooms where women express their views without trepidation, organizations to which women not only belong but also lead, and an environment where women can set goals without concern for a "glass ceiling."
For that reason, the office of the college's president has long caused considerable consternation among students: since 1899, when Simmons was founded as a college to prepare women for the workplace, its president has always been a man.


Public &amp; Private; The Lapel Pin Thing
To: President-elect Clinton Re: the Inaugural Dear Bill,


Islanders Go Quietly Against Nordiques
An early inundation of Quebec's goaltender, Ron Hextall, provided an early lead for the Islanders tonight at Nassau Coliseum.
But their inability to maintain any semblance of pressure made Hextall's life simpler for the remaining 58 minutes and led to a 2-1 loss to the Nordiques that could have lulled the 9,168 spectators on hand into slumber were it not for repeated interruptions by the raucous sound system and scoreboard noise-meter.
The home club's slogan promises "the New Ice Age," but matters on the home front grew positively glacial as the minutes waned and Quebec completed its 11th road victory in a season of surprising resurgence.


Revitalizing Congress
In the excitement of greeting a new Presidency and ending the standoff between White House Republicans and Congressional Democrats, it is too easy to forget that the 102d Congress adjourned in a blaze of scorn for its inefficiency as much as its scandals.
The 103d, sworn in yesterday, has more to do than legislate.
It must also restore public faith in Congress.
The House has 110 new members -- the most since 1948.
The Senate will have 15.
Both houses have more women than ever before, and the House has record numbers of blacks and Hispanics.


Francis Kinney, 77, A Yacht Design Expert
Francis S. Kinney, a naval architect and authority on yacht design, died Monday at the Nesconset Nursing Center in Nesconset, L.I.
He was 77 and had lived in Lloyd Harbor, L.I., for more than 50 years.
Mr.
Kinney died of complications from Alzheimer's disease, said a son, Jeremy F. Kinney, of Denver.


Books of The Times; Strategies for Treating the Nation's Drug Scourge
Reckoning  Drugs, the Cities and the American Future  By Elliott Currie  405 pages.
Hill &amp; Wang. $25.
The Making of a Drug-Free America
Programs That Work
By Mathea Falco
255 pages. Times Books. $22.


Chronicle
KING HUSSEIN of Jordan flew his own plane home to Amman from England yesterday after a monthlong trip that included his first medical checkup since undergoing cancer surgery last year.
The King, who is 57, waved to family members and Government officials as his Tristar jet taxied to the main terminal at the Marka Military Base near Amman, The Associated Press said.
He was accompanied by QUEEN NOOR, his American-born wife, and four of his children.


Bus With Japanese Fired On As Egypt's Violence Mounts
Suspected Muslim militants fired shots at a bus carrying Japanese visitors in southern Egypt today, extending attacks that have dealt a heavy blow to the nation's $3 billion tourist industry, its most important source of revenue.
Authorities said none of the 20 Japanese aboard the bus were hurt.
The Japanese were being driven back to Cairo from Luxor, the location of majestic Pharaonic temples and tombs, when their bus was sprayed with bullets, which the police said missed.


Bass and Uribe Sign
The Houston Astros signed two free agents yesterday, agreeing to one-year contracts with outfielder KEVIN BASS and shortstop JOSE URIBE, both of whom began last season with the San Francisco Giants.
Bass, 33, agreed to a $500,000, one-year contract with the chance for $200,000 in bonuses, down from a $1.75 million salary last year, which he closed as a member of the Mets.
Uribe, 31, got a $400,000 deal with the chance for $500,000 in bonuses, down from $1.4 million in 1992.


New Keypad For Apple PC Is Adjustable
Apple Computer on Wednesday will become the first large computer maker to introduce a computer keyboard designed to reduce hand injuries from typing.
But in doing so, the personal computer maker is touching off disputes over whether its keyboard will actually solve the hand problems it is designed to ease and whether the product copies patented technology developed by a small Silicon Valley inventor.
Adjusting the Angle
The Apple Adjustable Keyboard can be split into two pieces to permit a typist to hold his or her wrists in a more natural position.
The keyboard lets the user spread the left- and right-hand sections up to a 30-degree angle to find the most comfortable typing position.
It also includes a palm rest, similar to the ledge introduced recently on the company's Powerbook portable computers.


Metropolitan Diary
JUST IN TIME
Stella, come south.
You're just in time
for the colors of autumn
and crunching leaves,
which come after Christmas
in Florida,
followed by spring
in February.
Pansies, petunias and
poinsettias bloom
for the snowbirds.
We don't miss the apples and pumpkins,
though other things give us pause:
the gourmet part of the grocery store
has Chinese noodles and soy sauce,
hominy grits come with everything
and none of us trust Baptist bagels. ALICE LAURANCE
. . .
Dear Diary:
A contribution for the Who's-on-First folder.
The time: some nights ago, when Channel 13 was winding up its most recent fund drive with a feature on Alistair Cooke.
As is its wont, the station offered assorted premiums according to the levels of contributions -- $100 got you a copy of Mr.
Cooke's book "Alistair Cooke's America."
I succumbed and phoned the number on my screen.
A cheerful type answered and I made my pledge.
Would I like the premium? Yes, I would, and explained what it was.
Pause. "We have an
American
cookbook," she said. I demurred.
She said she would check with her supervisor.
Her supervisor asked me to spell Alistair.
She still sounded dubious but promised to put me down for whatever I might get for the $100 gift.
Will I get "Alistair Cooke's America"?
Will I get a cookbook?
Tune in again.
THOMAS W. STREETER
. . .
Dear Diary:
For years I've enjoyed eating breakfast at a particular coffee shop on the Upper West Side, except when served by a particularly downbeat and unsmiling waitress.
Recently I got around to asking the owner why the waitress was so unfriendly.
"Oh, that's Christina," he said. "She doesn't like to serve people." NYLES E. GRADUS
. . .
Sign, spotted by Peter S. Loomis at the New York Health Club, Crowne Plaza branch, Broadway at 48th Street: ATTENTION MEMBERS  During the week of December 14th, the pool will be painted with an epoxy paint.
There will be fumes in the club.
Please bare with us and we apologize for the inconvenience.
Thank you.
. . .
Dear Diary:
Ducking into Grand Central Terminal to escape a sudden downpour the other day, I thought of my favorite umbrella story.
My father, having left his umbrella on his morning train ride, went down to the Lost and Found and asked if anyone had turned it in.
The man in charge pointed to a shelf of umbrellas and said that those were the most recent ones turned in and did my father see his there.
Spotting a folding black one that resembled his, my father pointed it out.
The fellow asked where he had lost it.
"On the New Haven line this morning," my father said.
The Lost and Found man consulted a tag attached to the umbrella.
"I'm sorry, sir, but this one was abandoned in a telephone booth on the lower level," he said.
"Perhaps if you try back tomorrow. . . . "
Not being a particularly patient person, my father walked back to his office and phoned me, asking if I wouldn't mind stopping by the Lost and Found on my way home to pick up a black folding umbrella.
All I had to do was tell the man that I had left it in a phone booth on the lower level.
That evening I delivered the umbrella to my father and we both had a good laugh.
Although he soon lost that one, too, we never repeated our trick.
And as I waited in the terminal without an umbrella until the rain stopped, I thought of this and smiled.
DOUGLAS RITTER
. . .
Dear Diary:
As soon as I got into the cab I noticed the handwritten sign: "One more accident, lose job!!"
Oh, well. ALAN B. ROSENFELD


Failed I.M.F. Policy
To the Editor:
"Latin Democracy Lives in Rockets' Red Glare" and "Frustrations Blaze a Path For Egypt's Fundamentalists," reports from two distant continents, raise the specter of growing threats and challenges to elected governments (The Week in Review, Dec. 6).
In Caracas, Venezuela, you explain a violent military coup attempt as a function of the corruption of a political system dominated by two parties, both authoritarian and narrowly elitist.
You offer a similar explanation for the growing power of Islamic fundamentalism in Egypt, where a closed political system has reportedly left radicals with few alternatives to terrorist violence.


Bill Would Hold Fed More Accountable Politically
Challenging the autonomy of the Federal Reserve banking system, the chairman of the House Banking Committee introduced legislation today that would hold the central bank more accountable politically for crucial decisions on monetary policy.
Under the proposal, presidents of the Fed's regional banks would be nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate, rather than being selected largely by bankers from within their own ranks, as they are now.
Regional bank heads are among the members of the Fed's Open Market Committee, which makes the Fed's monetary decisions.


A Tale of Red Guards and Cannibals
Newly disclosed confidential government documents suggest that the Cultural Revolution plumbed previously unreported depths of savagery.
The documents, prepared by local government offices in the 1980's, two decades after the events they describe, seem to offer a meticulous record of how Red Guards and Communist officials in one province not only tortured their victims to death but also ate their flesh.


Basketball; Knicks Turn To Defense And Break Cavs' Spell
The Knicks needed any kind of victory against the Cleveland Cavaliers, but the one they got last night was special.
Trailing by 10 points with just over 11 minutes to play in the fourth quarter, New York rallied for an emotional 95-91 victory at Madison Square Garden, snapping a six-game losing streak against Cleveland.


Book Notes
Literary Chain Letter
People complain a lot these days about rising book prices.
Apparently, some people somewhere decided to do something at the grass roots about blunting the cost.


Prosecutors Say Exeter Teacher Had Students Make Sex Videos
The case of a former Phillips Exeter Academy teacher convicted of possession and distribution of child pornography has become a more serious problem for the school with the disclosure in court documents filed last week that the teacher assigned his students to make sexually explicit videos that he then edited into a tape for himself.
In addition, the teacher, Larry Lane Bateman, secretly videotaped students in their bathrooms and bedrooms and later spliced these tapes into pornographic films, the United States Attorney's office said in a pre-sentencing memorandum made public over the weekend.
The memo said that Mr.
Bateman, who is 51 years old, had set up a video camera in the campus residence where he was the house master and taped the students.


A Crush of New Issues Is Waiting
An avalanche of new issues is waiting to fall on the corporate bond market, but it is not clear whether such a crush of new securities will overwhelm investors, forcing prices lower and yields higher.
The rush into the corporate market is a race to take advantage of the low level of interest rates, which were brought down even more by a sudden rally on Monday.
While the market backed off a little yesterday, very little was given up and yields rose only slightly.


Poor Cooperation Deflates F.B.I. Report on Hate Crime
The Federal Government has released its first national report on hate crimes, but both law enforcement officials and civil rights groups say it is virtually useless because many local governments did not cooperate.
The report covering 1991 was the first under a 1990 law meant to combat hate crime by improving the reporting of it.
But reporting the information was made voluntary, and fewer than one in five of the nation's 16,000 law enforcment agencies provided numbers, officials said today.


A.T.&amp; T. to Cut Price of Videophone
In a tacit acknowledgment that it was charging too much, A.T.&amp; T. said yesterday that it planned to cut the price of its Videophone 2500 by a third, to $1,000, and would send $500 rebates to customers who had already bought the phone.
Price is an important factor in expanding the still-nascent market for such devices, because two phones are required for a video conversation.
Yesterday's move would reduce the price of a pair of the A.T.&amp; T. Videophone 2500 from $3,000 to $2,000, roughly the price of two camcorders.


TEAM FINDS BONES OF EARLY DINOSAUR
Scientists said today that they had discovered the 225-million-year-old remains of the world's most primitive dinosaur, a dog-sized creature that they said would shed new light on the dinosaurs' early family tree.
Paleontologists said the newly discovered dinosaur, which they named Eoraptor, was just a couple evolutionary steps away from the common ancestor of all dinosaurs.


Auto Rally
Auto stocks continued a rally yesterday that has lifted them much faster than the rest of the market since October's bottom.
Chrysler has been the strongest, but Ford and even General Motors have out-performed the market as well.
Greater efficiency, especially at Chrysler and Ford, has prepared them to exploit the economy's turnaround.


Corrections
A brief report on Sunday in the Westchester Weekly's "This Week" column about a folk concert by Jack Hardy at the Treestar Coffeehouse in Mount Kisco gave an incorrect date.
He will appear at 8 P.M. on Jan. 16, not this Saturday.


Woman, 27, Raped in Central Park Attack
A 27-year-old woman in New York to visit friends was sexually assaulted by a man with a knife as she was walking in Central Park on Monday afternoon, the police said yesterday.
The woman told the police that at 3 P.M. she was walking near the East Drive near East 62d Street -- usually a fairly well-traveled area, between Wollman Rink and the Children's Zoo -- when she was forced to go to a secluded area, where she was raped, the police said yesterday.


Bush Vetoes Not Forgotten As 103d Congress Convenes
The 103d Congress convened today and Democratic leaders promptly set about establishing legislative priorities to demonstrate that they can work with a Democratic President by re-passing bills President Bush vetoed.
A bill requiring employers to grant workers unpaid leaves for family and medical emergencies emerged at the top of the list.
Both Houses scheduled early action on it, and President-elect Bill Clinton's choice as chief of staff, Thomas F. McLarty 3d, called for action "as early in the session as possible."


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The President-Elect; Clintons Pick Private School In Capital for Their Daughter
President-elect Bill Clinton, who has made improving public education a priority throughout his political career, announced today that he was sending his daughter, Chelsea, to an expensive private school attended by many children of Washington's power elite.
In explaining the Clintons' decision to send 12-year-old Chelsea to the Quaker-run Sidwell Friends school, where annual tuition is $10,700, Mr.
Clinton's spokesman, George Stephanopoulos, said the family believed it had to do what was best for her education.
She is currently in the eighth grade at a public junior high in Little Rock, and will begin classes at Sidwell in Northwest Washington later this month.


Dinkins Disputed on Plan For Residency for Officers
City and state officials said yesterday that Mayor David N. Dinkins had the power to change the way police officers are selected to favor city residents, as he proposed in his State of the City address on Monday.
But the police officer's union disagreed, saying that the state Legislature would ultimately have to decide.


Bush, in West Point Valedictory, Offers Principles on Use of Force
President Bush warned today that the United States must not be drawn by its new dominant position into assuming a role as "the world's policeman."
In remarks to 4,000 cadets at the United States Military Academy, the President said the United States must not ignore international problems.
But his was a message of caution, dwelling on the importance of prudence and long deliberation in deciding where and when to use military force.


Mr. Yeltsin on Line One
Boris Yeltsin telephoned on Monday to invite Bill Clinton to an early summit meeting.
Mr.
Clinton took the call but put the request on hold.
He'd love to meet, he said, but not until he presented his domestic agenda and persuaded Congress to get cracking on urgent business at home.
It was the right response.
Mr.
Clinton is well aware that the call conveyed more than a polite invitation.
It signaled Russia's continuing need for American help and reassurance as it lurches toward democracy.
It was a reminder, too, that Mr.
Clinton cannot long ignore pressing matters of foreign policy.


Review/Television; Recycling a 60's Issue: LSD Is Popular Again
In case you've run out of things to worry about, "48 Hours" reports tonight that LSD is back.
As the program reminds viewers who are too young or too old to remember, lysergic acid diethylamide, a k a acid, was a snack of choice in the drug-happy 1960's.
Those once prominent proselytizers for psychedelic delicacies, Timothy Leary and Ken Kesey, show up to reminisce about the heady days of turning on, tuning in and dropping out.
The problem with LSD was that while some trippers just dropped out, others freaked out.
Tonight's horror stories indicate that heavy doses can still send users into psychotic states, producing what one doctor calls instant insanity.
Nobody seems certain what, if anything, the drug does to the brain, but the unsettling effects have, of course, been given a fancy name, post-hallucinogenic sensory disorder.


New York Fed's President Resigning
E.
Gerald Corrigan, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, announced yesterday that he would resign in August after more than eight years in that post and 25 years with the Federal Reserve.
Mr.
Corrigan, 51, said at a news conference that he planned to seek a job in private industry where "I'll try to limit myself to working six days a week, instead of seven." But he did not elaborate on his career plans.


Microsoft Names Apple Official for a Data Base Business
The Microsoft Corporation tapped a top software executive at Apple Computer Inc. today to head up its data base applications business.
Roger Heinen Jr., who has been Apple's senior vice president and general manager of the Macintosh software architecture division, takes the new post of vice president of Microsoft's data base and development tools division, effective Feb. 1.


Personal Health
A CONSCIENTIOUS new mother asked whether she should purchase a $120 thermometer that instantly measures body temperature when placed against the eardrum.
But the mother was asking the wrong question.
The right question is, should the baby's temperature be taken at all, and if so, when?
A second question is, if an infant's or child's temperature is taken, how accurate a reading is necessary?
And third, what, if anything, should be done to reduce a fever?


Despite More Funds, Women Face Barriers to Prenatal Care
BELKIS RODRIGUEZ had no prenatal care when she walked into the emergency room at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York last October in active labor.
At 37, with one other child, Ms.
Rodriguez said she knew she should have received medical care during her pregnancy.
But again and again, she was put on hold when she tried to schedule appointments at a local clinic in the Bronx, and when an appointment was made it was more than a month away.
She missed that appointment, but scheduled another.
Then she moved from the Bronx to Upper Manhattan and missed her new appointment, too.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Steven P. Jobs may have found a way to move Next Inc., his struggling work station company, to center stage in the desktop computer industry.
Next is said to be in talks with Hewlett-Packard about licensing its Nextstep software technology.  [ Page D1. ]
Citibank is altering its lending rules and procedures in hopes of cutting its loan losses.  [ D1. ]


Pro Football; Coughlin Tells Giants He's Not Man for Job
The Giants lost again yesterday when Tom Coughlin, the leading candidate for their head-coaching vacancy, decided to remain at Boston College.
In a news conference on the Boston College campus in Chestnut Hill, Mass., Coughlin said he had talked to George Young, the Giants' vice president and general manager, earlier this week and again yesterday morning.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The Hearings; For Appointees to Cabinet, a List of Dos and Don'ts
As they prepare Cabinet appointees for the confirmation hearings that will begin Wednesday, President-elect Bill Clinton's aides are advising the nominees to follow one guiding principle: be respectful to the Senators and their rules, but divulge as little as possible.
Transition officials said they were not too fearful that Senate investigators would turn up many skeletons, and thus had turned their attention to protocol to insure that the Senators' delicate sensibilities are not offended.


Executive Changes
BARR LABORATORIES, Pomona, N.Y., named Bruce Downey, 45, president, chief operating officer and a member of the board.
Edwin A. Cohen, 60, founder of the generic drug maker, becomes chairman and continues as chief executive.
KEMPER FINANCIAL SERVICES INC., Chicago, named Carla Straeten-Vorhees director of global fixed-income marketing.


Germans Join Boeing In Jet Study
The Boeing Company expects to work with Deutsche Aerospace A.G. to determine the feasibility of building a giant 550- to 800-passenger airliner, a Boeing executive said yesterday.
The executive, John Hayhurst, a vice president of the Seattle-based aerospace company, said Boeing would sign an agreement soon with the German company, a key member of Airbus Industrie, the European consortium that has also been considering building such a large plane.


Ditka's Reign Is Ended By Bears
Mike Ditka, the tantrum-prone coach who awakened the long-dormant Chicago Bears and took them on an emotional 11-year roller-coaster ride that peaked with the 1986 Super Bowl championship, was dismissed yesterday after the team plunged to a 5-11 record, its worst since 1975.
The move, which was announced by the team's president, Mike McCaskey, had been expected and the 53-year-old Ditka came to the news conference prepared, almost.


State of the Art for the State of the State


Nuclear-Plant Debate: Fix or Retire
The corrosion problem that led the Portland General Electric Company to retire its Trojan nuclear plant late Monday will affect more reactors as the years go by, experts say.
And uncertainty about how the Nuclear Regulatory Commission will handle the problem, an issue the utility cited in its decision, could very quickly bring reactor owners to a painful decision: whether to make expensive repairs, or retire their plants, or cut their power ratings.
Corrosion in Tubes
At the Rainier, Ore., plant, thousands of thin-walled metal tubes inside a heat exchanger called a steam generator had corroded.
The N.R.C., which generally requires that such tubes be plugged or lined with a metal sleeve if a crack reaches 40 percent of the thickness of the tube wall, had permitted the company to use a relaxed standard.
It has given similar permission to reactors in Michigan, Alabama and South Carolina.


Salvador Says It Needs More Time to Purge Army
The Salvadoran Government said today that in the interest of national stability it needed more time to carry out a purge of army officers accused of human rights abuses, a major element in the United Nations-brokered accords that ended this country's 12-year civil war.
Political leaders and others familiar with the Salvadoran Government documents delivered to the United Nations today said that only 23 of the more than 100 officers who are supposed to be purged had been ordered out of the army this week.
Under the peace accords, all the officers were to have been dismissed by Dec. 31.


Knicks' Backcourt Puzzle: Can Anthony Fill Bill?
Early in the evening at Madison Square Garden, Lenny Wilkens sat in the first row behind the visitors' bench, watching the Knicks' rookie, Hubert Davis, practice his jump shot.
Davis would dart from a spot near the lane, take a pass from Jeff Van Gundy, the Knicks' assistant coach, and release his shot, a thing of beauty, at the height of his jump.
Wilkens watched all of these jump shots go right to the bottom of the net, and said nothing.
He did happen to notice that the ball seemed to be delivered perfectly time after time.


Officer Shoots an Attacker
An off-duty police officer who was kidnapped and beaten in Brooklyn last night shot and fatally wounded one of his assailants, the police said.
The policeman, a narcotics officer whose name was withheld because of the nature of his work, was forced into his own car, then driven a short distance to the parking lot at 1710 Avenue Y in Sheepshead Bay, where the two men, both of whom had guns, began to beat him, the police said.
The officer identified himself, drew his weapon and shot one of the assailants.
Two revolvers were recovered at the scene, police said.
The officer was treated for cuts and bruises at Coney Island Hospital, the police said.


Former Head of New York Library Is Mourned


352 Haitians Reach Miami, Where U.S. Detains Them
A freighter carrying 352 Haitian refugees sailed into Miami harbor early today, and the authorities quickly took its passengers into custody.
But they were not so quick to say where the refugees would be held.
Coast Guard officials said the ship's passengers would be turned over to the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service.
But spokesmen for that agency said today that there was no room for the latest group at the Krome detention center, where refugees are housed.


Director Of Warhol Museum Is Chosen
Thomas N. Armstrong 3d, the former director of the Whitney Museum of American Art, has been named director of the Andy Warhol Museum, now under construction in Pittsburgh.
Mr.
Armstrong, a well-known figure in the art world, made headlines nearly three years ago when he was dismissed from the Whitney after 15 years as its director.
"Being involved in an important museum from the ground up is a very challenging assignment," Mr.
Armstrong said.
"I hope the Warhol Museum will be a model for other single-artist museums across the country."


Jesse Jackson Set To Talk to Owners
The Rev.
JESSE JACKSON has accepted an invitation to speak to baseball owners during their meeting next Tuesday at Grapevine, Tex., the executive council chairman, BUD SELIG said yesterday.


U.S. Export Panel Is Said to Back Jet-Engine Sale to China Military
After months of debate between the Commerce Department and the Defense Department, an interagency committee reached a tentative agreement today to allow the export of jet engines to the Chinese military, Government officials said.
The interagency group, known as the Policy Coordinating Committee on technology transfers, also considered today whether to allow the sale of 10 crop duster aircraft to Iran and the sale of satellite gear to China.
But no progress was made on resolving either issue, said two Government officials who insisted on anonymity.


Review/Theater; A Performance Montage of East-West Troubles
On a sweeping pictorial canvas, "Deshima" spans four centuries of troubled East-West relations, moving from the first arrival of Dutch trading ships in Japan to the purchase by the Japanese of van Gogh's "Sunflowers" for $39.9 million.
From the perspective of Ping Chong's far reaching performance piece, Japan found a symbolic certification for its world economic supremacy through the acquisition of masterpieces of Western art.
In other words, it has become the land of the rising "Sunflowers."
In previous works like "Kind Ness" and "Nosferatu," Mr.
Chong has dealt incisively with American and European myths and traditions, and in others he has soared into the futuristic.
Rarely has he approached subjects of an Asian nature, a fact for which he fully compensates in "Deshima" (at La Mama Annex).
This is an ambitious attempt to probe ancestral roots as well as ancestral trade routes and to dramatize the reverberations between disparate cultures.
He studies economic as well as political imperialism.
As Mr.
Chong sees it, Japan staked an early claim to most-favored-nation status in Asia.


Hill &amp; Knowlton Settles a Lawsuit
Hill &amp; Knowlton in New York and Capitoline International Group Ltd. in Washington said yesterday that they had reached an out-of-court settlement ending a dispute that generated widespread publicity for the public relations firms.
The settlement calls for Hill &amp; Knowlton to drop a suit against Marcia Katz, Kenneth Rabin and John Seng, who had been senior executives at the company's health-care communications division in New York.


The Pop Life
This Is Not Geology
The world of pop music has definitely been rocking and rolling.
There's been so much activity, in fact, that Rolling Stone magazine decided it was time to publish a third edition of its history of the music.


Chronicle
From Albany come some words of high -- and official -- praise for the Buffalo Bills, who overcame a 32-point deficit in the third quarter of Sunday's game against the Houston Oilers to win, 41-38, in overtime.
In a proclamation issued in Albany yesterday, Gov.
MARIO M. CUOMO anointed the football team "The Comeback Kids."


Computers Advancing Rapidly Back to the Pen
Holding a stylus, Ronjon Nag writes the word "longhand" on a digitizing tablet, an opaque plastic slab with a writing surface the size of a sheet of business stationery.
Mr.
Nag's script "longhand" appears on the screen of his desktop computer, and then almost instantly the word appears above it, this time typed in standard computer text.
Recognizing a person's handwriting and translating it into typeface is no small feat for a computer.
Indeed, the pen-based computers now on the market cannot do it, which is why current users must settle for little more than filling in the blanks on standardized forms or painstakingly printing block letters.
Natural Handwriting
Mr.
Nag, a computer scientist trained at Cambridge University, is the co-founder of Palo Alto-based Lexicus, one of a handful of new companies developing software for recognizing what computer experts call natural or unconstrained handwriting.
Of these start-ups, Lexicus is one of the closest to bringing out a commercial product, which Mr.
Nag hopes will happen in the first half of the year.


Review/Music; Barenboim Spends an Evening At the Piano With Schubert
Occasionally one comes across human beings who seem to have been created by music for music.
Mind, muscles and nerve endings are pre-ordered genetically into a smooth, well-oiled vessel.
Through it, musical impulses flow: unimpeded, natural and direct.
Franz Schubert was such a creature; so, in his subsidiary way, is Daniel Barenboim.
Mr.
Barenboim played the second set of Schubert's piano Impromptus and the B-flat Sonata for a respectful, if flu-ridden, audience at Avery Fisher Hall on Monday night.
It was a program he had performed in Vienna a few days earlier and it is to be repeated this weekend in Chicago.
The pianist has become the busiest of conductors, and these are his only recitals of the season.


When X = Literacy
Malcolm X taught himself to read and write in prison, the hard way.
He copied the dictionary, page by page, struggling to pronounce the words and to commit the definitions to memory.
In his autobiography he writes: ". . . as my word-base broadened, I could for the first time pick up a book and read and now begin to understand what the book was saying. Anyone who has read a great deal can imagine the new world that opened. . . . I never had been so truly free in my life."


Frustration in Boston Over Its Schools
In the year since Mayor Raymond Flynn got his wish and replaced Boston's elected school board with seven of his own appointees, the city's elation over a new beginning for the troubled school system has been replaced by frustration with the slow pace of change.
Much of this frustration has been directed at the superintendent, Lois Harrison-Jones, an administrator with 31 years of experience in the Dallas and Richmond schools who was hired in July 1991 to head the Boston school system, the nation's oldest.


David Wallerstein; Theater Innovator In Midwest Was 87
David B. Wallerstein, an innovator in the movie theater business, died Monday at his home in Chicago.
He was 87.
Mr.
Wallerstein died of cancer, said Chuck Ebeling, a spokesman for the McDonald's Corporation, which Mr.
Wallerstein had served as a board member since 1968.


Before We Let World Bank Squander More
To the Editor:
While we concur with "The World's Poor Need Bill Clinton" (editorial, Dec. 19), that the world's poorest countries need assistance, and that President-elect Clinton should lead the effort, we do not think that the World Bank's International Development Association is the best mechanism for providing this aid.
In "World Bank War on Pollution Faces Ever Sharper Criticism," (news article, Nov. 12), you note growing criticism of the World Bank's environmental and human rights record.


Search for Corporate Home in Melville, L.I., Draws Opposition


An Exciting Day for the Meteorological Crowd


Eating Well
AT least 75 percent of the questions addressed to the food sections of most newspapers are requests for recipes, both those that have appeared in the paper and those that have not.
Another 10 percent are devoted to disagreeing with something a reporter has written and another 5 percent are requests for advice most food writers are not able to dispense.


For First Time Since '65, A State Uses Its Gallows
Going by an Army execution manual dating from the 19th century, the State of Washington hanged Westley Allan Dodd early this morning for killing three children.
It was the nation's first legal hanging in 28 years.
Less than 12 hours after the Washington State Supreme Court had upheld the constitutionality of hanging, a black hood was fitted over the head and shoulders of Mr.
Dodd, a noose was put around his neck, and he dropped through a trap door in front of 16 witnesses, who sat behind a glass window about eight feet from him.


ON SESAME STREET WITH: Jeff Moss; Making a Splash With Children From Morning Till Bathtime
AFTER dinner on any night in any city or town in this country, in practically any house or apartment where there are young children (and in quite a few where there are none), the words and music of Jeff Moss echo off tiled bathroom walls.
Rubber duckie you're the one
You make bath time lots of fun
Rubber duckie I'm awfully fond of you (vo-vo dee-o).


St. John's Goes to Line To Defeat Providence
So far this season, St.
John's had not been a good shooting team from anywhere on the floor.
But last night that changed.
The Redmen hit 53.3 percent of their shots, including a blistering 77.8 percent in the second half, to earn an 86-76 Big East victory over Providence College in Alumni Hall.


TRANSACTIONS
Auto racing
INTERNATIONAL MOTOR SPORTS ASSOCIATION -- Named Daniel D. Greenwood president and chief executive officer.
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Ben McDonald, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Agreed to terms with Travis Fryman, shortstop, on a one-year contract.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Named Bill Livesey vice president of player development and scouting; Kevin Elfering coordinator of scouting; and Eddie Robinson assistant coordinator of scouting.
Football  National Football League  CHICAGO BEARS -- Fired Mike Ditka, coach, and announced he will remain as consultant.
Hockey  National Hockey League  PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Assigned Martin Straka, center, and Jeff Daniels, left wing, to Cleveland of the International Hockey League.
East Coast Hockey League  LOUISVILLE ICEHAWKS -- Traded Terry Virtue, defenseman, to the Wheeling Thunderbirds for Ryhs Hollyman, defenseman.


California Is Preparing for Two New Storms
California, still drying off from an unusually wet and snowy December, was bracing today for two more storms, which are expected to set off mud slides in canyons, flooding in low-lying areas and high waves along the coast.
A warning by the National Weather Service advised residents to monitor radio and television for emergency notices, and a winter storm watch was issued for the Sierra Nevada tonight.


Frustration for O'Neal But Fine Time for Nets
Shaquille O'Neal may be the next best thing since the invention of the automobile, but his great talent and big wallet couldn't help him do two simple things tonight against the Nets: stay out of foul trouble and make free throws.
Once again the Nets were in a close game but this time the result was different, a thrilling 102-99 victory over the Orlando Magic.
New Jersey's games are beginning to look like Indiana Jones movies, rollercoater rides that tease and keep the heart pumping.


New Congressman Picks Old Congressman for Aide
Representative John M. McHugh was elected to Congress last November on the pledge that he would fight as hard as his predecessor, the popular David O'B.
Martin, to keep three upstate New York military bases from closing.
Now, saying he couldn't find anyone better qualified to help him with that task, Mr.
McHugh has hired Mr.
Martin as a $75,000-a-year staff aide.


Medical Less Is More
To the Editor:
Dr.
Robin Motz's concern (letter, Dec. 24), that managed care will result in fewer tests, consultations and procedures, is true.
This is, however, not necessarily a bad thing.
After a career that included traditional fee-for-service and prepaid care, I concluded that the errors of doing too much outweighed those of doing less.


NEC, in Strategy Shift, Is Entering PC Price War
Japan's personal computer market, which has remained remarkably insulated from the fierce price-cutting elsewhere, finally seems to be facing a price war of its own.
The NEC Corporation, which controls more than half the personal computer market here, said today that it would soon introduce a new line of personal computers with prices about half those for its current models.


Morales, Blair Honored
Swimmer PABLO MORALES and skeed skater BONNIE BLAIR, a pair of double gold-medal Olympians in 1992, were named Sportsman and Sportswoman of the year by the United States Olympic Committee yesterday.
Morales came out of retirement to win gold medals in the 100-meter butterfly and as part of the men's 400-meter medley relay team at the Summer Games in Barcelona, Spain.
Blair became the first American woman to win the same event at two consecutive Winter Games when she took the 500 meters at Albertville, France, then added the gold in the 1,000. (AP)


Reporter's Notebook; Bedfellows For a Day: Politeness And Politics
On a shirtsleeve day in January, anything seemed possible.
The 103d Congress convened, and for a couple of hours gridlock gave way to the promise of bipartisan service to the nation.
To be sure, lawmakers had to find something to fight about.
They debated hard over whether the people of Puerto Rico, American Samoa and Washington deserved voting representatives on the floor of the House.
But otherwise, during a stream of parties and ceremonies, Republicans and Democrats embraced, kissed each other's children and even toasted one another's good fortunes at the polls.


Food Notes
Feed a Cold
A ticket to the Caribbean is one way to help dispel a cold.
Empire Kosher Poultry is offering a more economical and traditional remedy.


Chronicle
Count former President JIMMY CARTER among those who think it is counterproductive to boycott Colorado because of the passage of an amendment overturning bans on discrimination based on sexual preference.
Mr.
Carter is planning to ski and take part in other events in Crested Butte, Colo., this month to benefit a charity he founded.
He said his presence there might help opponents of the measure.
Noting that voters in the state's ski-resort areas had voted overwhelmingly against the amendment, Mr.
Carter said on Monday in an interview in The Atlanta Journal-Constitution: "I agree with the Mayor of Aspen who said that when we had racial troubles in the South, people didn't boycott us. They came and tried to help. I think this will help the people fighting the law."


U.S. URGING ALLIES TO THREATEN IRAQ ON ACTION IN SOUTH
The United States has urged its allies to join in threatening Iraq with military action if Baghdad does not remove newly deployed surface-to-air missiles that menace allied warplanes patrolling southern Iraq, Bush Administration officials said today.
American officials have consulted with British, French and Saudi officials over the proposed ultimatum, which could be issued as early as Wednesday.


Tomato Gene Is Submitted For Approval
Bowing to pressure from consumer advocates and celebrity chefs, Calgene Inc. said today that it had asked the Food and Drug Administration formally to approve as a food additive a gene implanted in tomatoes to retard spoilage.
The request came in spite of a May ruling by the F.D.A. that genetically engineered foods do not require special approval or labeling.
But that ruling, and the imminent marketing of Calgene's Flavr Savr tomato, created a storm of protest, including a petition signed by 1,500 chefs across the country, and a threatened boycott of bioengineered foods.
Calgene's tomato, which will be marketed by its Calgene Fresh subsidiary in fresh form and by the Campbell Soup Company in processed forms, contains a gene that slows the ripening process plus the kan(r) gene, which serves as a "marker" to help differentiate the altered product.
A Company's Complaints
"We have elected to ask the F.D.A. to formally apply the comprehensive standards of food additive review to our kan(r) submission, because of continued misrepresentation and public misunderstanding of the scope and rigor of F.D.A. review of new food products," said Roger Salquist, Calgene's chief executive.


United Way Needs a Period of Scrutiny
To the Editor:
Re "United Way: Leaner and Needier" (editorial, Dec. 17): United Way's problems owe less to the recession and past scandal at the fund-raising organization than to its lack of definition and canvassing methods.


The Real Winners in Kenya's Vote
With unseemly haste, Daniel arap Moi was sworn in Monday as Kenya's President only hours after results of a disputed vote were announced.
Domestic protests and a cutoff in foreign aid had forced Mr.
Moi to permit the first multiparty elections in 26 years.
Though the rules were skewed in his favor, 15 members of his Cabinet were defeated and, in a four-way race, Mr.
Moi won only by a plurality, with a claimed 36.7 percent.
This is a considerable moral victory for the opposition, and a vindication of Western pressure.
Mr.
Moi has held office since 1978, having succeeded Kenya's first President, Jomo Kenyatta.
During the cold war, when times were better, Washington tended to view Mr.
Moi as a useful friend despite his autocratic tantrums; he once instructed members of his Cabinet to repeat aloud his wishes like parrots, and more recently vowed to crush his opponents like rats.


John Dorr, Filmmaker And Gallery Owner, 48
John Dorr, a filmmaker and gallery owner, died Friday at Century City Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 48 and lived in West Hollywood, Calif.
Mr. Dorr died of complications of AIDS, said Michael Kaplan, a friend.


Corrections
A front-page chart yesterday about spending on health care in the United States carried an incorrect scale in some copies.
The chart was in trillions, not billions, with $1 trillion at the top.


Schools Across U.S. Cautiously Adding Lessons on Gay Life
New York City's angry debate over including lessons about gay and lesbian families in the public school curriculum has overshadowed a growing movement nationwide: Many of the largest school systems are quietly and cautiously adding such lessons to their curriculums.
New York has taken the most aggressive stance among any school system by asking teachers to mention alternative families and life styles in the curriculum as early as the first grade.
Other places, like Fairfax County, Va., Broward County, Fla., Houston and San Francisco, have avoided an uproar like the one in New York by introducing such issues in later grades and by consulting with parents, physicians, clergymen and other community members in developing the curriculums.


Hewlett And Next Hold Talks
Next Inc., the work station maker founded by Steven P. Jobs, is in discussions with the Hewlett-Packard Company over possibly licensing Next's Nextstep software technology, three executives close to the negotiations said today.
If the talks prove fruitful, Mr.
Jobs will have found a way to move his struggling, five-year-old company to center stage in the desktop computer industry after it was written off by many computer executives.


New Definition for AIDS Arrives, Bringing New Concerns
As New York begins the use of an expanded definition of AIDS this year, health officials and advocates for people with H.I.V. are debating how to insure not only an accurate count of new AIDS cases, but confidentiality and timely medical treatment for the patients behind the numbers.
The new definition, which went into effect New Year's Day, is expected to almost double the number of new cases reported nationwide this year and help health officials better gauge the extent of the AIDS epidemic.


University Puts Off Plan for Mideast Branch
The University of New Haven, which has six campuses in Connecticut and runs undergraduate programs in Russia and in Cyprus, has spent the last several months trying to set up another outpost, this one in the Middle East.
But the site it chose was just over the line in the West Bank territories, which Israel has held since the 1967 Arab-Israeli War.
A State Department official called the plan "very unwise" and said it showed "little sensitivity for the ongoing peace process." University officials said the Israeli Ministry of Education tried to discourage them from scheduling classes for the semester that begins next month.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, an article on Friday about Slovakia's independence misstated the amount of foreign capital invested in the country.
It is $215 million, not $215 billion.


Somali Faction Leader Criticizes U.N. Peace Effort
The Somali peace talks under way here hit a snag today when one of the strongest factions said it had no confidence in the United Nations' ability to help the country and called on the United States to take up the role of mediator among the warring parties.
The faction, the Somali National Alliance of Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, said in a statement that the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, does not understand Somalia's "intricate political problems" and that his approach to peacemaking was "too meddling, too divisive and too secretive to produce any positive result for the betterment of Somalia."


Bosnia's Elderly Fall to a New Enemy: Cold
They lay bundled up in blankets on the bathroom floor as they had died, 10 old people thin as matchsticks.
Each of them remained in their stockinged feet and sweaters and woolen hats, as though the freezing cold that was their final enemy might pursue them beyond the grave.
On the morning that the people of Sarajevo marked the beginning of their 10th month under siege, 10 of the 118 residents of an unheated home for the elderly on the outskirts of the city had died in two days.
The dead included three men and seven women and their deaths brought to 190 the number of residents who lived at the home when the siege began who are now dead.


Marriage of Wine and Cork: Rocky Times Ahead
WANT another prediction for 1993?
This one isn't momentous, but here it is, anyway: 1993 may see the beginning of the end of the wine bottle cork.
Just the beginning, mind you. Corks will be around for a long time to come.


Citibank Rethinks Its Lending
Citibank, which made more than its share of lending mistakes in the 1980's and paid a severe price for its laxness, is altering its lending rules and procedures in hopes of cutting loan losses.
Executives at the bank, the nation's largest, are not saying exactly how lending standards are changing or whether Citibank will continue making giant loans, like those exceeding $200 million that it made in the 1980's, without selling a large part of them to other lenders, as most banks do.


Under New Health Plans, Patients Change Habits
It has been just over a year since the employees at Randall Decorators, a small Staten Island business, became part of a momentous transformation in health insurance in the United States, by switching to a plan that lowers monthly costs, but limits their choice of doctors.
They expected to save money and they did, cutting their monthly premiums by 23 percent, a total savings of $400 a month among the seven employees who joined the plan.
What they did not expect was the difficulty some have had in adjusting to the new health plan.
They have had to come to terms with the fact that the intimate relationship between patient and doctor has expanded to include a third party -- an insurance company.


Study Urges U.S. Effort On Hispanic Education
Blocked by barriers of language and poverty, the 5.4 million Hispanic public school students in the United States have special problems that are often not addressed because teachers have not been properly trained, a report that will be released today says.
Colleges must change the way they recruit, evaluate and instruct teachers, especially those of Hispanic descent, said the report by the Tomas Rivera Center, a not-for-profit institute for the study of Hispanic issues that is headed by Henry G. Cisneros, Secretary-designate of the Department of Housing and Urban Development.


Corrections
A Critic's Notebook article on Dec. 26 about church performances of Handel's "Messiah" in New York City referred incorrectly to a Greek Orthodox church at 302 West 91st Street in Manhattan.
It is the Church of the Annunciation, not the Church of the Ascension.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 1
Dec. 25
Jan. 3
1993
1992
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.6
7.4
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
3.1
Gasoline stocks
215.2
213.4
221.7
Distillate stocks
141.3
138.9
143.4
Crude imports, daily
5.8
5.2
5.5
Product imports, daily
2.1
1.9
1.7
Crude stocks
321.5
321.6
328.7
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
86.7
87.0
85.6
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Fox Unit Names Chairman
Lucie Salhany, the chairman of 20th Television, Fox Inc.'s television programming subsidiary, was named chairman of the Fox Broadcasting Company yesterday, replacing Jamie Kellner, who resigned unexpectedly on Monday as president of the television network.
Ms.
Salhany, who is 46 years old, thus becomes the first woman to lead a broadcasting network.
She has been chairman of 20th Television since July 1991, overseeing all of the unit's network, syndication and cable production and distribution activities domestically and internationally.


Fox Unit Names Chairman
Lucie Salhany, the chairman of 20th Television, Fox Inc.'s television programming subsidiary, was named chairman of the Fox Broadcasting Company yesterday, replacing Jamie Kellner, who resigned unexpectedly on Monday as president of the television network.
Ms.
Salhany, who is 46 years old, thus becomes the first woman to lead a broadcasting network.
She has been chairman of 20th Television since July 1991, overseeing all of the unit's network, syndication and cable production and distribution activities domestically and internationally.


No Headline
"THERE are very few men who are the equal of women cooks in Italy," said Francesco Battuello, a food writer, sommelier, consultant and keen observer of the Italian culinary scene.
Unlike in other European countries or the United States, the best traditional cooking in Italy has always been found in the restaurants where women are in charge of the kitchen.
Whether the talk is of the heartiest dishes, like ribolitta and pappardelle with rabbit sauce at Da Delfina in Artimino, or the most delicate, like ravioli with parmigiano, ricotta and white truffles at La Chiusa in Montefollonico, you will get very little argument from knowledgeable diners and food experts about where the traditions of Italian cooking are being upheld, the Michelin Guide notwithstanding.
The Italian edition of the guide gives most of its stars to restaurants where the food is more French than Italian.


Bank Rates Down a Bit In New York
The average yields offered on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit for the week beginning today are slightly lower in the New York market but about the same in other areas compared with the previous week, according to latest survey by The Bank Rate Monitor.
Deposit rates are expected to remain close to current levels through at least the first half of the year.
Mortgage rates, which are closely tied to long-term Treasury issues, are still falling.
The 30-year fixed rate is at the lowest level since October.


Baseball Will Reopen Its Labor Bargaining Sessions Today
Negotiators for baseball's owners and players will hold a bargaining session today, the first since the 28 club owners voted on Dec. 7 to reopen the basic labor agreement.
Donald Fehr, executive director of the Major League Baseball Players Association, would not speculate about the agenda at the session or whether he believed the players would be presented with a proposal.


Thomas Lorango, 33, A Piano Soloist at 16
Thomas Lorango, a pianist, died last Wednesday at the New York University Medical Center.
He was 33 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS, said his wife, Karen Ritscher.
Since his debut at 16 as a soloist with the Philadelphia Orchestra, Mr.
Lorango had appeared with many orchestras around the country, including the Dallas Symphony, the St.
Louis Symphony and the Buffalo Philharmonic.
A frequent recitalist, he appeared at Alice Tully Hall, the Library of Congress and other halls in the United States and in Europe.
He was a participant in the Marlboro Music Festival in Vermont and often toured with Music From Marlboro.
In addition to his wife, he is survived by his parents, Vincent and Mary Lorango of North Tonawanda, and a brother, Tony, of Torrance, Calif.


Ghost of Montana Is Haunting the 49ers
Joe Montana charged off the 49ers practice field today as though he were late for an appointment.
Turns out, he just wanted the aerobic workout.
The point is, Montana isn't working up much of a sweat during team drills this week.
San Francisco Coach George Seifert has said and said again, in his signature monotone, that quarterback Steve Young will start and finish Saturday's playoff game against the Washington Redskins, and that he will not bench Young on a whim.
This may be Seifert's way of trying to keep Young from hearing Montana's footsteps, but it also may mean that Montana will not play again this season unless Young goes down with a debilitating injury.


On Patrol Against Enemies Foreign or Domestic; Where 3 States Meet, a Connecticut Town's Perambulators Remain Ever Vigilant
The town perambulators took to the woods today to see if their territory had been invaded.
"Our job is to make sure there is no aggression," said Robert Estabrook, the senior perambulator, who is just about the last of his breed.
The last, that is, except for Robert Morrill, the junior perambulator, who said he was helping insure that "New York doesn't encroach."


Pennsylvania Milk Passes Stringent Quality Control Tests
To the Editor:
A Dec. 19 article about interstate dairy competition reports on an advertisement by a Long Island dairy that puts Pennsylvania milk in a negative light.
The ad states, "What is it about milk from Pennsylvania that gives us a bad feeling?" and pictures a cow with three eyes in front of a nuclear reactor's cooling towers.


Olympus Headquarters Is Opposed
Despite promises of tax relief, new jobs and modern office buildings in a campus-like setting, some residents of this Long Island community are fighting plans by the Olympus Corporation to build its North American headquarters here.
The dispute mirrors the rejection several months ago by residents of Brookville, L.I., of plans for a new headquarters for the Canon Corporation, another Japanese camera and optical equipment company.
Homeowners here, like those in Brookville, say they fear that commercial encroachment will depress their property values and increase traffic.


W. G. McLoughlin, Professor of History At Brown, Dies at 70
William G. McLoughlin, a professor emeritus of history and religion at Brown University, died Monday at Rhode Island Hospital in Providence.
He was 70.
Professor McLoughlin, who lived in Providence, died of liver cancer, his family said.


Musburger Workload
BRENT MUSBURGER's workload as the host of ABC's golf telecasts will be reduced this season from nearly all 26 tournaments on its schedule to about 15.
But the network said it was not because of criticism of his work.
ABC also hired PETER JACOBSEN to work with Musburger at the 18th hole, and increased the number of weeks JERRY PATE will work as an on-course reporter.


Police Commissioner Cuts Jobs in Suffolk
In a reshuffling of a sprawling suburban police force criticized for being top-heavy with administrators, the Suffolk County Police Commissioner today announced cuts of nine upper-level positions from the 2,350-member department.
The number of officers above the rank of captain has been reduced from 45 to 36, officials said.
The reductions were made through retirements, they said, and there are no plans for layoffs.
The cuts are expected to save about $1 million in salaries, officials said.


Computer Gives Organists Job Security
To the Editor:
Your report on the restoration and computerization of the grand organ at the cathedral of Notre-Dame of Paris (Arts pages, Dec. 10) mentions that when the instrument was rebuilt in 1733, a dozen pipes from a 14th-century organ were retained and are still part of the organ today.


Hull Top Vote-Getter
BRETT HULL of the St.
Louis Blues polled the most votes for the third consecutive year in the final results of the National Hockey League All-Star voting announced yesterday.
Hull received 303,953 votes in fan balloting and joins Chicago goalie ED BELFOUR and defenseman CHRIS CHELIOS as repeat starters from last season for the Campbell Conference.
Joining Hull on the Campbell Conference front line will be Detroit center STEVE YZERMAN, and Vancouver's PAVEL BURE.


Jidda Journal; Everywhere in Saudi Arabia, Islam Is Watching
Two bearded men, their robes flowing as they strode briskly past shoppers in the Basateen Mall, cornered a middle-aged woman whose loose strands of hair fell across her face.
"Cover up, woman!" one shouted, as heads turned and the woman's three grown daughters huddled around her.


For Manhattan Tower, a 4-Plane Glass Facade
"A curtain wall that falls down like a guillotine" is how Raimund Abraham describes the sharp-edged glass facade of his design for the new New York headquarters of the Austrian Cultural Institute.
The 20-story tower, which beginning next year will rise on the site of a Manhattan town house currently occupied by the institute at 11 East 52d Street, is the first major building designed by Mr.
Abraham, an Austrian architect who has lived in New York since 1971 and teaches architecture at Cooper Union.
The building will contain four floors of commercial space and seven floors of apartments, in addition to the institute's offices, galleries and other public spaces.
Its glass facade, divided into four planes that appear to slide past each other on a steep vertical incline, expresses the mix of uses within.


Escarole Isn't Just for Salad Anymore
THIS meal of escarole and potatoes is so quick to put together, the only holdup might be waiting for the potatoes to finish cooking.
As greens have become more popular, Americans have begun using them for more than salads.
The flavor of escarole is brought out by cooking, and it is delicious with garlic and hot pepper.
Garlic lovers may want to add an extra clove here.


Young Woman Was Aggressive Toward Boys, Psychiatrist Says
A psychiatrist in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial agreed with a defense lawyer today that the mildly retarded woman central to the case was aggressive toward boys.
But under later questioning from the prosecution, who had called him as a witness, the psychiatrist seemed to retreat from that characterization and said he could offer only one example that could be described as aggressive behavior.


Baseball Will Reopen Its Labor Bargaining Sessions Today
Negotiators for baseball's owners and players will hold a bargaining session today, the first since the 28 club owners voted on Dec. 7 to reopen the basic labor agreement.
Donald Fehr, executive director of the Major League Baseball Players Association, would not speculate about the agenda at the session or whether he believed the players would be presented with a proposal.


Colleagues Honored in Gifts to Neediest
Many workers pay tribute to their colleagues during the holidays, celebrating relationships forged in meetings or all-night brainstorming projects or gripe sessions around the copier.
Instead of buying gifts, some people send money to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund because they believe that aiding the fund is a more meaningful way of letting their 9-to-5 colleagues know that they value their expertise, humor and friendship.
Carrol T. Lippman sent $200 to the Neediest Cases in honor of the support staff at the Manhattan law firm of Rubin, Baum, Levin, Constant &amp; Friedman.
In a note that she enclosed with her check, she explained that she had just left the firm but had been allowed to keep an office there.


George R. Collins, Art Historian, 75, And Gaudi Expert
George R. Collins, an art history professor who was a leading scholar and champion of Antonio Gaudi's distinctive architecture, died yesterday in Falmouth, Mass.
He was 75 years old.
He died of Alzheimer's disease in a nursing home, said his wife, Christiane.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Streaks
After winning three holiday tournaments, and spending Christmas on the road, Maine's Black Bears are resting in Orono, and do not play again until Jan. 15, at home against Clarkson.
The team has a 21-0-1 record and 20 victories in a row, which brings up the matter of college hockey streaks.


Market Place; Is A&amp;W Ready To Turn Around?
AFTER a parade of product introductions in recent months, the beverage business appears energized after a summer of cool weather and dreary sales.
Investors hungrily embraced shares of Snapple in its recent public offering.
And the stocks of several drink companies, including Pepsico, Coca-Cola and the Cott Corporation, a private-label soda maker, are trading near their highest levels of the last year.
If the weather is sunnier, and with all the new products, industry analysts expect sales of flavored drinks will rise 3 percent in 1993.


2 Off-Duty Officers Under Suspension
Two off-duty police officers were suspended from duty yesterday after one was arrested on a charge of drunken driving in the Chelsea section of Manhattan, the police said.
One of the officers waved a gun during a dispute, there, a department spokeswoman said.
Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, the spokeswoman, said Officers Robert Fee and Christopher Roberts were suspended after Mr.
Fee was arrested and charged with and driving while intoxicated and menacing with a gun.
Sergeant Mohrmann said the incident occured at 4:30 A.M. at Seventh Avenue and 20th Street when a witness to a dispute between the officers and three men called 911 to report a man with a gun.


Britain's Usually Staid Classical-Music Broadcasters Cause a Bit of a Ripple
This has been a season of upheaval in the formerly cloistered, not to say comfortably stuffy, world of classical-music radio in Britain.
In September a new, commercial classical station, Classic FM, went on the air with backing that included Time Warner, the American entertainment conglomerate.
And the British Broadcasting Corporation's long-established Radio 3 has a new director -- Nicholas Kenyon, a former music critic -- whose own impeccably elitist background hardly prepared listeners for some of his populist format changes.


No. 2 Officer Retires at Digital Equipment
John F. Smith, senior vice president of operations and second in command at the Digital Equipment Corporation, announced his retirement from the company yesterday.
Mr.
Smith, who has been with the company 35 years, said in an interview that his position would not be filled when he left Digital.
Under Robert B. Palmer, Digital's president and chief executive, the troubled computer maker has been restructured into nine business units reporting directly to Mr.
Palmer.
Digital has been staggered by record losses in recent quarters, including a loss of $260.5 million for the quarter that ended on Sept. 30.
It reported $2.8 billion in losses for its fiscal year 1992.


60-Minute Gourmet
QUICK and healthful winter soups can be prepared with many varieties of fish and shellfish, and they can be served as appetizers or as main courses.
At my local fish market I recently saw some good-looking monkfish that started me thinking about fish soup for dinner.
Monkfish is particularly well suited to soups and stews because of its firm, lean flesh.
Others that work well include cod, sea bass, scrod and tilefish.
After choosing the fish, I consider the flavors and textures for the soup.
Should it be light and herby?
Thick and assertive?
Creamy and rich?


The N.H.L.'s Pitch to Go Prime Time
"HE shoots! He scores!" is a familiar refrain at National Hockey League games.
Now the league, long considered woefully lagging in the competition for fan and sponsor dollars, is firing off a round of ambitious advertising and promotion efforts.
Whether the league can score in a glutted sports market and a weak economy is as problematic as wondering when the New York Rangers will win another Stanley Cup.
"This is all part of a process, a marketing process, to accelerate the growth of the game," Steve Ryan, the president of N.H.L.
Enterprises Inc. in New York, the league's marketing arm, said in an interview yesterday.


Sports of The Times; Hall of Fame Not Too Soon For Reggie
THEY don't make 'em like Reggie Jackson anymore.
Which is another of baseball's problems.
He struck out 2,597 times, the most of any swinger in the history of the game, but that was part of his charm.
Reggie lit up the entire ball park, and he deserved his election to the Baseball Hall of Fame yesterday.
Style does count.
The whole is greater than the sum of its parts.
Reggie Jackson was a Hall of Fame ballplayer even when he was churning the air with a monumental strikeout, or nearly getting skulled by a fly ball he had misjudged.
He won games.
He put fannies in the seats.
He played in 11 league championships.
Welcome to the Hall of Fame.


Robert Glasse, 63, An Anthropologist in New Guinea, Dies
Robert M. Glasse, an anthropologist who helped to trace a fatal neurological disease among New Guinea natives, died on Friday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 63 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, his wife, Bernadette, said.


Bridge
The world's strongest mother-and-daughter partnership is probably the Manhattan combination of Gail Greenberg, who has won four world titles, and Jill Blanchard, who was a candidate for the 1991 United States open team.
They were members of the winning team Sunday in the two-day Swiss Teams at the New York Winter Regional.
On the diagramed deal, with the North-South cards, they flirted with disaster, escaped and achieved a bidding coup.
Some partnerships have a sensible agreement that a pass following a minor-suit opening, a take-out double and a redouble shows length in the opener's suit.
With that agreement, West would have permitted South to languish in one club redoubled and would have collected a mere 1600.
Even without that specific agreement West should consider a pass, since East would make a strong effort to bid over the redouble and a pass therefore suggests length.


Messier, Neilson Continue Their Feud
Unemployed and unhappy, Roger Neilson went to breakfast this morning and added more weight to his attack on Mark Messier.
Clearly pleased by the recent turn of events, Messier went to practice and called a players-only meeting to, among other things, refute Neilson's accusations about his commitment to the Rangers' program.


Bruce King, Dancer and Teacher, 67
Bruce King, a dancer, choreographer and teacher, died on Friday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
He was 67 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS-related lymphoma, said Robert Herbert, a friend.


Guilty Plea By Sharpton In Tax Case
The Rev.
Al Sharpton pleaded guilty today to a charge of failing to file a New York State personal income tax return for 1986, in a pact that he said would make it easier for him to run this year for New York City Council president.
Mr.
Sharpton said that he was seriously considering such a race and that he might make a decision as early as next week.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Bulls' Streak Ends at 7  James Worthy scored 21 points and teamed up with Vlade Divac in the fourth quarter to rally the Los Angeles Lakers to a 91-88 victory over the Bulls in Chicago last night.
The loss ended Chicago's seven-game winning streak, while the Lakers won for just the third time in their last 10 games.
With 15 seconds left in the game, Divac clicked on an 18-footer for a 91-88 Laker lead.
Jordan missed on a 3-pointer with 5 seconds left, but Chicago later got the ball back and Jordan's desperation 3-point shot with 0.9 seconds left was wide.
Divac had 9 of his 14 points and Worthy 7 in the final quarter.
Game scoring honors went to Jordan with 36 points, while Pippen added 17 and Grant 15. (AP) Jazz 113, Spurs 87: Jeff Malone had 22 points and Karl Malone 18 as the Utah Jazz extended their winning streak to six games by routing visiting San Antonio. (AP) Suns 106, Rockets 104: Phoenix's Charles Barkley scored 29 points and Danny Ainge hit 12 crucial fourth-quarter points to hold off the Rockets in Houston as the Suns came up with their 15th victory in 16 games.
Hakeem Olajuwon led the Rockets with 29 points and 13 rebounds. (AP) Celtics 107, Hornets 103: Kevin McHale scored 8 of his 18 points in the final four minutes to lead Boston at Charlotte, N.C. (AP) Heat 89, Pistons 83: Harold Miner scored 19 points and sparked a fourth-quarter rally for Miami.
The Heat spoiled the return of their former coach, Ron Rothstein, who now coaches the Pistons, by coming up with their best defensive effort of the season. (AP) Pacers 114, Clippers 106: Rik Smits matched his season high of 27 points and Detlef Schrempf hit his second triple-double of the season as Indiana, playing at home, snapped a six-game losing streak.
Schrempf totaled 15 points, a season-high 18 rebounds and 12 assists. (AP) Trail Blazers 109, Mavericks 95: Jerome Kersey led six double-figure scorers with 17 points as Portland handed Dallas its ninth consecutive loss.
Rod Strickland and Terry Porter added 16 points each for the visiting Blazers. (AP) Sonics 116, Warriors 106: Nate McMillan scored 12 of his 21 points in the fourth quarter, including a tie-breaking layup with 1:20 left, to pace the Sonics in Seattle.
The Sonics ended the Warriors' five-game winning streak. (AP) N.H.L.
Lemieux Ailing Again  Bob Errey scored twice as Pittsburgh beat Boston, 6-2, on the Penguins' home ice in a game that saw Mario Lemieux play just one period because of back problems.
Lemieux, who leads the National Hockey League with 39 goals and 104 points, left the bench with 11 minutes 33 seconds left in the second period and did not return.
Lemieux had not played in the second period.
A team spokesman reported Lemieux had aggravated his back problem and would be evaluated on a day-to-day basis. .
It was the second consecutive game that Lemieux left with back pain. (AP) Blues 6, Oilers 1: Brett Hull continued a midseason surge with two goals and Nelson Emerson had two goals and two assists as St.
Louis defeated visiting Edmonton. (AP) SKIING Giant Slalom to Merle  Carole Merle of France stormed back to the form that made her a champion last season and decisively won a World Cup giant slalom on an icy slope at Maribor, Slovenia, yesterday.
Merle was the fastest skier in both runs, turning in a total time of 2 minutes 29.44 seconds.
That was 1.3 seconds better than Anita Wachter of Austria. (AP) BOXING Holmes Plods Along  Larry Holmes won a 10-round decision over Everett (Big Foot) Martin in Biloxi, Miss., last night.
The 43-year-old former heavyweight champion peppered Martin, a favorite target for name heavyweights over the last four years, with a variety of punches, but never came close to knocking him down. (AP)


Corrections
A map yesterday with the Our Towns column portrayed a new extension of Route 24 in New Jersey incorrectly.
The extension does not extend west of Interstate 287.
The map also referred incorrectly to a town on old Route 24.
It is Chatham.


Moody's Reviews Ratings Of Commonwealth Edison
The rating on about $8.4 billion of the long-term debt of the Commonwealth Edison Company, the big Chicago-based utility, has been placed under review for possible downgrading, Moody's Investors Service said yesterday.
Moody's said the review had been prompted by indications that the Illinois Commerce Commission's final order in a long-disputed case could be substantially below current rates, requiring the utility to make customer refunds totaling hundreds of millions of dollars.


A New Job and a New Room for Milken


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Chelsea's School; Sidwell Is Often Chosen by Capital's Elite
As the President's daughter, 12-year-old Chelsea Clinton will probably be the most recognizable student at Sidwell Friends school.
But the private Quaker-run school chosen today by Bill and Hillary Clinton has long been the academic choice of many of this city's affluent professionals.
Among its 1,030 students, Chelsea will find the sons and daughters of lawmakers, business executives and journalists.


CLINTON AIDES URGE FREER HAITI POLICY
President-elect Bill Clinton's top aides presented him today with a proposal for a new policy on Haiti that would make it easier for Haitians to apply for political asylum in the United States while at the same time discouraging a mass exodus from the impoverished Caribbean nation, staff members said.
The proposed policy, which is to be announced before his inauguration and would later be made formal in an executive order, would set up an enlarged system to process asylum cases at a number of points inside Haiti, on the American military base at Guantanamo Bay and in third countries in the region.


Rumble Go the Strings of His Heart
"WHEN they phased out the Checker cabs, that was like genocide for bass players," said Jon Deak, who plays the bass for the New York Philharmonic.
Mr.
Deak was getting his young sons ready for bed while his wife, Jacqueline Mullen, having finished feeding their infant daughter, rushed off to play the cello with the Metropolitan Opera.
"Do dinosaurs," urged Nicholas, who is almost 3, as Mr.
Deak bowed the bass to imitate thunder, car alarms and squeaky doors.
"Car," said Forrest, who is 18 months old.


Macy: $33.6 Million November Loss but Better Cash Flow
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company reported a $33.6 million loss in November, but the bankrupt retailer's cash flow was better than expected, thanks to a jump in sales during the long weekend after Thanksgiving.
Analysts are more interested in how the company, which operates the Macy's, Bullock's and I. Magnin department store chains, weathered December.
The Christmas season is typically a sales bonanza for retailers, and Myron E. Ullman 3d, co-chairman and co-chief executive of Macy, said yesterday that the Macy's and Bullock's chains had comparable-store sales gains of about 3.5 percent in December.


Bonds of Tyranny Prove Slippery For Dissident Fleeing From China
The surprising thing about Zheng Yi is that he turned out to be as successful as a fugitive as he was as a writer.
When Mr.
Zheng, a well-known author, was made the target of a nationwide search three and a half years ago, almost no one would have bet on his escape.
Mr.
Zheng had been a leader of the 1989 Tiananmen Square democracy movement, and the Government had branded him a "most wanted" outlaw and distributed posters with his picture and description.


Judge Decides to Put Deadline on Deadlock
United States District Judge David Doty monitored six hours of negotiations today between representatives of the National Football League's owners and players and told both sides that if they did not settle their five-year-old labor dispute on Wednesday he would rule on the motions before his court.
Both parties, who met in Doty's courtroom from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M., were summoned last week by Doty after a tentative settlement initially trumpeted by both sides appeared close to collapsing.
The primary issue is the players' demand for a comprehensive free-agency plan that would allow players to move freely to new teams without penalty to the team that signs them.


Carl Green Sr. Community Leader, 70
Carl Green Sr., a community leader in Brooklyn, died Thursday at his home in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
He was 70.
He died of lung cancer, said a son, Roger L. Green, a State Assemblyman.


INSIDE
Tanker Spill Off Scotland
A tanker loaded with 26 million gallons of oil was impaled on rocks off Scotland's Shetland Islands, endangering seabirds and wildlife.
Page A3.
Stepping Down From the Fed
The president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York plans to resign after eight years of playing a leading role in American finance.
Page D1.
Delivering Prenatal Care
Offering free prenatal care to poor women to reduce the infant mortality rate can help, but it is not a solution by itself.
Health, page C12.
The Most Primitive Dinosaur
A 225-million year old fossil exhumed in Argentina has the most primitive features of any known dinosaur, say the scientists who found it.
Page A17.
Reggie, Reggie, Reggie
Reggie Jackson, with 563 homers and countless thrills, reached the Hall of Fame on his first swing.
Page B7.


Union at News Urges Zuckerman Boycott
With Mortimer B. Zuckerman on the verge of buying The Daily News, the single union still battling him last night formally called for a boycott by readers and for a corporate campaign against his businesses if he does not reach a settlement.
The union, the New York Newspaper Guild, passed a resolution last night calling for the measures if Mr.
Zuckerman has not reached an agreement by the time his purchase is completed.
Mr.
Zuckerman is expected to become the owner of The News within days despite his continuing standoff with the guild.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FISONS P.L.C., Suffolk, England, said its Fisons Pharmaceuticals unit had received approval from the Food and Drug Administration to sell Tilade, a nonsteroid, anti-inflammatory treatment for asthma, which Fisons plans to market jointly with Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc.
UNITED BISCUITS P.L.C., Isleworth, England, agreed to buy Bake-Line Products Inc., of Des Plaines, Ill., for $70 million.
United said an opportunity existed for "substantial synergy" between its North American unit, Keebler, and Bake-Line, a leading manufacturer of private-label cookies in the United States.


Corrections
An obituary in some editions on Monday about Stephen Harvey, a writer on movies and a film curator at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, referred incorrectly to his mother and to Karl Philip Karlock.
His mother is Ann Weisbrat of Los Angeles; Mr.
Karlock is a friend.


Effects of Segregation Told in a Trial
Lawyers seeking to integrate Hartford's schools with suburban ones offered evidence today from some of the best-known studies on the effects of segregation on black students: studies of a 25-year desegregation program in Hartford and its suburbs, Project Concern.
The studies' main author, Prof.
Robert L. Crain, has testified about Project Concern in school-desegregation cases across the nation.
Their findings, he said today, are the "central national evidence" that segregation perpetuates itself -- that children who attend segregated schools live segregated lives as adults.


Crossland Sale Effort Set
Deciding that Crossland Savings Bank has become healthy enough to be sold, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation hired Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company yesterday to find a buyer for the bank, which the Government owns, said Harrison Young, director of the division of resolutions for the F.D.I.C.
The F.D.I.C. seized Crossland in January 1992, after the bank failed largely because of bad real estate loans.
At the time, the F.D.I.C. said it could not find a suitable buyer and in an unusual move took ownership, bringing in new management.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  IN UKRAINE, MISSILES AND RESPECT
Among disarmament negotiators, nuclear missiles are measured by their ability to destroy.
In Ukraine, they are increasingly being measured in terms of dollars and respect, and the perception may well hold the key to the success or failure of the strategic arms treaty signed this week in Moscow.
A1  RUSSIA SEEKS CAP ON PROFITS
Russian officials insisted that a sensitive new decree was not an attempt to regulate prices but to cap manufacturers' profits on basic goods from bread and milk to television tubes and industrial explosives.
A12


City Council Speaker Criticizes Mayor in Annual Address


Quakers Remain Active in Somalia; Food for Hungry's Aid
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 21 article suggesting that the news media spotlight pulled relief agencies to Somalia is an excellent effort to keep charities on their toes.
However, you report that Food for the Hungry has no permanent staff in Africa.
Actually, we have more than 300 permanent staff members in five African countries alone.
We have had programs in Africa for more than 13 years because we believe long-term, sustainable development is the answer to hunger.


New Cuban-Americans Also Oppose Castro; Change Old Attitudes
To the Editor:
In "A Bridge to Cuba" (Op-Ed, Dec. 18), Prof.
Ruth Behar, a second-generation Cuban-American, urges rapprochement with her native land.
The United States should rethink its parochial mind-set and consider a more magnanimous attitude toward our neighbor.
We should support the almost-unanimous United Nations resolution calling for an end to the Cuban embargo.


Pop and Jazz in Review
The Idris Muhammad Trio  Bradley's
Jazz at its best is often permeated with age.
Not age as it is traditionally construed -- a loss of power -- but age as knowledge, as an accumulation of ideas, an expanded vocabulary that allows for a more polychromatic and subtle rendering of experience.
At Bradley's on Sunday night, the alto saxophonist Gary Bartz, the bassist Ray Drummond and the drummer Idris Muhammad turned in an intense, furious set that allowed the three musicians all the room they needed to display their accumulated knowledge.


Glen Ridge Witness Says Woman Asked for Help
A mildly retarded young woman sought advice on how to say no to aggressive sexual overtures, a witness at the Glen Ridge sex assault trial said today, recounting a conversation three days after the 1989 episode at the heart of the case.
Trial prosecutors say that the witness, Margaret Savage, who used to be a physical education teacher for mentally handicapped students in West Orange, N.J., is the first person the young woman complained to about what happened to her on March 1, 1989.
Four young men, all former high school athletes, are charged with assaulting the woman, using a broom handle, a fungo baseball bat and a stick, in the basement recreation room of two of the youths in Glen Ridge.
The defense says she consented to have sex.


Review/Theater; A Playwright's Warm-Up for a Classic Comedy
The obscurity of Oliver Goldsmith's first play, "The Good Natur'd Man," is in defiant contrast to the phenomenal popularity of its successor, "She Stoops to Conquer." The enterprising Pearl Theater Company has performed a distinct rescue service by presenting the earlier work.
Not only is it of historical interest, but it also has a theatrical viability of its own as an acerbic commentary on the wages of blind philanthropy.
As such, the play spoofs the sentimental comedies of Goldsmith's day, the late 18th century, and also, by extension, mocks pretensions of later times.
In a sense, it presages the culture of radical chic.
The current production, directed by Anthony Cornish, is modest and respectable and is a useful introduction to a comedy that is seldom performed.


The Plans May Be New, But Are They Improved?
So what's new in the state capital?
If Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's message to the Legislature is an accurate gauge, political programs that begin with the word "new."
The 156-page message released today is filled with policy sobriquets that would make an old-time New Deal Democrat proud.
There's the "New View of New York," a plan to use parolees, youths and welfare recipients to clean up the roads leading from New York City's airports to Manhattan.
There's the "New Compact for Learning," a proposal to increase community control over local schools.
And there is the "Partnership for a New, New York," an industrial policy of sorts to increase the competitiveness of state businesses through advanced technology.


Christo Sets His Sights On Wrapping Reichstag
After more than 20 years of planning, the artist Christo may soon receive permission to execute one of his most ambitious projects: wrapping the historic Reichstag building in a million square feet of silver-colored fabric.
At a news conference today, Christo said he had won support from the president of Germany's parliament, Rita Sussmuth, who is to attend the opening of an exhibition of his works in Berlin this week.
Mrs.
Sussmuth's support is vital because parliament, known officially as the Bundestag, administers the Reichstag building.


Islanders' Flatley Is Out
The Islanders are running out of forwards.
Team captain PATRICK FLATLEY, who scored the game's first goal against the Nordiques Tuesday, suffered a fractured rib and is expected to miss the team's games against Buffalo and Vancouver this weekend.
DANIEL MAROIS has a slight left ankle sprain and is also doubtful for both games.
DEREK KING (hip pointer) and RAY FERRARO(broken right leg) are out indefinitely.


Change Is Reported On Banking Account
The New York Switch Corporation in Hackensack, N.J., has selected TBWA Advertising in New York to handle the account of its New York Cash Exchange electronic banking network, according to industry executives who insisted on remaining anonymous.
Billings were estimated at $3 million to $5 million.


Steel Union Agreeable To Long Pact
The United Steelworkers Union, facing a potentially contentious round of labor negotiations with steelmakers later this year, said yesterday that it had sent letters to five steel companies offering to agree to long-term contracts that could include far more flexible work rules.
But the union said its offer, which it said could include a nine-year contract, was predicated upon steel producers' not asking for concessions in wages and benefits.
The union said it was also seeking language in the contracts that would prevent layoffs of its members.


Home Video
Releases on Wednesdays
This month the studios will do the same with videocassettes as they do with movies.
Tapes of many feature films will be released only one day a week.
In theaters, films usually open on Friday; in video stores the day will be Wednesday.


CLINTON BACKS OFF HIS PLEDGE TO CUT THE DEFICIT IN HALF
Responding quickly to new projections of larger deficits from President Bush, President-elect Bill Clinton appeared today to back off his campaign pledge to cut the Federal budget deficit in half in four years.
Mr. Clinton said the Bush Administration had camouflaged the magnitude of the deficit.


Time That Looks Ready to Fly
LEONARDO DA VINCI is one of Stephen Kowalski's heroes.
He was the inspiration for a ticking contraption called "Ode to Leonardo," below.
"It looks like a flying machine that he might have appreciated," Mr. Kowalski said.


Dow Drops 2.71 on Philip Morris Selloff
The selloff in drug and tobacco stocks gathered force yesterday, with both industries threatened by tighter Government regulation.
Investors in general were nervously busy but indecisive, as the Dow Jones industrial average inched down 2.71 points on heavy volume to 3,305.16.
The Nasdaq composite average, however, surged 7.51 points, or 1.11 percent, to a record of 681.85, on a computer technology rally led by chip maker Intel.


The Neighbors Aren't Strangers After All
IT is a cereal-commercial kind of neighborhood: cheery, nearly new colonial homes set on a small, steep hill in Ossining, N.Y.
A homeowner's association insures that all 26 lawns are uniformly trimmed and tidy.
There are, by mutual agreement, no fences.
One resident, a local coach, allows street hockey games in front of his driveway; boys play baseball and football, by neighborhood consensus, on a lawn between two houses.
One of those houses belongs to Nancy and Richard Peller.
Mrs.
Peller, a 35-year-old mother of two who knows all but one of her 25 neighbors by name, said she considered two of her neighbors to be among her closest friends.
With other neighbors, they exchange child care, arrange wine-and-cheese parties in the summer and get together nearly every day.


Skiing; It's a Dawning of a New Age for Senior Skiers
This promises to be the year of the senior skier.
At least, it is a year when Eastern ski areas are offering more special programs, events and discounts on lift tickets, lessons, lodging and equipment for older skiers than at any time in the past.
Fifteen years ago, when Lloyd Lambert, now 91 and still skiing, formed the 70-Plus Club to promote free skiing for older skiers, many ski areas responded with lift tickets at junior prices.
Others, like Stratton Mountain, Vt., started clubs for older skierswith races and ski-together gatherings.


Dr. Carl Bode, 81, a Scholar of American Culture
Dr.
Carl Bode, an authority on American literature and culture, died on Tuesday at the Heron Point residential care center in Chestertown, Md., where he lived.
He was 81.
His family said he had had several strokes.


Salvadoran Chief Admits Purge Skipped General
President Alfredo Cristiani admitted today for the first time that he is retaining his top military chief, Gen.
Rene Emilio Ponce, who was supposed to have been included in an army purge that is part of the accords ending the 12-year civil war.
But leaders of the former guerrilla front with whom the peace was negotiated took a conciliatory stance toward Mr.
Cristiani's insistence on delaying part of the purge, saying they believed "the process of purification is under way and will conclude successfully."


Pro Football; Byrd Shows Movement In Three Right Fingers
Dennis Byrd, who suffered a broken neck in a Jets game on Nov. 29 and was left partly paralyzed, has experienced some active motion in three fingers on his right hand, Dr.
Kristjan Ragnarsson, the chairman of the Department of Rehabilitation Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital, said yesterday.
Byrd, the Jets' defensive end, has been undergoing rehabilitation at Mount Sinai for the last month, following surgery at Lenox Hill Hospital to repair a fractured vertebrae in his neck and stabilize the injured area.


Seeking the Quaint, Town Says No to Neon Signs
MICHAEL GASPERINO has a red-and-white neon sign that boldly advertises one of his convenience store's biggest bargains: "Ham &amp; Egg on Roll with Coffee $1.25."
But after roughly 20 years of faithful illumination in the front window of his shop here, the 4-foot-by-4-foot sign has been forcibly relegated to the cellar, where it is now surrounded by bags stuffed with discarded soda cans.


Executive Changes
ADIDAS USA INC., Spartanburg, S.C., appointed Russell A. Kersh chief operating officer and chief financial officer.
BAYWAY REFINERY, Linden, N.J., a unit of Tosco Corp., named Dwight Wiggins president.


Frederick's of Hollywood reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


And Now, Surreal Hardware
WORMS, rams' horns, bugs and bones double as door pulls (like the ones above), hooks and handles.
"I'm really into archeology, and it's influenced the work that I do," said Rhea C. Alexander, a product, furniture and interior designer in SoHo.


Market Place; Rebuilding U.S.: In Line to Profit
WHILE it is not clear what investments the Clinton Administration will make to rebuild the nation's roads and bridges, more spending is expected and Wall Street analysts say some companies, particularly engineering and consulting concerns, will be among the first beneficiaries.
For a start, 40 percent of the nation's road bridges are deficient and obsolete, and about 60 percent of the 2.1 million miles of paved roads are in dire need of repair, experts say.


Pro Basketball; Night to Forget for Road-Weary Nets
U-G-L-Y.
That's the only way to describe this one.
The Nets were losers by 132-106 tonight to the lowly Philadelphia 76ers before 10,125 fans at the Spectrum.
It was New Jersey's worst loss of the season.
Luckily for the Nets, there was other news today that might help prevent a repeat of tonight's blowout: New Jersey will most likely sign the former Knick and longtime Philadelphia guard Maurice Cheeks to a one-year contract in the next few days, according to General Manager Willis Reed.


Smoked
Might Philip Morris take I.B.M.'s old place as the market's bellwether and most valuable company?
Maybe not.
Since peaking Sept. 22 at $86.625, or $77.8 billion in market value, it has fallen 17 percent to $71.75, costing shareholders $13.4 billion.
The slide accelerated this week, on the prospect of new cigarette taxes or laws.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the funeral of the Rev.
Timothy Healy, president of the New York Public Library, referred incorrectly to the church.
It was St.
Ignatius Loyola.


I.B.M. Cuts Hit Hudson Valley First
The International Business Machines Corporation announced yesterday that its first payroll cuts for 1993 would be at three operations in the Hudson Valley of New York State, where up to 3,500 jobs will be eliminated.
The company stressed that it would encourage workers at the I.B.M. operations in East Fishkill, Poughkeepsie and Kingston to leave voluntarily, offering incentives of up to a year's salary, medical benefits and retraining.
But company officials said the cutbacks might well include layoffs, a historic break with the company's longstanding no-layoff policy.


O.K., Homework First, Then the News
NEW periodicals and radio and television shows have recently emerged to entertain and educate children by speaking their language, or by letting them talk for themselves.
Tomorrow's Morning, for example, is a newspaper that its editor described as "the Christian Science Monitor meets Mad magazine." WNYC-FM, a public radio station devoted primarily to classical music, has opened Sunday night to youngsters with a show called "New York Kids."
What's the reason behind more media targeting of children?
"It might be a baby boom, the changing demographics, at least in radio," said Lou Giansante, the producer of "New York Kids."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the appointment of Lucie Salhany by the Fox Broadcasting Company misstated her new title in some editions.
She was named chairwoman, not president.


F.D.A. Questions Safety of Saline Breast Implants
The Food and Drug Administration has notified the makers of saline-filled breast implants that they must prove the safety of the devices or face having them removed from the market.
The saline-filled implants are silicone bags filled with salt water and have been considered safer than all-silicone implants, which were removed from the market last year.
In all-silicone implants, the bag may leak, allowing silicone to travel elsewhere in the body and causing inflammation or in some people a strong immune-system reaction, like autoimmune disease.


A Flower Show for Rockefeller Center
IT may seem a little early to think about spring, but plans have just been announced for the Rockefeller Center Flower and Garden Show, which is to transform Rockefeller Center into a land of daffodils and tulips, flowering trees and European beeches, rock gardens and woodsy nooks full of trillium and cityscapes fit for tiny backyards and rooftops.
"We want to welcome spring to New York with lots of different kinds of daffodils and azaleas and hardy plants that homeowners can use in their own gardens," said David Murbach, manager of the gardens division at Rockefeller Center.
"It's a community event. We're part of this city, this is our home. And we hope this will become an annual event like the tree lighting."


With Money No Object, Ford Beats Honda
The Ford Motor Company celebrated with a parade today as its Taurus model finished first -- by a stadium lot full of cars -- to win an industry rivalry for the nation's best-selling car.
Only instead of the age-old fracas between Ford and Chevrolet, this time it was a showdown with the dreaded Japanese and the celebrated Honda Accord, which has been the American favorite for three years running.


Rudolf Nureyev, Charismatic Dancer Who Gave Fire to Ballet's Image, Dies at 54
Rudolf Nureyev, one of the most charismatic ballet stars of the 20th century and an artist who was often called the greatest male dancer since Vaslav Nijinsky, died yesterday in a hospital near Paris.
He was 54 and had homes in Paris, New York City and St.
Bart's in the Caribbean.
He died of "a cardiac complication, following a grievous illness," his physician, Michel Canesi, said.
Dr.
Canesi would not elaborate on the illness.
"Following Mr. Nureyev's wishes, I can't say any more," he said.
Many of Mr.
Nureyev's friends said he had AIDS.
He entered the Hopital Notre Dame du Perpetuel Secours in Levallois, a suburb of Paris, on Nov. 22.


Hockey; Lemieux Is Out For 2 1/2 Weeks
Mario Lemieux's bad back has acted up again and it will keep the National Hockey League's leading scorer out of the Pittsburgh Penguins' lineup for at least two and a half weeks.
Lemieux, who has 39 goals and 65 assists for 104 points in 40 games, left Pittsburgh's game Tuesday against the Boston Bruins, but the Penguins said tests today showed no major problems.
Doctors told Lemieux to rest until Jan. 25, when he can return to practice.


Stormy Seas Hinder Containment of Oil Spill Off Scotland


Stock Funds Did Well, Relatively
Despite a strong fourth-quarter performance, stock mutual funds showed less hefty gains in 1992 than in recent years.
But in an era of low interest rates, the returns were still sizable enough to leave investors grinning.
Pushed by a 9 percent jump in the last quarter, stock mutual funds posted an 8.9 percent gain for the year, Lipper Analytical Services reported yesterday.
The results were far below the brawny rise of 36 percent in 1991, and also below the average compounded annual returns of 15.6 percent in the last 15 years and 11.1 percent in the last 30 years.


Jean Strachan Wilson, History Professor, 89
Jean Strachan Wilson, professor emeritus of history at Smith College, died Monday at Pennswood Village in Newtown, Pa.
She was 89.
She died of heart failure, said Prof. Elizabeth von Klemperer of Smith.


Pro Football; Free Agency: Fighting the Good Fight
Free agency has been a benefit worth the fight for athletes seeking to sell themselves in an open market, but it has been a loathsome notion to owners profoundly reluctant to surrender their historic power to control players in perpetuity.
"Free agency is citizenship, that's all," said Gene Orza, general counsel of the Major League Baseball Players Association.
"The principal effect of free agency is to create a semblance of a market, but it's not like a real market, because there are all sorts of restrictions."


As Daily News Nears Sale, Foes and Challenges Await
Mortimer B. Zuckerman is expected to complete his purchase of The Daily News this week, which could lead to a newspaper war in the country's largest city and challenge the conventional wisdom that New York cannot support four newspapers.
In an industry that is part production-line grit and part blue smoke and mirrors, the arrival of Mr.
Zuckerman as the would-be savior of the bruised Daily News could give the 73-year-old newspaper new life and the city a new publisher with a history of winning influential friends and making bitter enemies.


Iraq Given Friday Deadline on Missiles
The United States and allies on the United Nations Security Council told Iraq today that it had 48 hours to remove the newly deployed surface-to-air missiles that threaten their planes patrolling the country's southern skies, or face military retaliation.
The ultimatum was presented this afternoon to Nizar Hamdoon, the Iraqi representative to the United Nations, by the American, British, Russian and French representatives.


Mario Cuomo, Unusually Reserved
Reality governed rhetoric in Mario Cuomo's 11th annual address to the State Legislature.
With no money around and none in sight, the Governor kept his proposals and promises to a minimum.
The result was an unusually flat presentation for the grandiloquent Mr.
Cuomo.
He missed a chance to set an overarching theme for the new year.
But he was wise not to raise false hopes for a recession-weary state.
His most provocative proposal was to let local school districts finance their share of education costs through local income taxes instead of property taxes.
That wouldn't cost the state anything, but is likely to spark more debate than change.


Rochester Brinks Theft Likened to Brooklyn Case
Robbers who stole between $6 million and $7 million from an armored car company here Tuesday night apparently carried off the crime in a manner strikingly similar to the robbery of a Brooklyn armored car company 10 days ago, according to details released by investigators today.
In both cases, security guards told the police that they were surprised by assailants who had somehow evaded security systems, and then ordered the guards to the floor and tied them up.
And in both cases, the guards could not identify the robbers or even say how many there were.


N.F.L.'s 7-Year Plan Was Really 5 Years Of Cheating History
The catalyst isn't on anyone's roster: U.S. District Judge David Doty.
Sometimes the winning field goal blasts cleanly through the uprights.
Sometimes it flutters and bobbles and finally bounces home.
The latter best describes how the owners and players in the National Football League finally laid their swords to rest.
Their new working agreement reached yesterday afternoon took five years of name-calling and backbiting, five years of turmoil and waste.


Russia Says Curbs on Profit Are Not a Change in Policy
Russian officials insisted today that a sensitive new decree is not an attempt to regulate prices but to cap manufacturers' profits on basic goods from bread and milk to television tubes and industrial explosives.
The decree, which limits producers' profits on listed product groups to a set percentage of their cost, does not represent a significant shift from the policies of the previous Government, the officials said, and simply extends a decree issued in August.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
United Airlines announced layoffs, salary cuts, fewer flights and other measures aimed at cutting operating expenses by $400 million a year.  [ Page D1. ]
Ford outdealed Honda to claim the best-selling car title.
Ford's 409,751 Tauruses compared with 393,447 Accords sold in 1992.  [ D1. ]  Sales of domestically made cars and light trucks fell 1.5 percent in the final 10 days of 1992.  [ D5. ]


2 Women Appointed to Senate Judiciary Panel
After the tumultuous hearings over the nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. said he wanted a woman on the Judiciary Committee to put to rest any accusations of insensitivity among the panel of 14 white men.
Today Mr.
Biden, the Delaware Democrat who is chairman of the Judiciary Committee, was given two women: Carol Moseley Braun of Illinois and Dianne Feinstein of California.


Choosing a School for Chelsea
No one can reasonably argue with President-elect and Mrs.
Clinton's desire to choose the school they think best for their daughter, Chelsea.
That is their obligation as parents.
But Mr.
Clinton also had a larger obligation that he took on by campaigning as an advocate of public education.
He has not served the spirit of that obligation by choosing a private school, and the handling of this family decision has provided ammunition for his opponents in the struggle to rebuild public schools.
The public schools are losing support because many middle-class parents have rushed to put their children in private schools.
In settling on Sidwell Friends, an institution favored by affluent, liberal Democrats in Washington, the Clintons have joined that rush.
Were there sound personal, educational and security reasons?
Possibly.
But according to news accounts, the Clintons did not even visit any public schools in the District of Columbia.


Determining Demographics by What's on the Coffee Table
TO "you are what you eat" and "you are where you live," a market research company hopes to add this advisory: "You are what you read."
In a provocative new survey, Yankelovich Partners concludes that what people read, particularly their choice of magazines, can more accurately forecast their behavior as shoppers and consumers than demographic factors like residence, age and marital status.


Pro Basketball; Riley's Credo: The Knicks Don't Apologize
The day after another iron curtain-type defensive effort helped the Knicks pull out a game, Coach Pat Riley was sounding like Winston Churchill.
"We're not going to apologize for playing aggressive," the coach said after practice today, obviously still riled by the $10,000 fine the league imposed on power forward Charles Oakley last week for his overly aggressive play in Indiana on Dec. 29.
The Knicks have appealed the penalty.


Theater Suffering After Film Boycott
The theater industry in New York City is an unexpected victim of the Hollywood film boycott that ended more than a year and a half ago, according to a new study of the city's theater business, to be released today.
During the boycott, a bitter nine-month stalemate between Hollywood producers and New York film unions, the major studios virtually shut down film making in the city.
Not only has the number of movie productions in New York been sharply reduced ever since, the report says, but the boycott has also caused a lasting talent drain of actors and production and technical workers, many of whom have moved to the West Coast.
That exodus has reduced the available pool for theater in New York as well.


Walgreen Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


United Air Announces Huge Cuts
Citing chaotic industry conditions and annual losses of hundreds of millions of dollars in recent years, United Airlines yesterday announced a package of layoffs, salary cuts, fewer flights and other measures aimed at cutting operating expenses by $400 million a year.
Stephen M. Wolf, United's chairman and chief executive, described the industry's ills as "well documented" and "pervasive," pointing especially to the fare wars led by carriers like Continental Airlines, Trans World Airlines and regional competitors that are operating in bankruptcy and benefiting from court orders cutting their costs.


Sports of The Times; Mara, Tisch Should Rule On Parcells
AS the Giants' general manager, George Young has always been prepared.
He's always had a short list of job candidates, in his mind if not on paper.
"When you hire an assistant coach," he once said, "you start thinking, 'Can he develop into an offensive or defensive coordinator if we need one? Or can he develop into a head coach if we need one?' You always have to be ready if something happens."


Nikita Magaloff Dies; Romantic Pianist, 80
Nikita Magaloff, one of the last representatives of the Romantic school of pianism, died on Dec. 26 at the Samaritans Hospital in the Swiss village of Vevey.
He was 80, and lived in Baugy, Switzerland.
He died after a long illness, hospital officials said.


Trial Opens Today For California Chief Of Public Education
Opening arguments are expected to be delivered on Thursday in Sacramento Superior Court in the trial of Bill Honig, California's Superintendent of Public Instruction, to determine whether he illegally profited from his office.
The case, which Mr.
Honig and his supporters say is motivated by politics, threatens to end the 10-year political career of one of the nation's most respected reformers of education.


Parolee Held in Sex Assaults and Robberies
A Brooklyn man on parole for an attempted-robbery conviction was charged yesterday in a series of sexual assaults and robberies at a Bedford-Stuyvesant housing project.
Darryle Williams of 606 Park Avenue, Bedford-Stuyvesant, was charged yesterday in 11 attacks on women at the Sumner Houses, said Amanita Duga-Carroll, a spokeswoman for the housing police.
The victims, who ranged in age from 8 to 62, were stalked, robbed and, in six cases, raped or sodomized in attacks beginning last June, the police said.


Another Platform for Oil's Story
WERE it not for oil, there would not be automobiles, airplanes or plastics, and an exhibition at the Paine Webber Art Gallery in Manhattan offers a look at more than 130 years of the oil industry in the United States.
The exhibition is "The Prize: Journey Through America's Oil Age," and it coincides with the four-part documentary "The Prize," which is being shown on PBS next Monday through Thursday.
Both the documentary and the exhibition are based on Daniel Yergin's book "The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money and Power" (Simon &amp; Schuster, 1991), which won a Pulitzer Prize in 1992.


Schools Need Race Balance, Weicker Says
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., in a State of the State speech that focused almost entirely on the deep racial divisions in Connecticut's public schools, today urged legislators and local school leaders to begin a voluntary integration effort that would give urban and suburban districts roughly equal racial mixes by the 1999-2000 school year.
The backdrop of the speech, which Mr.
Weicker repeatedly acknowledged, is a court case in which minority students from Hartford have sued the state, arguing that racially segregated schools violate the State Constitution's guarantee to equal education.
Testimony is under way in that case, with a decision expected sometime this year that could, if the students prevail, mandate sweeping changes.


Aerodyne Products Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 25


Two Giants, Rudolf Nureyev, 54, and Dizzy Gillespie, 75, Die
Two celebrated geniuses of the performing arts died yesterday: Rudolf Nureyev, the ballet dancer who leaped from Soviet dictatorship to the heights of artistic freedom in the West, and Dizzy Gillespie, the jazz trumpet virtuoso who brought a new wit and stylistic range to America's native art form.
Mr.
Nureyev, who died at the age of 54 in a suburban Paris hospital, made his dash to freedom with an elan that became his hallmark onstage as well.
After his defection from the Kirov Ballet in 1961, he quickly became one of the most creative and popular ballet artists of this century, perhaps the greatest male dancer since Vaslav Nijinsky.


Fabrics Of Life And Art
BITS of American Indian, British, Filipino, Brazilian and African cultures are woven into 26 textile pieces that fill the Bomani Gallery in San Francisco.
They are part of the exhibition "A Common Thread: Innovations and Improvisations in Contemporary Textiles," through Feb. 27.
"The unifying force in the whole show is the dialogue between the cultures," said Asake Bomani, who owns the gallery with her husband, Danny Glover.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Counting Sunny Hours
Q.
Since the number of sunny days should soon increase, the idea of a garden sundial beckons.
Can you suggest sources? -- Rebecca Lansing, Chicago.
A.
A sundial is certainly a nice way to watch time go by, and using the sun's shadow for this purpose dates to about 1500 B.C.
But sundials as decorative garden ornaments date only to about the 16th century.


A Feast of New Issues for Traders
The corporate bond market withstood a near-record barrage of new issues yesterday as a host of companies sought to take advantage of a friendly interest-rate environment.
The sale of more than $4.7 billion in new issues was the second largest in a single day, exceeded only on Jan. 8, 1992, when $5.3 billion of new issues were sold, the Securities Data Corporation reported.
And there is at least $2 billion more in the pipeline for today, including a $1.25 billion global bond sale by the World Bank and $750 million by RJR Nabisco.


Cooperative Bank For Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An Honor for Stallings
GENE STALLINGS, who led undefeated Alabama to the national championship, was named yesterday in Atlanta as National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I-A College Coach of the Year by the American Football Coaches Association.
The Crimson Tide capped a 13-0 season with a 34-13 victory over Miami in the Sugar Bowl for its 23d consecutive victory in Stallings's third season at Alabama.


School Upset By Shooting Of Teen-Ager During Game
Students and administrators expressed shock and anger today at the shooting of a former student during a basketball game Tuesday evening in the crowded high school gymnasium.
"Two gunshots suddenly rang out," said David Rodriguez, a senior, describing the final seconds of the game.
He said cheers from the crowd of more than 300 suddenly turned to screams "as students and teachers ducked and ran for cover."


New Cuban-Americans Also Oppose Castro; The True Bridges
To the Editor:
The Cuban exile community is suffering from collective dementia and hate-filled fanaticism, or so we ought to believe from Ruth Behar's Dec. 18 Op-Ed article.
This shared hatred of Fidel Castro, according to Ms.
Behar, has given sustenance to an aggressive United States policy toward Cuba.
She invites President-elect Clinton to reconsider his commitment to the Cuban Democracy Act, which prohibits United States subsidiaries from trading with Cuba, and thereby rescue United States-Cuba relations from the cold war.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
KNOWING how to restart a furnace if it stops unexpectedly can help you save money, reduce anxiety and often avoid a long, cold wait for a service technician.
Most heating-system breakdowns are neither dangerous nor serious, even in furnaces that burn highly flammable natural gas.
Following are safe, easy steps for restarting oil, gas, electric and steam furnaces, and heat pumps.
Begin by checking the thermostat, which is usually on a living room wall.
Increasing the setting to about 10 degrees above room temperature may restart the furnace.
Look at the thermostat's day/night switch, if there is one; its settings, which regulate heat by time of day, may be incorrect.


William B. Lodge, 85, A Television Executive
William B. Lodge, who helped build the CBS radio and television networks as a top executive in the formative years of the broadcasting industry, died Tuesday in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., where he lived.
He was 85.
He had been in declining health since he had a stroke in 1981, CBS said.


Investigators Raid Homes Of 7 in Union
Seven officers of a plumbers' union were awakened before dawn yesterday by investigators from the Manhattan District Attorney's office who came with warrants to search their homes for financial records and with the grim news that the union officers were under scrutiny in an organized-crime investigation.
Law-enforcement officials said the raids were part of an investigation of suspected Mafia influence in Local 2 of the plumbers' union in Manhattan and the Bronx, as well as bid-rigging on public and private construction projects in the last five years.
The officials asserted that they had uncovered evidence that some contractors were allowed to violate work rules, employ lower-paid nonunion plumbers and withhold pension and fringe-benefit contributions in return for kickbacks to union officials and members of the Lucchese and Genovese crime families.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Confirmation Hearings; G.O.P. Senators Spare Nominee Tough Quizzing
President-elect Bill Clinton's choice to become the next Commerce Secretary, Ronald H. Brown, coasted through his Senate confirmation hearing today.
Republicans who had threatened a vigorous cross-examination of Mr.
Clinton's Cabinet nominees ended up asking very few questions about how Mr.
Brown would handle issues involving his many former legal and lobbying clients.
While Mr.
Brown cited a Commerce Department letter stating that he was complying with Federal law, he is disqualifying himself from fewer decisions than Bush Administration appointees to comparable positions like Carla A. Hills, who is also a Washington lawyer.
Citing Valuable Experience
Mr.
Brown said that his legal work for the Government of Haiti, Japanese electronics companies and other clients had given him valuable experience for dealing with trade policy and other issues as Commerce Secretary.
Mr.
Brown said that American industry needed a strong advocate and that his experience as a lawyer had fully prepared him for that role.


Cuomo Proposes Tax on Incomes To Aid Schools
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed today to allow localities to finance schools using income taxes instead of property taxes, a move he said would ease the burden of the property tax on people with low incomes and address the disparities between rich and poor school districts.
After years of failing to persuade the Legislature to change the state school aid system to give more help to poorer districts, Mr.
Cuomo's proposal marks a new approach to the school finance problem, one of the state's most complicated political and governmental issues.


Quakers Remain Active in Somalia
To the Editor:
"Better Late Than Never, Aid Organizations Say" (news article, Dec. 21) reports there were only three American relief agencies working in Somalia before it made the headlines in July.
However, the American Friends Service Committee has conducted community development and relief projects in Somalia for more than 10 years.
We may have been overlooked because our staff is Somali, and our efforts are relatively small-scale.
KARA NEWELL  Executive Secretary, American Friends Service Committee Philadelphia, Dec. 22, 1992


Indian Troops Reportedly Kill 40 in Kashmir Raid
Indian paramilitary forces rampaged through a town in the Vale of Kashmir today, killing at least 40 people and setting houses and markets ablaze, according to reports from Kashmir.
More than 100 people were reported wounded in what was described as indiscriminate firing by Indian forces.
If confirmed, the death toll would be the worst in Kashmir since May 1990, when security forces opened fire on a funeral procession for the region's leading Islamic cleric, killing 67 people.


Berkshire Bond Conversion
Berkshire Hathaway Inc. said yesterday that holders of about 15.25 percent of its outstanding zero-coupon convertible bonds had decided to convert them into common stock of the company.
The remainder of the bonds were redeemed for $404.7 million in cash.
Berkshire, which is controlled by Warren E. Buffett, the Omaha financier, had called the notes for redemption on Jan. 4.


Reflections on the Scars Of the Old Budget Fights
Every morning when he looks in the mirror, Richard G. Darman said today, he sees a tiny scar on his forehead, the remnant of a fall he took outside a McDonald's restaurant in the autumn of 1990, at the height of the struggle over the budget between the Bush Administration and Congress.
The scar reminds him of the battle wounds of the last two years as President Bush's budget director, Mr.
Darman said at an unusually ruminative meeting with reporters.


Iraq: Hanging Tough Isn't Enough
Baghdad's deployment of antiaircraft missiles near and inside the no-flight zone declared over southern Iraq directly threatens the lives of allied pilots.
President Bush and allied leaders have now issued a stern -- and necessary -- response: Either the Iraqis shut down the missile sites on their own by Friday or the allies may have to do it for them.
But firm reaction isn't enough.
It will soon be up to the Clinton Administration to move beyond the present cycle of provocation and response and take steps to secure a definitive peace.


A Rare Burst of Budgetary Candor
President Bush's final budget is, in some respects, the most honest in years.
Unlike his recent predecessors, he did not send Congress one last wish list that he knew would be ignored.
And unlike his own previous budgets, this one doesn't pretend the deficit will disappear.
His prediction of growing deficits may be exaggerated, but it is no surprise.
Regardless of all the fancy forecasting by Federal number-crunchers, there is always some politics in the officially published estimates.


New Producer Heads Apollo Revue
To hear Ralph Cooper 2d tell it, he has become a victim of the same harsh treatment as the thousands of performers who have been pulled off the Apollo Theater stage during Amateur Night, the famed Wednesday-evening revue that his father started in the 1930's.
Mr.
Cooper, who took over Amateur Night after his father died in August, has been replaced as part of what the Apollo's new executive director said was an effort to freshen and streamline the show.
But Mr.
Cooper, who was not only the producer but also the emcee, said his legacy has been snatched away.


Pro Football; Wannstedt Available If Giants Pursue Him
George Young and Dave Wannstedt were in Dallas yesterday, and Young said they did not talk about the Giants' coaching vacancy.
But Jerry Jones, the Cowboys' owner and general manager, reiterated the team's position that Wannstedt, the Cowboys' defensive coordinator, would be allowed to have interviews for a head coaching job.


In the South Bronx, the Grass Roots Grow Up; Organizations Born in Protest Uncomfortably Find They're Now the Establishment
Nearly two decades ago, a band of urban homesteaders intent on blocking the city from demolishing the South Bronx apartment building they were painstakingly renovating linked arms, stood firm and stared down the city's bulldozers.
They won the confrontation and their building, and in the process spawned the Banana Kelly Community Improvement Association, named for the curved block of Kelly Street where they made their stand.
Like pioneering urban groups all over the country, they succeeded where government had failed, providing spotless buildings, low-income cooperatives and greatly needed social services.
And nowhere has that success been more evident than in the South Bronx, where Banana Kelly and others helped revive an area that arson and political inaction had consigned to the depths of urban chaos and despair.


Baseball; Jackson in Town to Doff His Heartfelt Cap to Yanks
In his first public appearance as the newest member of baseball's Hall of Fame, Reggie Jackson yesterday left no doubt that New York is where his heart is, where his body should have remained and where he would like his mind to be.
Jackson, the only former player elected for 1993 enshrinement in a vote of qualified members of the Baseball Writers Association, played for four teams, including the Oakland Athletics for 10 years and the Yankees and California Angels for five years each.
But he said yesterday his plaque at Cooperstown when he is inducted into the Hall on Aug. 1 would have him wearing a Yankee cap.


N.F.L. Labor Accord Is Reached, Allowing Free Agency for Players
Five years of bickering, bargaining and court battles came to an end today when the National Football League and its players agreed to a seven-year contract that, for the first time in the history of the sport, gives veteran players the freedom to move to other teams.
For owners, the agreement brought a landmark as well: the right to impose a salary cap, enabling them to hold down the earnings of players and somewhat blunt the impact of free agency.
Thus, the movement of players in football will most likely not resemble the mad scramble that characterizes baseball, but rather the more restrained movement in the National Basketball Association, which also has a salary cap.


A Cry of Islamic Fury, Taped in Brooklyn for Cairo
A blind Muslim cleric now preaching in Brooklyn and New Jersey, who stood trial in Egypt a decade ago for the assassination of President Anwar el-Sadat, is emerging as the spiritual leader of an Islamic fundamentalist movement that has carried out a series of violent attacks that has shaken the Egyptian Government.
Sheik Omar Abdul Rahman, living in self-imposed exile in the United States following his acquittal, is a voice heard not only in the mosques that run along Atlantic Avenue, where Yemeni, Sudanese and Egyptian immigrants worship, but on tens of thousands of scratchy cassette tapes that are sold in the back alleys and hallways of Cairo's schools and universities.


Costco Wholesale Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 22


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY ON THE BRINK WITH THE DAILY NEWS
Mortimer B. Zuckerman is expected to complete his purchase of The Daily News as soon as today, which could prompt a new newspaper war in New York City and tempt the fates that have long declared that the city cannot support four newspapers.
The purchase could also ignite an angry and tangled fight with labor unions, notably the Newspaper Guild.
A1.


Sales of Domestically Made Vehicles Up 4% in '92
Sales of domestically made cars and light trucks fell 1.5 percent in the final 10 days of 1992.
But the year as a whole ended on an up note, with total sales increasing 4 percent over 1991's depressed level.
For all of 1992, sales of domestic and imported light vehicles totaled 12,901,570 -- 8,249,007 cars and 4,652,563 trucks.
This was an improvement over the 12,326,772 vehicles sold in 1991, but a far cry from the nearly 15 million sold annually during the glory years of the mid-1980's.


Review/Ballet; Return to Repertory With 2 Standards
"The Nutcracker" is no more.
The toys and the Christmas tree have been packed away for another year.
And on Tuesday night the New York City Ballet returned to repertory at the New York State Theater.
It was a slow but steady, and finally satisfying, return.
The evening began with a timid account of George Balanchine's "Serenade," an evocation of romantic longings that ought to be heartbreaking.
The steps were clear enough, yet the ensemble seldom created the illusion of being swept along by the choreography or the accompanying score by Tchaikovsky.


Bronx Fire Leaves 2 Dead
Two people died last night in a three-alarm fire at a home in Morrisania, the Bronx, Fire Department officials said.
Harry Ryttenberg, a deputy fire commissioner, identified the dead as Alice Oglesby, 35, and her grandniece, Candice Schaeffer, 7.
Both lived in the three-story brick residence at 593 East 164th Street, where a fire started about 10 P.M. and spread to the building next door.
Mr.
Ryttenberg said investigators were looking into the possibility that the fire resulted from candles being used in a religious service.


College Basketball: Big East; Fast Start for Teams But No Boasting So Far
Hang around Dave Gavitt long enough and you learn some things.
One of the many things that his longtime associate and successor, Mike Tranghese, understood long before Tranghese took over the job of Big East commissioner in June 1990 was to keep some of his opinions to himself.
Early in what was forecast as a down year for the league -- an expectation that could come true, given the high standard established a decade ago -- the commissioner remains consistent.


Hockey; On Return to Kings, Gretzky Gets Pats on the Back
Wayne Gretzky did more than make a cameo appearance tonight.
He assisted on two goals, skated long shifts without ever hunching over to catch his breath and generally looked to be his old mobile self.
Only three months ago, pain from his herniated thoracic disk still riveted much of his upper torso, and the greatest scorer in hockey seemed resigned to retirement at age 31.
On airplane trips, he would need permission from flight attendants to lay flat on the floor.
In a restaurant once, he lay spread-eagled on the carpet to ease his back pain, and an unknowing waitress assumed he was drunk.


Corrections
A sports article yesterday about the reopening of negotiations on baseball's basic labor agreement misstated the date of the bargaining session.
It is next wednesday; it was not yesterday.


Council Bill Permits Bias Awards
The New York City Council passed a measure yesterday that would allow victims of bias-motivated violence or harassment to sue in state court for punitive damages.
Proponents of the measure, which passed by a vote of 44 to 1, called it groundbreaking legislation that would give the city one of the toughest civil laws against hate crimes in the country.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about stock trading on Tuesday misstated the closing price for the Albany International Corporation in some editions.
It closed at $15.125, down 12.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Confusion on Plans for a Giant Plane
Airbus Industrie said today that it had begun cooperation with the Boeing Company that could lead the aircraft makers to study the feasibility of a new super- jumbo aircraft seating as many as 800 people.
But Boeing denied the statement, saying that right now it plans to work on a feasibility plan for a giant airliner only with one of Airbus's major holders, Deutsche Aerospace A.G.


Economic Scene; Worrying About That Old Enemy
NEVER mind that many Americans can't decide whether the recession is really over, let alone how robust the recovery will be.
The hard money crowd at the Federal Reserve is already on to the next battle: inflation.
No sooner was the election over than Fed policy makers evidently decided, albeit tentatively, to lower targets for money supply growth.
That's not the same as clamping down on money growth, but it is a signal of shifting priorities and future intentions.


Hockey; Senators Provide the Elixir for Rangers
The Ottawa Senators are the home remedy of the National Hockey League, a little hard to swallow but an all-purpose medicine that is good for what ails you.
They are an expansion team that has won only three times in half a season, none of them on the road.
And they didn't come close Wednesday night when they visited Madison Square Garden.
The Rangers, under the psychic weather lately, defeated them by 6-2 in a tepid affair as Sergei Zubov, a rookie defenseman from Russia, scored two goals.
Mike Richter made a rare appearance as the starting goalie and played well.
A victory is a victory, but there have been board of governors meetings in this league with more fireworks.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIED-SIGNAL INC., Morristown, N.J., has reached an agreement in principle to purchase a specialty chemicals business in Pittsburg, Kan., from Koch Chemical Co., Wichita, for an undisclosed amount.
GENERAL ELECTRIC CO., said its Aircraft Engines unit had received a $200 million order from the Greek Air Force for jet engines to power 40 F-16 fighters recently purchased by Greece.


CHRONICLE
In Yorba Linda, Calif., the relationship, albeit fleeting, of another Presidential couple is to be celebrated this weekend: that of RICHARD M. NIXON and Elvis Presley.
The Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace will offer free admission -- and birthday cake -- to honor what would have been Presley's 58th birthday on Friday, and Mr.
Nixon's 80th birthday on Saturday.


Congress Certifies Clinton's Election


In East Harlem, a Parade Celebrates the Feast of the Epiphany


Stop Negotiating With Serbia
The United Nations negotiations on Bosnia, including those scheduled to resume in Geneva Sunday, have been a failure.
Cyrus Vance, the U.N. special envoy, and Lord Owen, the European Community's representative, hope to resolve the crisis through diplomacy alone.
But their approach is so seriously flawed that it will not stop Serbian aggression in Bosnia or prevent its spread to Kosovo.
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia and his Bosnian surrogates have continually duped Mr.
Vance and Mr.
Owen.
They prolong negotiations with promises, which they break -- and the aggression is renewed.
Then they make new promises and start the cycle of lies again.
Mr.
Milosevic has convinced the negotiators that the peace process would be harmed if the West took military action or provided arms to the Bosnians.


Weicker's Message Focuses on Schools
In Connecticut, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s State of the State speech focused on the deep racial divisions in the state's public schools.
Against the backdrop of a case in which minority students are suing the state, the Governor urged legislators and school leaders to give urban and suburban districts equal racial mixes by the 1999-2000 school year.
Article, page B1.


Pro Football; N.F.L. Free Agency: Superstars Need Not Apply
Yesterday's labor agreement was hailed as a major victory for the average National Football League player, for the owners and for professional football in general, but it comes at the expense of rookies and superstars.
That was the instant assessment offered by Leigh Steinberg, the agent to many superstars, who admits he has a special ax to grind.


Christopher and Heads Of Jewish Groups Talk
Secretary of State-designate Warren M. Christopher met today with representatives of several major Jewish organizations to defuse tensions between Jewish groups and the new Clinton Administration.
The meeting, held in the office of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Democrat of Connecticut, was attended by Mr.
Christopher; Lester Pollack, chairman of the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations; Monte Friedkin, vice president of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, the leading pro-Israel lobby, and Elizabeth Schrayer, the lobby's political director.


Foreign Affairs; The Diversity Trap
Reagan Democrats squawk about Bill Clinton shortchanging them in favor of Carter foreign policy liberals.
Jewish leaders complain that the Clinton team isn't sufficiently Jewish or pro-Israel.
Women and blacks demand their share of the diplomatic and defense pie.
Nothing new here in job jockeying, particularly not among Democrats -- except in degree.
But degree can be everything.


Review/Dance; Into Death and Desolation, Nothingness and Nevermore
Ecstasy and earthiness color Margie Gillis's eye-riveting dances, images of physical power channeled into robust femininity.
Aptly, her signature piece is now "Bloom," the superb 1989 solo she choreographed to Siobhan McKenna's taped recitation of Molly Bloom's soliloquy in James Joyce's "Ulysses."
Toward the end, Ms.
Gillis's Molly, long hair pulled back, and skipping across the stage with a print dress raised to reveal a bare thigh, suddenly stops and buries her face in an invisible bouquet: the fragrance of the flowers described by Ms.
McKenna seems virtually to waft into the theater.
Even the dancer seems overcome by the scent ("I was the flower of the mountain") and the sexual metaphor as she flings herself into a whirling crescendo, a sensuous spin of rising desire.
"Yes, I will, yes," are the final words as Ms.
Gillis stops short, wide-eyed and beckoning in a frozen image of acquiescence.
The audience goes wild.


Develcon Electronics Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The White House Staff; Advisers Looking Askance At Pledge for 25% Staff Cut
As President-elect Bill Clinton's advisers get closer to becoming White House staff members, they are growing dubious about his campaign promise to cut that staff by 25 percent.
Transition officials now say it could take months for the new Administration to meet that goal, if it does so at all.


With Cups Raised To a High Art Form
CUP.
Three such cozily put together letters.
Such a nice, neat and evocative word.
Actually, it's more than a word.
It's a gesture.
In describing the object, one can hardly keep from joining one's hands together to make an imaginary example.
Edward Pate, director of Archon, a ceramics gallery on East 31st Street, has taken a timely approach to the timeless cup.
In his current exhibition, called "A Show About the Cup," Mr.
Pate has presented a group of 15 works -- all cups, as interpreted by five artists.
"The idea of the show was to draw attention to the cup as an object that we're so intimately involved with and so unaware of at the same time," he said.


Tsongas Hospitalized for Cancer Treatment
Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts was admitted to the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston yesterday for further treatment of lymphoma, a cancer of the immune system, officials of the hospital said.
Mr.
Tsongas, a Democratic Presidential candidate last year, was reported in good condition.
He entered the hospital for monitoring of the chemotherapy he is receiving for his latest battle against lymphoma.


AT THE LIBRARY WITH: Sandra Cisneros; A Solo Traveler In Two Worlds
ON a rainy winter afternoon, the writer Sandra Cisneros stands before a ragtag group of children and adults in the tiny Brownsville branch of the Brooklyn Public Library, and with orange and black cat-eyed glasses perched atop her head, begins her song of life in the barrio.
One hand clutches her open book.
The other moves passionately, as does her face, which she scrunches into a knot and then opens with delight as she reads aloud of wise children and foolish adults, of tangled Latino and American cultures, of noise and silence and Proustian moments, of intense love and intense anger.


A Fitness Suitcase For Home Or Travel
FOR many people the hardest part about exercising at home or while traveling is getting started.
Unlike a health club, where the focus is on fitness, a home or hotel environment has diversions everywhere you look.
Exercise equipment can add an incentive and can make the task simpler.
Sentry Pack, a fitness-products company in Waterbury, Conn., has developed a series of workout kits for travel or home.
Its Healthage line comes with a variety of exercise gear in various combinations and prices.
The Healthage Ultra Fitness Kit is the company's most complete package, and it's available at Sears stores nationwide for $49.99.


Scottish and Labor Officials Fault Government on Oil Spill
A day after the tanker Braer ran aground and began spilling oil off the southern tip of the Shetland Islands, conservationists, Scottish officials and Labor Party critics faulted the Government for not enforcing tougher restrictions on tankers using shipping lanes close to environmentally sensitive areas.
Chris Smith, a spokesman on the environment for the opposition Labor Party, said the Government had failed to learn from the Exxon Valdez oil spill in Alaska in 1989, which caused widespread damage and led to measures in the United States regulating the movement on tankers through certain offshore areas.


A Man's Garage Is His Castle, All 4,700 Square Feet of It
AROUND Palo Alto, where many entrepreneurial dreams began in garages, garage lore is part of the local fabric.
Now, there's a new twist to the old tale: a garage that is a dream come true.
By definition, a dream garage is not ordinary.
"My dream was to someday have a place to park all my cars," said Marshall Mathews, now the owner of a 4,700-square-foot garage that is more than twice the size of his 2,000-square-foot house.
"I never thought I would have this large a garage."


Fannie Mae Prices Its First '93 Issue
The Federal National Mortgage Association, or Fannie Mae, the nation's largest investor in home mortgages, on Tuesday priced its first debenture issue for the new year, a $1.2 billion offering made through various securities dealers.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
FAMILY secrets can bind family members together or tear them apart.
Being protected from the truth can breed a child's resentment and anger.
So can knowing information that's inappropriate and emotionally overwhelming.
Often, the contents of the secret are less important to the child than the way it is shared.
On her 18th birthday, Rita Underberg was told a family secret: her mother was dying of cancer.
"They didn't want to worry me," said Dr.
Underberg, who's now a psychologist and a clinical professor of psychiatry at the University of Rochester, "but I'd been upset and confused for five years about why she wasn't getting better." She still feels misled, and wishes her parents had let her know the truth earlier.


Mississippi Debt Of $127.9 Million
Mississippi was in the tax-exempt market yesterday to sell $127.9 million of general obligation refunding bonds to the public through underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.


Buying Account Review by Nynex
The Nynex Corporation said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its consolidated media buying account to three finalists: Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot in Boston, Bozell New York and Chiat/Day in New York.
Though billings were not disclosed, trade publications have estimated them at $130 million.


Bridge
Just as New Yorkers continue to mock the shade of Fiorello La Guardia by referring to Sixth Avenue rather than Avenue of the Americas, so bridge players, also favoring brevity, talk about the McKenney.
This is the traditional name for the annual race to accumulate the most master points, but the American Contract Bridge League prefers to call it the Barry Crane Top 500, in honor of a player who headed the standings on many occasions.
The 1992 winner was Dennis Sorensen of Gresham, Ore., a former mathematics teacher who now follows the tournament trail, mainly on the West Coast.
In the course of the year he played in nearly 40 tournaments and accumulated about 2800 master points, not far short of a record.
His final surge to the title was in Reno, Nev., during the New Year weekend, technically part of 1992 for McKenney purposes.
On the diagramed deal, which helped him to win the Knockout Team title there, he sat South and landed in four hearts doubled.
His opening bid would not win the approval of the purists, but the modern trend is toward undisciplined weak two-bids.


Tanker, Gushing Oil, in Danger of Breaking Apart
The disabled tanker that was swept onto the rocks here on Tuesday spewed oil into the storm-whipped waters of the North Sea today, fouling miles of coastline as officials scrambled to contain what they said could be an environmental disaster.
Thirty-six hours after losing power and being pushed aground by strong winds, the tanker, the Braer, remained in one piece late today, wedged against a 75-foot cliff, listing sharply with its stern virtually submerged.
Oil gushed out as waves battered the ship.
And officials said they feared that another fierce storm forecast to move through the area tonight could bring heavy seas that would break the vessel apart, dumping the rest of the oil into the water.


Unifirst Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The President-Elect; Auto Makers Ask Clinton to Limit Imports of Mini-Vans From Japan
Leaders of the Big Three American auto makers today pressed President-elect Bill Clinton to limit Japanese auto imports into the United States.
Harold A. Poling, chairman of the Ford Motor Company, John F. Smith, Jr., president of the General Motors Corporation, Robert J. Eaton, chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, and Owen Bieber, president of the United Auto Workers, spoke with Mr.
Clinton and Vice-President-elect Al Gore at the Governor's Mansion, in a meeting they requested before Mr.
Clinton completes his economic plans.


Indictments Cite Corruption In Private Sanitation Service
The United States Attorney for New Jersey today announced indictments in a corruption case involving Newark's Sanitation Division and used the occasion to warn other cities to be vigilant when they hire private companies to provide municipal services.
"I don't know if this is an indictment of the concept of privatization," said Michael Chertoff, who is the state's chief Federal prosecutor.
"But it suggests that no method of delivering municipal services should escape the need for diligent supervision. There will always be a small minority of people seeking to enrich themselves."


William H. Angoff, 73, Expert on S.A.T., Dies
William H. Angoff, whose work with the Scholastic Aptitude Test helped make it more understandable to millions of high school students and college admissions officers, died on Tuesday at his home in Princeton, N.J.
He was 73.
He died of a heart attack, said Tom Ewing, a spokesman for the Educational Testing Service of Lawrenceville, N.J.


Harding Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


2 Arrested in Stranglings
Two Queens men were arrested yesterday and charged with strangling two women in their apartment on the Upper West Side of Manhattan three weeks ago, the police said.
Kevin Ladson, 22, and Antoine Atterbury, 21, both of Jamaica, were charged with second-degree murder.
The women, Nikki Silas, 20, and Karbrian Rojas, 19, shared an apartment at 211 West 109th Street, between Amsterdam Avenue and Broadway, said Detective Joseph McConville, a Police Department spokesman.
Detective McConville said that the men knew the victims and that the motive was theft.


A Shake-Up at Williams-Sonoma
In an apparent management shake-up, Williams-Sonoma Inc., a retailer of kitchenware and other home and garden items, today announced the resignation of its president and chief operating officer, Kent Larson, and its senior vice president and general merchandising manager, Glen Senk.
Williams-Sonoma, which is based here, had losses in the first three quarters of 1991 but says it expects to return to the black in its fourth-quarter results.


A Store Where Brooklyn Is the Star
IF there ever was a store with a one-track mind, it's Ad Finem, which opened recently in Brooklyn Heights.
"Most of the work here is by Brooklyn artists and designers," said Debbie Davies Brunelli, the owner.
Portraits tiny enough to hang in a dollhouse depict the world according to Brooklynites -- scenes of the Brooklyn Bridge, Prospect Park and brownstones in Park Slope, and of the Manhattan skyline as seen from the Esplanade in Brooklyn Heights.
The miniature paintings and drawings are by Veronique, an artist in Park Slope.


Mary Tarleton Knollenberg, Sculptor, 88
Mary Tarleton Knollenberg, a sculptor, died on Dec. 21 at her home in Chester, Conn.
She was 88 years old.
She died in her sleep, said Edmund Delaney, her lawyer and a friend.


2 States, 1 Target; Cuomo and Weicker Differ in Attack On Systems of Bias by Local Wealth
In Albany and Hartford, two Governors used their annual State of the State addresses today to suggest new ways to battle the historic problems created by the side-by-side coexistence of rich and poor school districts.
Each addressed a different aspect of the crucial issue of education.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York focused on the way wealth is tapped to pay for education.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut confronted the educational disparities that inevitably result when white students attend schools in affluent suburbs while minority students attend schools in poor urban areas.


Holiday Mulching
The Green Guerillas, a city community gardening group, will be chipping Christmas trees for recycling at the Westside Community Garden on Sunday from 1 to 4 p.m.


Snowbound in Thirsty California
In the seventh year of drought, this remote Siskiyou County town is buried under seven feet of snow and oldtimers are doing the back-breaking work of shoveling their roofs while dreaming of summer, when the mountain lakes will be brimming and the pine forests less likely to burst into flame.
"A lot of people will grumble for a while," said Dick Wood, a semiretired wallpaper hanger who cleared his roof so that it would not collapse under the next groaning load of snow and stocked up on kerosene in case falling trees knocked down power lines again.
"But in the end they'll be happy, because we need the water."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Mary Cleere Haran Rainbow and Stars 30 Rockefeller Plaza Through Jan. 30
Late in "Swinging on a Star," Mary Cleere Haran's brilliant new cabaret act at Rainbow and Stars saluting 1940's movie songs, the singer compares her mother's stories of dating in the 40's to her own experiences growing up in San Francisco in the late 60's.
Where a typical date for her mother meant dining and dancing to the music of a hotel orchestra in an evening that ended with a "sweet little goodnight kiss," Ms.
Haran reflects, a comparable experience for her was a night of dancing to Rolling Stones records, then deciding whether to sleep with someone from her mime class.


Circle Fine Art Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bush and Clinton Aides Link Policies on Haiti
Hoping to stave off a flood of new Haitian refugees, aides to President Bush and President-elect Bill Clinton said today in an unusual joint statement that both men are pressing for a political settlement in the troubled nation.
After reports that the Clinton Administration would adopt a more liberal policy toward Haitian refugees, Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger and the man who will replace him, Warren M. Christopher, said today that they "share the goal of restoring democracy to Haiti, safeguarding human rights of all Haitians on the island and helping the parties find a lasting solution that will end Haiti's suffering and attain new support for Haiti's economy and people."


No Headline
"Sell the house in East Hampton and get out of the influence of those awful people, especially his media friends. Never take advice from anyone who earns over $42,500 a year." -- JERRY NACHMAN, former editor of The New York Post, recalling advice he gave Mort Zuckerman, as he takes over The Daily News.  [ B3:5. ]


Events: Garden Talks And Design Symposium
English Gardens
University of Connecticut at Stamford, Scofieldtown Road off High Ridge Road; (203) 322-6971.
The Bartlett Arboretum; the Art of Living, a British cultural organization, and garden clubs in Connecticut are sponsoring "A Day in English Gardens" on Wednesday from 9:45 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Sarah Coles, a British garden writer, will speak about three gardens in Hampshire, England, including a 1908 garden designed by Gertrude Jekyll, and about designing English-style gardens in small areas.
Fee, $25; a box lunch is available for $7.
Reservations required.


Thompson Enters Draft
CHARLES THOMPSON, the former University of Oklahoma quarterback who spent 17 months in prison for selling cocaine, announced yesterday in Columbus, Ohio, that he would forgo his final year of eligibility at Central State University and make himself available for the National Football League draft.
Thompson, who is 24, was primarily a tailback at Central State this year as the Marauders won the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics Division I championship.
He carried 200 times for 1,018 yards and five touchdowns and caught 29 passes for 439 yards and 7 touchdowns.


Review/Television; 'Star Trek' Leaps To the 24th Century In Syndicated Series
Enterprise is still the name of the "Star Trek" game, in the sense not of difficult undertaking but of business venture.
Created by Gene Roddenberry, the original "Star Trek" series, not very successful in its initial run, made its debut on NBC-TV in September 1966 and, three years and 79 episodes later, turned out to be a megahit.
It has since spawned a cartoon series, more than 100 novelizations, 6 movies and a blockbuster syndicated series called "Star Trek: The Next Generation," for which Mr.
Roddenberry returned as executive producer.


Chevron Will Cut Earnings For New Accounting Rule
The Chevron Corporation said today that it would adopt new accounting standards, retroactive to Jan. 1, 1992, that will result in a one-time charge to first-quarter 1992 earnings of about $625 million, or $1.82 a share.
The net effect is a decrease in net income of $540 million, or $1.58 a share, for the first nine months of 1992.
Chevron has not yet reported its fourth-quarter results.
The one-time charge stems from the implementation of new accounting rules that are being widely adopted among many large companies.
Benefits and Taxes
One rule requires companies to account for the costs of providing for a retiree's nonpension benefits during the worker's employment, rather than waiting until the benefits -- primarily, health and life insurance -- are actually paid out.


Eagles Expect Waters To Be Back for Dallas
The Philadelphia Eagles placed ANDRE WATERS on their practice squad yesterday and Coach RICH KOTITE indicated that he would activate the strong safety for Sunday's National Football Conference playoff game against the Dallas Cowboys.
Waters has been sidelined since Oct. 18 with a broken fibula and torn ligaments in his left leg. (AP)


Ohio Incinerator Endangers a Nearby School
To the Editor:
The assertions in "To Protect Health" (letter, Dec. 22) by Jeff Zelik, plant manager of Waste Technologies, that the proposed East Liverpool, Ohio, hazardous-waste incinerator presents no risk to the community do not withstand close inspection, as Vice President-elect Gore has commendably recognized.


Nationsbank Card Features a Savings Plan
Nationsbank Inc., the country's No. 4 bank, said today that it was introducing a credit card that would enable card holders to build their savings when they make purchases.
The card program, a joint venture with Start Inc. of Herndon, Va., will provide each holder of a Nationsbank-Start Visa or Mastercard with a tax-deferred annuity administered by the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company of New York.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in some editions yesterday about a report by the Environmental Protection Agency on the effects of secondhand cigarette smoke misidentified the person who called on President Bush to restrict smoking in Federal buildings.
It was Dr.
Alfred Munzer of the Coalition on Smoking or Health, not Douglas Fuller of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.


G.E. to Buy Mutual Fund Marketer
The General Electric Company's finance subsidiary definitively agreed to buy the Weyerhaeuser Company's GNA unit, which markets mutual funds and insurance products, for $525 million in cash, the companies said yesterday.
The deal represents two strategic trends: Weyerhaeuser, a forest products company, is returning to its core business of timber and paper production, while the General Electric Capital Corporation is seeking a stronger position in the fast-growing business of bank sales of mutual funds and pension annuities.


Tokyo Journal; Finally, Prince Finds a Bride: A Harvard Woman
Japan's longest-running soap opera, the search for a bride for Crown Prince Naruhito, ended tonight with the disclosure that the country's next Empress will be a decidedly modern Japanese woman.
She is a 29-year-old Harvard graduate who has spent her short career as a diplomat handling some of Japan's most delicate economic disputes with the United States.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.33
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.10
3.70
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.23
3.25
3.73
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.31
6.29
6.40
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.35
7.33
7.38
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.38
8.35
8.57
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.34
6.34
6.65
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Calendar: How to Make Glass
Studio Glass
Heller Gallery, 71 Greene Street (Spring Street); (212) 966-5948.
"Glass America 1993," featuring functional and sculptural work by 40 artists, starts on Saturday and runs through Jan. 31.
Open Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
No charge.


8.32% Top Yield On MCI Debt
MCI Communications Inc. in the corporate debt market to raise cash, priced $400 million of notes and debentures through Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in two parts.
A $200 million offering of noncallable notes due in 2000 was priced at par to yield 7.125 percent, or about 80 basis points more than the seven-year Treasury security.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


CHRONICLE
RONALD REAGAN voted for whom?
According to the Jan. 9 issue of TV Guide, the former President pulled the lever for BILL CLINTON and not for PRESIDENT BUSH, who was Mr.
Reagan's two-term Vice President.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Mark McLemore, infielder, to a contract with Rochester of the International League and invited him to spring training as a non-roster player.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Signed Ron Tingley and Greg Myers, catchers, and Mark Holzemer, pitcher, to one-year contracts.
Agreed to terms with Rene Gonzales, infielder, on a minor-league contract and invited him to spring training as a non-roster player.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Agreed to terms with Mark Eichhorn, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Signed Dave Cochrane, infielder-outfielder, to a contract with Indianapolis of the American Association.
Named Jack McKeon consultant and Tommy Dunbar manager of their Princeton, W.Va., affiliate in the Appalachian League.
New York-Penn League  WATERTOWN INDIANS -- Named Mike Young manager.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  ATLANTA HAWKS -- Activated Blair Rasmussen, center, from the injured list.
Waived Andre Spencer and Alex Stivrins, forwards.
BOSTON CELTICS -- Waived Bart Kofoed, guard.
DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Activated Dexter Cambridge, forward, from the injured list.
Waived Stephen Bardo, guard.
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Activated Alton Lister, center, from the injured list.
Waived Paul Pressey, guard.
INDIANA PACERS -- Activated Vern Fleming, guard, from the injured list.
Placed Greg Dreiling, center, on the injured list.
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Released Kenny Payne, forward.
Continental Basketball Association  LA CROSSE CATBIRDS -- Signed Danny Pearson, forward.
QUAD CITY THUNDER -- Signed Regie Fox, forward.
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Signed Chris Corchiani, guard.
ROCHESTER RENEGADE -- Signed Jerome Harmon, forward.
Placed Dirk Minniefield, guard on injured reserve.
ROCKFORD LIGHTNING -- Traded the rights to Jim Farmer, guard, to the Columbus Horizon for a 1993 fourth-round draft pick.
SIOUX FALLS SKYFORCE -- Signed Brett Szabo, forward-center.
WICHITA FALLS TEXANS -- Signed Brad Baldridge, forward.
Football  National Football League  KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Fired Joe Pendry, offensive coordinator; Bruce Arians, running backs coach and Howard Mudd, offensive line coach.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Placed Andre Waters, strong safety, on the practice squad.
Soccer  American Professional Soccer League  APSL -- Announced that the Toronto Blizzard have been approved for membership beginning in the 1993 season.
National Professional Soccer League  MILWAUKEE WAVE -- Signed Paul Wright, forward.
Waived Lyle Yorks, midfielder.
College
NCAA -- Appointed Lee A. McElroy, director of athletics at Sacramento State, and Eleanor S. Morris, director of the office of scholarships and student aid at North Carolina, to the NCAA special degree-completion program committee.
Appointed DeLoss Dodds, director of athletics at Texas, to the NCAA Div.
I men's basketball committee; and Eamon M. Kelly, president of Tulane, to the NCAA Ad Hoc Committee to study enforcement issues.
SENIOR BOWL -- Named Ted Marchibroda of the Indianapolis Colts and Bill Belichick of the Cleveland Browns head coaches for the Senior Bowl.
COLORADO STATE -- Named Larry Kerr defensive coordinator and Mick Delaney administrative assistant and special teams coach.
Retained Tom Ehlers, assistant linebackers coach, and Vance Bedford, defensive secondary coach.
LOUISIANA STATE -- Named Lynn Amedee offensive coordinator and quarterbacks coach.
NORTH CAROLINA STATE -- Announced that Bryant Feggins, basketball forward, will miss the remainder of the season while recovering from a gunshot wound.
NORTH DAKOTA -- Announced that Mike Bergman, basketball forward, is transferring from Iowa State.
TENNESSEE -- Promoted David Cutcliffe, quarterbacks coach, to offensive coordinator.
Named Kippy Brown assistant head coach and receivers coach.


Survivors Are Some Of Neediest
When Moises T. goes to sleep, his mother often returns.
She appears to him in nightmares in which she is drowning, and he cannot reach her.
Sometimes he dreams about the morning when he found her lying in a pool of blood in bed, stabbed to death by a boyfriend who then hanged himself only a few feet away.
Moises, 10, usually jolts awake at that point, crying and screaming and raging at his failure to save her.


Court Upholds Injunction On Sale of Sackler Art
The Appellate Division of State Supreme Court refused yesterday to lift its preliminary injunction against next's week's sale of art from the estate of Arthur M. Sackler.
The decision postpones the auction, scheduled for Wednesday at Christie's in New York, of half of the Sackler collection of majolica.
The 144-piece collection, described by Christie's as the largest holding of majolica, a form of Renaissance and 18th-century polychromed pottery, to come on the market since the 1960's, was estimated to bring a total of $3.5 million.
The rest of the majolica was to be sold in October.


Hockey; Devils Seem Inspired To Put On a Big Show
Did the Devils know that scouts from six teams were at the game? They played like it.
Showing the enthusiasm of players trying to impress outsiders or save their jobs, the Devils crushed the Minnesota North Stars, 5-1, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight and erased some bad memories of recent games.


Stranger in a Strange Land: Muslim in Serb Army
When Muslim soldiers of the Bosnian Government fight their way up the precipitous slopes of Mount Trebevic in an effort to break the siege of Sarajevo, Edin Lazovic and his fellow commandos are there to stop them.
So far it has been a mismatch, with hundreds of Muslims killed, some of them still lying in the snow.
Mr.
Lazovic relaxed today in a restaurant at the top of the old bobsled run from the 1984 Winter Olympics.
As he did, others in his special forces unit stopped by the table, slapping him on the shoulder.
Now and then, they offered dark jokes about Muslims on the other side of the siege lines a few hundred yards below, and he shared in the laughter.


Dizzy Gillespie, Who Sounded Some of Modern Jazz's Earliest Notes, Dies at 75
Dizzy Gillespie, the trumpet player whose role as a founding father of modern jazz made him a major figure in 20th-century American music and whose signature moon cheeks and bent trumpet made him one of the world's most instantly recognizable figures, died yesterday at Englewood Hospital in Englewood, N.J.
Mr.
Gillespie, who was 75, had been suffering for some time from pancreatic cancer, his press agent, Virginia Wicks, said.


Results Plus
SKIING  Schneider Conquers a Tricky Course  Vreni Schneider of Switzerland made a tricky course look easy yesterday in Maribor, Slovenia, as she recorded her 20th World Cup slalom victory and first of the current season.
Schneider was the fastest in both runs and compiled a combined time of 1 minute 39.11 seconds on a demanding slope that saw four top-seeded skiers fail to finish the first run.
An Olympic silver medalist, Annelise Coberger of New Zealand, finished second in 1:40.42, and Deborah Compagnoni of Italy was third in 1:41.01.
Julie Parisien of Auburn, Me., and Kristina Andersson of Sweden tied for fourth at 1:41.25.
Parisien won the season's first slalom in Park City, Utah.


Aid Urged for Dislocated Workers in Arms Industry
Echoing themes endorsed by the Clinton team, a Federal commission today sharply criticized Government programs meant to help thousands of dislocated employees of military contractors.
The Defense Conversion Commission recommended that existing programs be strengthened and better coordinated with local communities to cope with the 960,000 jobs in private industry that are expected to be lost from the weapons makers from 1991 to 1997 as a result of military cutbacks.


INSIDE
New Conviction for Keating
Charles H. Keating Jr. was convicted of Federal fraud charges in the collapse of Lincoln Savings.
Page D1.
Judge Protects Records
In an Iran-contra ruling, a judge barred destruction of computer messages in the White House.
Page A15.


Pro Football; Cowher Was Quick to Set Tone for the Steelers
In Merrill Hoge's mind, the seeds of success for the Steelers' season were planted during Coach Bill Cowher's first meeting with the team after he was hired to replace the longtime Pittsburgh coach, Chuck Noll, last January.
"When we found out we were getting a new coach and a new coaching staff, everybody thought it was going to be a rebuilding year and that it would be four or five years before we'd be a contender," Hoge said.
"But Coach Cowher said it's not going to be a rebuilding time, but a refocusing time. He said we had the potential to be in the playoffs this year and he didn't expect any more or any less.


U.S. to Compensate Ex-G.I.'s Exposed to Poison Gases
Following recommendations of a National Academy of Sciences study, the Department of Veterans Affairs proposed today that thousands of servicemen exposed to poison gas during secret World War II experiments be compensated for an expanded list of ailments.
The study found that more than 4,000 soldiers and sailors -- twice the number previously estimated -- had been intentionally exposed to high concentrations of mustard gas or of Lewisite, a poisonous gas made from arsenic, or of a combination of the two.
The department said that all 4,000 could claim compensation for an expanded list of medical problems that might have have resulted from the tests.


Why Does Empire Blue Cross Routinely Get Ripped Off?
To the Editor:
Just two instances that occurred to members of my family illustrate a major problem with Empire Blue Cross-Blue Shield, New York State's largest health insurer.


Lawrence Bruce Service
A memorial service for Lawrence E. Bruce Jr., president of the United States Committee for Unicef, who died on Dec. 25, will be held on Friday at 11:30 A.M. at the Community Church at 40 East 35th Street in Manhattan.


Essay; When to Use Force
When a departing President makes a serious effort to examine and articulate the idea that guided his foreign policy, attention should be paid.
At Texas A&amp;M last month, Mr.
Bush made a first try.
The speech was the product of a committee covering its posterior and deserved the shrug it received.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Living Section yesterday with an article about the Italian dish bollito misto misidentified the chef at the Four Seasons.
He is Stefano Battistini, not Julian Niccolini.


Vallone Faults Dinkins Administration; Asserts Council Will Fulfill Oversight Role Provided by Charter
City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone sharply criticized the Dinkins administration yesterday as he vowed in his annual speech to turn the Council into the effective governmental watchdog envisioned in the 1989 City Charter.
Mr.
Vallone's remarks were the toughest criticism he has hurled at the Dinkins administration since the Council expanded to 51 members and gained power over budget, oversight and land-use decisions two years ago.
He assailed the administration for what he said were failed policies, from its haphazard handling of child-abuse cases to its failure to comply with local laws banning barracks-style homeless shelters.
Continuing Problems
"Why haven't these problems been corrected?" Mr.
Vallone said in his State of the City speech.
"Crime, education, homelessness, social services: New Yorkers pay their taxes so that City Hall will deal with these problems. They're not getting their money's worth."


New Cuban-Americans Also Oppose Castro
To the Editor:
I take exception to "A Bridge to Cuba" by Ruth Behar (Op-Ed, Dec. 18).
Like her, I left Cuba as a child of 10 in 1961.
Therefore, I am a member of the second generation of Cuban-Americans who, according to Ms.
Behar, seek to build bridges, not walls, between the United States and Cuba.


No Headline
Charles H. Keating Jr., the former head of the failed Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, and his son Charles H. Keating 3d were convicted today of Federal fraud and racketeering charges related to the collapse of Lincoln, which has come to epitomize the troubles of the savings and loan industry.
After deliberating for five days, a jury in a Federal court in Los Angeles found Mr.
Keating, 69, guilty on all 73 counts, including securities and wire fraud, racketeering and conspiracy.
The younger Mr.
Keating, 37, former vice president of Lincoln, was found guilty of 64 similar counts.
Long Prison Terms Possible
The elder Mr.
Keating faces a maximum sentence of 525 years in prison and his son, 475 years.
United States District Judge Mariana R. Pfaelzer set sentencing for March 15 and gave no indication of what sentence she might impose.
Mr.
Keating, who is serving a prison sentence on a state conviction, remained in Federal custody today; his son is free on bail.


Chairman Steps Down At Macy's Western Unit
Daniel B. Finkelstein, chairman of R. H. Macy &amp; Company's West Coast division, has suddenly resigned, marking the end of what had once been seen as a family dynasty at the retail company.
Rudolph J. Borneo, president of the division and a graduate of Macy's executive training program, will serve as acting chairman of the division until a successor to Mr.
Finkelstein is hired, the company said.


Quakers Remain Active in Somalia; Pax Christi's Position
To the Editor:
Re "Reshaping Pacifism to Fight Anguish in a Reshaped World" (front page, Dec. 21), on the peace movement's response to the situation in Somalia: You interpret the failure of the initial statement of Pax Christi U.S.A. to condemn the use of arms in this tragic situation as support for military action.
Pax Christi U.S.A. does not support the military action in Somalia.
As the national Roman Catholic peace movement, we are committed to nonviolence.


Brevard Journal; As Wine Is Served, Business Sours
The saying around this tranquil mountain town goes like this: "Offend mountain people and you'll never know it. They'll just walk away."
But Nilgul and James F. Taylor sure know it.
They lost the restaurant they ran for 14 years after a sizable segment of their clientele, mostly fundamentalist Christians, stopped coming when the Taylors added wine to the menu.


Ukraine Finds Nuclear Arms Bring a Measure of Respect
Among disarmament negotiators, nuclear missiles are measured by their ability to destroy.
In Ukraine, they are increasingly being measured in terms of dollars and respect, and the perception may well hold the key to the success or failure of the strategic arms treaty signed this week in Moscow.
"Our deputies don't care where these things are aimed," said Serhiy Holovaty, a leading voice in the Ukrainian Parliament's commission for foreign affairs.
"They know that they must get something for them."


Books of The Times; A Bizarre Past as Prologue to an Uneasy Future
The Same River Twice  A Memoir  By Chris Offutt  188 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.
In one sense, Chris Offutt's unusual poetic memoir is the story of a man contemplating in terror the impending birth of his first child.


Surgery for Elway
A bone spur was removed from JOHN ELWAY's left shoulder, and the Denver Broncos quarterback was expected to have full use of the shoulder within four to six weeks.
Elway throws with his right hand.
The arthroscopic surgery was performed Tuesday by Dr.
JAMES P. McELHINNEY, a Broncos team physician.


Jerusalem Prize to German Writer
Stefan Heym, a German-born writer whose fiction and nonfiction books explore the roots of tyranny and nationalistic prejudice, was named yesterday as the winner of the Jerusalem Prize.
The $5,000 prize is sponsored by the Jerusalem International Book Fair and has been given at the bi-annual fair since it started in 1963.
Previous recipients of the prize, which is given to a writer whose works "best express the theme of the freedom of the individual in society," include Milan Kundera, V. S. Naipaul, Graham Greene and Simone de Beauvoir.


U.N. ENVOY WINS PLEDGE FROM SERB
Cyrus R. Vance, the United Nations envoy who is trying to negotiate an end to the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, met with President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia today and said later that the Serbian leader had agreed to help.
Mr.
Milosevic is widely held to be a principal instigator of the fighting that has swept through three republics of former Yugoslavia in the last 18 months, but Mr.
Vance noted that the Serbian had kept a similar vow a little over a year ago to end the war between Croatia and Serbia.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Brenda Kahn Knitting Factory
"She's in love with the man that she always wanted to be," sings Brenda Kahn in one of her street-corner ballads chronicling the downs and rare ups of the tattered ghetto where artists historically huddle to sip black coffee and cheap wine.
Ms.
Kahn could be singing in the first person, except that she has managed the old boys' trick of transforming a fixation into an avenue of self-expression.


Young Uck Kim Cancels
The violinist Young Uck Kim has canceled his recital tomorrow evening at the Metropolitan Museum of Art because of a death in his family.
Mr.
Kim was to appear with the pianist Emmanuel Ax.
Automatic refunds will be issued within four to six weeks.
Information: (212) 570-3949.


Ronnie Welsh, 52, Stage and TV Actor
Ronnie Welsh, who made his acting debuts on radio and television at the age of 12 and continued his career as an adult, died on Tuesday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 52 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of brain cancer, said Rosemary Prinz, a friend.


For U.N.'s 'Servant,' Undiplomatic Welcomes
The United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, left here today for a brief stop in Eritrea and then to spend the Coptic Christmas in his native Cairo, winding up a trip focused on Bosnia and Somalia.
But in visiting the two world trouble spots most in the public eye, he often served as a lightning rod for dissatisfaction with the organization.
The Muslims jeering him on a freezing day in Sarajevo were really jeering a Security Council they perceive as cowardly because it won't give them the same military protection it afforded Somalia's starving peasantry.
The Somali clans that disrupted his visit to Mogadishu and rejected his stewardship of peace talks held here in Ethiopia were reacting in part to the loss of their profitable trade in looted food as a result of United Nations action.


Study Finds Asteroid Leveled Siberian Area in '08
A scientific team says it has solved the mystery of what exploded 84 years ago over Siberia with a force of 1,000 Hiroshima-sized nuclear weapons, flattening hundreds of square miles of forest: it was a stony asteroid 100 or so feet in diameter, they say.
For decades experts have debated the cause of the explosion over Tunguska on June 30, 1908.
Evidence has always been sparse.


Novell and A.T.&amp; T. Set Computer-Phone Links
A.T.&amp; T. and Novell Inc. announced a strategic partnership agreement today under which they plan to jointly develop and market a product to link business telephone systems with computer networks.
Novell, based in Provo, Utah, is the world's leading supplier of computer networking software.
Today's move forges further links between Novell and the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, which is becoming a partial shareholder in the software company as a result of Novell's announced acquisition two weeks ago of A.T.&amp; T's Unix Systems Laboratories software subsidiary.


Dinosaurs To Scare A Dinosaur
JIM GARY strips old Chryslers, Fords and Chevrolets for their parts.
Then he uses a welding torch to reassemble the brake shoes, springs, oil pans and front-end suspensions into dinosaur skeletons.
"It takes 8 to 10 cars just to build one of the dinosaurs," said Mr.
Gary, a New Jersey artist whose creations stretch up to 60 feet long.
About two dozen of his "prehistoric" creatures will be on view at the new Liberty Science Center in Jersey City, which will open Jan. 23 at Liberty State Park, 251 Phillip Street; (201) 451-0006).


Michael G. Smith, 71, Anthropology Teacher
Michael G. Smith, a professor emeritus of anthropology at Yale University, died Tuesday at Bristol Royal Infirmary in Bristol, England.
He was 71 and lived in Glastonbury, England.
Professor Smith died of a stroke, said Prof. Lambros Comitas, a friend and colleague.


Nu Horizons Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Southwestern Public Service reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


A Network For Sports
Liberty Media Inc. is planning to create a national sports network together with NBC and the Cablevision Systems Corporation.
The three companies announced plans yesterday for the creation of Prime Sports Channel Networks.
If the network appeals to audiences, it could present an alternative to ESPN, the sports network that is owned by Capital Cities/ABC Inc.


Money Market Funds Show Seasonal Increase in Yields
Still affected by seasonal pressures, yields offered by tax-exempt and taxable money market funds were up in the latest week.
The latest survey by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report shows tax-exempt yields moderately higher for the week that ended Tuesday.


Nuns, Feet and Stress in New Jersey
IT could be a dream.
You are in a chapel-like place, thickly carpeted, paneled in blond woods, with stained-glass feebly filtering the wan winter light.
A band of strangers gathers, mostly women in slacks, arrayed in loose lines.
Is that harp music?
No one smiles.
No one wears shoes.
Slowly, very slowly, the people begin to move, arms rising and falling like unbalanced windmills.
They step this way and then that way.
They breathe deeply, sort of together.
Still, they say nothing.
They stare straight ahead -- at you.


Pro Basketball; Nets Sign Cheeks, Adding Ballast to Backcourt
Maurice (Mo) Cheeks, a 14-year veteran of the National Basketball Association, was coaxed back to active duty by the Nets yesterday, and it wasn't a moment too soon.
Drazen Petrovic, the starting shooting guard who had not missed a game since New Jersey obtained him from Portland in January 1991, did not make the trip to Boston late yesterday afternoon and will miss tonight's game against the Celtics because of a sprained right ankle.


Honda to Build Engines for Indy Race Cars
Eager to portray itself more convincingly as an American institution, the Honda Motor Company's United States subsidiary said today that it would begin building engines for race cars in the Indianapolis 500 and associated races, starting in 1994.
Honda executives said they expected the racing program to help in the marketing of Honda and Acura cars and to provide racing experience for the company's American engineers and technicians.


Scientists Say Satellite's Findings Confirm Big Bang Cosmic Theory
Putting the Big Bang theory of cosmic origin to its sternest test yet, an American satellite has made precise temperature measurements showing that 99.97 percent of the radiant energy of the universe was released within the first year of the primeval explosion.
"This is the ultimate in tracing one's cosmic roots," Dr.
John C. Mather, a scientist for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, said today in announcing the newest results from the Cosmic Background Explorer satellite, or COBE (pronounced CO-bee).


Children Heed Parents' Advice In Giving to the Neediest Cases
After they decorated their homes, prepared lavish meals and handed out presents, many parents gathered their children in recent weeks for a more sober ritual: a discussion about charity and the suffering of people spending the holiday season without food, clothing and shelter.
The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund benefits from these talks about remembering the poor, receiving hundreds of donations each year from children who are following their parents' advice, as well as from adults who learned about the importance of helping others when they were young.


Magic 'Round Midnight
YOU'VE seen the image in a dozen movies.
A blue wisp of cigarette smoke curls into a dim light, its sinuous swirls dancing to a saxophone's sultry phrases.
The hour is well after midnight, but the music has suspended time.
Rapt lone listeners hang on every note; couples lean over martini glasses and gaze into each other's eyes across tiny tables.
They're taking part in a venerable ritual of a New York City weekend: the late set at a jazz club.
The cinematic image has changed hardly at all between "Young Man With a Horn" and "The Fabulous Baker Boys" or "Mo' Better Blues." Yet a late set in early-1990's Manhattan doesn't necessarily take place in the glittering nether worlds of the movies.
Wandering among late sets on recent weekends, I've found less haze in the air, more tourists in the seats, the elegant couples replaced by a motley assortment that's likely to include students, bohemian types, couples and groups and plaid-jacketed oddballs.
But at clubs that have been around for decades, the late set on a Friday or Saturday night can still be an event of nearly wordless intimacy, where partners onstage and strangers in the audience grow closer than ever, sharing a search for moments of spontaneous musical bliss.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news and listings appear today on pages B12-13.


Review/Dance; A Piece of 'Swan Lake' In Nureyev's Memory
A newscaster announcing the death of Rudolf Nureyev on Wednesday made much of the fact that the New York City Ballet would be performing "Swan Lake" that night, a work with which Nureyev had been associated.
But George Balanchine's excerpted version of the classic (the second act) is very little like what Nureyev danced, although it pays homage to Lev Ivanov, the 19th-century choreographer who created that act.
The greater point made by the program, which the company's director, Peter Martins, dedicated to Nureyev's memory in an affectionate speech, was how much ballet has changed since Nureyev defected from the Soviet Union in 1961.
Balanchine's "Swan Lake," once cramped but oddly lovable, now takes place in a vast ice palace designed by Alain Vaes at the choreographer's behest.
It is populated by peculiarly costumed hunters and swans dressed, with the exception of Odette, in black.
And although Darci Kistler and Ben Huys made a handsomely matched, radiant Odette and Prince Siegfried, their impeccably danced performance was permeated with a now rather empty-feeling chill, unknown to the classic, that once communicated Balanchine's vision of purity.


U.S. Approves Financing for Continental Airlines
The Government today approved a proposal by Air Canada and a group of Dallas businessmen to invest $450 million in bankrupt Continental Airlines.
Continental's move reflects stepped-up efforts by financially pressed United States carriers to obtain overseas financing for their beleaguered industry, which has lost $8 billion since 1990.


INSIDE
Chain Stores Report A Surge in Holiday Sales
The nation's chain stores reported stunningly strong sales in December, their best holiday season since 1988.
The vigorous buying by Christmas shoppers surprised even the most optimistic retailers.
Page D1.
Clinton Gets a Grim Report
The top Federal auditor told the President-elect that the Government did "an abysmal job" of bookkeeping and that its hidden liabilities totaled tens of billions of dollars.
Page A10.
More Jobs, Israelis Tell Rabin
Many Israelis are disappointed that Prime Minister Rabin has not pressed more aggressively for economic change and jobs.
Page A3.


The Incomparable Nureyev
In every generation there are performers whose audiences talk for the rest of their lives about having seen them, if only once.
Fyodor Chaliapin, the legendary basso, was one of those performers.
So were his fellow Russians Vaslav Nijinsky and Anna Pavlova, for whom balletomanes might easily give up a few of their own heartbeats for a chance to see them alive again and dancing.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The Defense Department; Aspin Questions Bush Estimates on Arms Budget
President-elect Bill Clinton's choice for Defense Secretary, Representative Les Aspin, said today that the Bush Administration's military budget for the next six years may overestimate savings and underestimate weapons costs.
The estimates are significant because Mr.
Clinton promised to cut $60 billion out of Mr.
Bush's budget of $1.42 trillion for the fiscal years 1992 through 1997.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Dec. 22 about marriages of members of the Unification Church referred incorrectly to a 1982 wedding in Madison Square Garden involving 2,075 couples.
It was not the first mass wedding performed by the church's leader, the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon.


Concessions by Serbia on Kosovo Reported
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia has made some verbal concessions on the issue of Kosovo, the tense province in the south of his republic that is inhabited largely by ethnic Albanians, a United Nations spokesman said today.
Mr.
Milosevic had revoked the autonomous status of Kosovo and imposed harsh restrictions on the Albanians, who are believed to constitute 90 percent of the population.
The rest are Serbs and their ethnic cousins, the Montenegrins.


Hoving's Adventures At the Met
Making the Mummies Dance By Thomas Hoving Illustrated. 448 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.


Shift at Robertson, Stephens
Robertson, Stephens &amp; Company, a leading investment bank based here, said today that it would shift from a partnership to a corporate structure.
Robertson, Stephens, which specializes in high-tech and health-care issues, is one of the last major investment banks with a partnership structure.
The firm employs 235 people, including 16 analysts.


At Wits' End: Algonquinites in Hollywood
BY 1935, Dorothy Parker had abandoned the life of a New York sophisticate for that of a Hollywood screenwriter, but the sunshine did nothing to mellow her caustic outlook.
As she wrote in a letter back east to Alexander Woollcott, her friend from the old days of the Algonquin Round Table, "Aside from the work which I hate like holy water, I love it here." It was the kindest thing she ever said about writing for the movies.
About the same time, George S. Kaufman, the quintessential Broadway playwright, wrote to a friend, "I'm going to Hollywood, God damn it, this Saturday, but only for a few weeks." He was true to his word, which went a long way toward saving his self-respect.


Trump Project Adds to Sewage Problem
To the Editor:
Although the fate of Donald J. Trump's Riverside South project on Manhattan's West Side has been resolved with a favorable vote in the New York City Council (news article, Dec. 18), the question of what happens to the project's sewage has not.


Corrections
An answer in the Q&amp;A column of Science Times on Tuesday about preserving champagne bubbles misstated the location of the Exploratorium science museum.
It is in San Francisco.


Shannon McCune, 79, Educator, Geographer and Asia Expert, Dies
Shannon McCune, an educator, geographer and specialist in Asian studies, died Monday at his home in Gainesville, Fla.
He was 79.
His family said he died of congestive heart failure.


Breaking Bill Clinton's Promise
Twelve days before the inauguration, we may be able to predict the fate of Bill Clinton's promise to free American government from the grip of special interests: Broken from Day One.
The questioning of Ron Brown by the senators reviewing his fitness to be Secretary of Commerce was a bipartisan disgrace.
The Republicans on the committee joined with Mr.
Brown, the chairman of the Democratic Party, in a public compact to make Washington safe for Mr.
Brown's law firm, Patton, Boggs &amp; Blow.


U.S. EMBARRASSED
For months, the Bush Administration and the Clinton team have portrayed the Bosnian Muslims as victims of unspeakable acts of murder, rape, terror and "ethnic cleansing" at the hands of the Serbs.
But when the leader of the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government came to town today looking for help, neither the old or new Administrations were quite sure what to do with him.
The visit by the Bosnian President, Alija Izetbegovic, cast in a very personal light the quandary facing the United States: how to respond to a war and a humanitarian tragedy that has evoked widespread public sympathy but little enthusiasm for forceful military intervention in the West.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Washington Talk; 'Main St.' Not Stirred By Change In the Wind
Thomas Caviness isn't going. He isn't in the mood.
Bernadine Carie is curious, but she hasn't quite caught the spirit.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.18
3.62
4.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.08
3.75
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.28
3.23
3.80
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.44
6.31
6.45
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.44
7.35
7.41
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.45
8.38
8.44
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.37
6.34
6.65
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Franco Corelli Master Class
The tenor Franco Corelli is to give a master class on Wednesday at 8 P.M. at the Theresa L. Kaufmann Auditorium of the 92d Street Y. The class, a first for Mr.
Corelli, who has remained out of public view since his last Metropolitan Opera appearance in December 1974, is a benefit for the Richard Tucker Music Foundation.
The four singers with whom he will work, all Tucker Foundation award winners, are Marie Plette, a soprano; Mary Ann McCormick, a mezzo-soprano, and two tenors, Tracey Welborn and Paul Groves.
Tickets to the class are $25; tickets at $75 include a reception with Mr.
Corelli and the singers.
Information: (212) 966-1100.


3 Students Shot At Train Stop In Brooklyn
Three Brooklyn high school students were shot on a crowded subway platform in Coney Island yesterday by a fourth student during an argument that started as a "look down," the transit police said.
Police officers on the platform who were working on a "safe passage" program of the Transit Authority immediately apprehended Omar Thomas, 17 years old, a student at John Dewey High School, who was charged with attempted murder.


Push by U.S. To Cut Tariffs Is Reported
In a change of tactics, the Bush Administration is secretly trying to strike a deal by the end of next week to bring about a reduction in tariffs around the world, American and European officials said today.
As the Bush Administration draws to a close, its officials are eager to achieve success in one of the few foreign policy arenas that has consistently frustrated them for four years.
But they insist that they will not make unnecessary concessions or sacrifice America's economic interests for the sake of a quick deal.


Six-Day Ban for the Blues' Shanahan
Forward BRENDAN SHANAHAN of the St.
Louis Blues was suspended for six nongame days without pay by the National Hockey League yesterday for hitting Minnesota's MIKE CRAIG in the face with a stick during a game.
Craig came away from the Dec. 22 incident with a cut lip.
Shanahan will lose $21,738 in salary.
In addition, he was fined $500 and the Blues were fined $21,738.
The suspension will be served on consecutive nongame and nontravel days starting Jan. 14.
A team spokesman said the Blues did not plan to appeal the suspension. (AP)


Penalties Set By N.A.S.D.
Nearly three years after a penny stock began an apparently inexplicable rise in price, the National Association of Securities Dealers yesterday disclosed fines and suspensions against a group of brokers it said had manipulated the stock, Vintage Group Inc.


For Children
Virtuality
South Street Seaport
11 Fulton Market Building
Fulton and South Streets
Lower Manhattan
(212) 587-1522
Recommended ages: 10 and up
This single-minded store has four virtual-reality machines, which allow customers to shoot a robot and a pterodactyl by playing a video game called Dactyl Nightmare.
At $5 for three and a half minutes, the player stands in a circular machine, wearing a Darth Vader-like helmet and fulfilling some errant fantasies.


Results Plus
N.H.L.
Quebec Makes 'Em Quiver  The Quebec Nordiques, perennial Adams Division doormats, moved into first place last night when Andrei Kovalenko connected on an overtime goal to give the Nor diques a 3-2 victory over the Bruins in Boston.
Kovalenko got his 15th goal of the season at 1 minute 35 seconds of overtime.
Claude Lapointe passed from the left boards to the left side of the slot, where Kovalenko one-timed a 30-footer to the left of goalie John Blue.
The Nordiques, 6-1 in their last seven games, have 54 points, a point more than Montreal.
They had just 52 all last season.
Boston, 1-5 in its last six games, had its seven-game unbeaten string against the Nordiques broken. (AP) North Stars 6, Penguins 3: Ulf Dahlen scored three goals and Russ Courtnall added two more as Minnesota, taking advantage of the absence of Mario Lemieux, defeated the Penguins on Pittsburgh ice.
Dahlen registered his third career hat trick and the first by a North Star in 41 games this season.
On Wednesday night, Lemieux left Pittsburgh's game against Boston in the second period, complaining of a stiff back.
He has since been ordered by doctors to rest his back until Jan. 25, and last night he watched from a private box as the Penguins' six-game unbeaten streak came to an end. (AP) Flyers 8, Capitals 2: Kevin Dineen broke out of a slump with three goals as Philadelphia crushed visiting Washington.
Philadelphia, which has just one loss in its last five games (3-1-1), recorded its 999th franchise victory.
Washington, which had been unbeaten in its last four games (2-0-2), suffered its first loss against a Patrick Division opponent in its last eight games (6-1-1).
Dineen notched the Flyers' first goal at 5:43 of the first period off a scramble in front.
Dineen had just two goals in his previous 20 games and 2 points in his last eight contests.
His hat trick last night leaves him with 11 goals for the season. (AP) Blues 3, Flames 2: Brendan Shanahan, suspended by the league earlier in the day for a stick-swinging incident, scored on a 15-foot slap shot with 2:02 left in overtime to give St.
Louis the victory at home.
Shanahan was suspended for six non-game days without pay for hitting Minnesota's Mike Craig in the face with his stick on Dec. 22.
In last night's game, Shanahan took a pass from Nelson Emerson in the right circle and fired the puck past goalie Mike Vernon to give the Blues consecutive victories for the first time since Oct. 31. (AP) Oilers 3, Blackhawks 3: Steve Larmer's second goal of the game with 5:38 left in the third period earned host Chicago the tie.
Larmer took a pass from Michel Goulet, who had circled the Oilers' net as goaltender Bill Ranford was shoved into the net, and jammed the puck over the goal line.
It marked the 11th straight season that Larmer, playing in his 843rd straight game, has scored 25 goals. (AP) N.B.A.
Spurs Cast a Spell  Dale Ellis scored a season-high 33 points and David Robinson added 16 as the San Antonio Spurs won at home over the Utah Jazz, 109-99, the Spurs' third victory over the Jazz this season.
San Antonio, in second place in the Midwest Division, pulled within four games of Utah.
The Jazz's six-game winning streak was stopped. (AP) Trail Blazers 113, Rockets 91: Cliff Robinson scored 21 points and Portland took advantage of the Rockets' 19-point fourth quarter for a road victory in Houston.
Portland won its third straight victory, and the Rockets lost their sixth game in a row.
Portland didn't lead until it went on 19-8 run over the final 7:13 of the third quarter.
Houston went scoreless for 2:40 during Portland's run. (AP) Hawks 100, Bucks 94: Stacey Augmon scored 20 points, including two key baskets to keep Atlanta comfortably ahead in the final minute, and Kevin Willis added 18 points and 14 rebounds as Atlanta won in Milwaukee to end a four-game losing streak.
Frank Brickowski had 24 points and Eric Murdock 19 for the Bucks, who had a three-game winning streak snapped. (AP) Suns 111, Mavericks 107: The best team in the league had to rally to beat the worst.
Phoenix (23-5) outscored Dallas (2-25) by 29-18 in the fourth quarter to avoid an embarrassing loss.
"It was tough to get up for a game like this," said Charles Barkley, who led the Suns with 32 points and 14 rebounds.
Barkley received three stitches over his right eye after being hit by a Terry Davis elbow. (AP) TENNIS  O'Brien Upsets Krajicek  Alex O'Brien of the United States upset top-seeded Richard Krajicek of the Netherlands, 6-4, 6-4, to advance to the quarterfinals of the South Australian Open yesterday in Adelaide, Australia. (AP) Edberg Overcomes Flu and Kafelnikov: Top-seeded Stefan Edberg overcame a nagging flu to defeat Yevgeny Kafelnikov of Russia, 6-3, 6-4, in the second round of the Qatar Open in Doha.
Third-seeded Boris Becker also moved into the quarterfinals with a 7-6 (7-3), 6-2 victory over a Frenchman, Stephane Simian. (AP)


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY DAILY NEWS BEGINS NEW ERA WITH LAYOFFS
Mortimer B. Zuckerman began a new era at The Daily News with a tense labor confrontation, telling 170 employees, some of whom had worked at The News for decades, that they no longer had jobs.
The move by Mr.
Zuckerman to cut the membership of the Newspaper Guild by a third signaled a low point for the guild, which represents journalists at several news organizations in New York City.
A1.


Health-Care System Is Issue In Jailing of Uninsured Patient
James McElveen says he and his best friend, Benny Milligan, are being sent to prison this week because his friend did what was necessary to get him the medical treatment that saved his life.
What was necessary, as the men saw it, was to lie to a hospital about whether Mr.
McElveen had medical insurance rather than take a chance that the nearest emergency room would treat him without insurance.


Don't Boycott Colorado, but Help Fight Back; State Was Targeted
To the Editor:
You may feel morally obliged to call for a boycott of Colorado, but you should be aware of the unusual conditions that led to passage of Amendment 2.
Without these, the infamous anti-gay rights amendment would probably never have been on the ballot, much less adopted.


18 Injured at Massachusetts Construction Site


King Able to Practice With Bullets
Forward BERNARD KING practiced with the Washington Bullets yesterday for the first time since he underwent knee surgery 16 months ago.
King, a 13-year National Basketball Association veteran, has been working out on his own near his Franklin Lakes, N.J., home since he had cartilage removed from his right knee in September 1991.
On Saturday, he worked out for 90 minutes at the Capital Centre before his team's home game with Miami.
King was cleared to practice after passing a physical Monday.


Sex-Trial Jury Sees Woman's Drawings
The jury in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial today began viewing drawings made by the mildly retarded women at the center of the case: some pictures of weather and her family, and others that a witness said depict her sexual encounter with the four defendants.
The day in court was marked by frequent arguments over the testimony of the witness called by the prosecution, Ann Burgess, a psychiatric nurse, professor at the University of Pennsylvania and researcher with expertise in sexual assault cases.


Art in Review
Donald Lipski: 'The Bells' 'Seven Rooms/Seven Shows'  P.S. 1 Museum 46-01 21st Street Long Island City, Queens Through Sunday
Of the several impressive exhibitions that vie for attention at P.S. 1 Museum, the most mesmerizing is Donald Lipski's "Bells," although the attraction of these four chiming sculptures has as much, if not more, to do with the ears as with the eyes.


Art in Review
Fairfield Porter
Tibor de Nagy Gallery  41 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Jan. 23
This show, following the recent and larger one at Hirschl &amp; Adler, underscores the seriousness and pleasure of Fairfield Porter's paintings.
There are some particularly fine works here, including a small view of Orvieto that evokes Corot in its freshness, and a large canvas, titled "Armchair on Porch," thinly painted in dusky colors with diffuse clouds of white that evoke the quality of summer sun filtered through a porch screen.
The gallery also has works on view by artists associated with Porter, including a landscape by Jane Freilicher and a view of Florence by Nell Blaine.


Sports of The Times; Rethinking Salary Cap In the N.B.A.
THE salary cap in sports is starting to sound like one of those wonder utensils they hawk on late-night television.
You can clean fish with it!
You can brush your teeth with it!
You can fix your computer with it!
And all at the very same time!
Call me perplexed.
I hear the football players clumping around celebrating free agency, the baseball owners issuing a shriek for help before they spend again, and the hockey owners going for a slick young commissioner and a trip to Disneyland, everybody talking up the new wonder tool, the salary cap.


Shannon McCune, 79, Educator, Geographer and Asia Expert, Dies
Shannon McCune, an educator, geographer and specialist in Asian studies, died Monday at his home in Gainesville, Fla.
He was 79.
His family said he died of congestive heart failure.


Finding the Late Sets And Who's Playing
Here is a selection of jazz clubs in Manhattan that have late sets this weekend:  BIRDLAND, 2745 Broadway, at 105th Street, (212) 749-2228.
Barry Harris Trio, tonight and tomorrow night at midnight. $10 cover and $10 minimum at tables; $5 cover and one-drink minimum at the bar; no cover and no minimum in the mezzanine.
Laird Jackson Trio, Sunday night at midnight. $7 cover and $5 minimum at tables; no cover and one-drink minimum at the bar.
BRADLEY'S, 70 University Place, between East 10th and East 11th Streets, Greenwich Village, (212) 473-9700.
Philip Harper, Kevin Hayes and Dwayne Burno Trio, tonight and tomorrow night at midnight; Chico Freeman Trio, featuring John Hicks, Sunday night at midnight. $12 cover and $8 minimum.


The First, Faltering Steps Toward A Free Market
"Russia for Sale: The Rough Road to Capitalism" covers two turbulent years of Russia's staggerings toward a market economy, from 1990, when aspiring entrepreneurs were running into entrenched obstructionists, through the attempted coup by hard-liners in August 1991, up to the shaky ascendance of President Boris N. Yeltsin.
Sasha, a St.
Petersburg steelworker and the central figure of a timely documentary on Sunday, is an enthusiastic supporter of Mr.
Yeltsin.
You can see him at work at two jobs and then giving blood to earn a few more rubles, at home in the unspacious but subsidized apartment where he lives with his wife and two sons, and on long lines with other shoppers.
Sasha tells of his disillusionment with Communist Party promises -- "We've simply been cheated" -- and his faith in the democratic movement, with its goal of a free market.


Rights of 'Domestic Partners' Broadened by Dinkins Order
Mayor David N. Dinkins moved yesterday to give unmarried heterosexual and homosexual couples in New York City some of the rights enjoyed by married couples.
Through an executive order, the Mayor created a city registry in which city residents or nonresident municipal workers who live together could register as unmarried "domestic partners." A second executive order detailed several ways in which such partners will now be treated the same as married spouses by the city.


Shannon McCune, 79, Educator, Geographer and Asia Expert, Dies
Shannon McCune, an educator, geographer and specialist in Asian studies, died Monday at his home in Gainesville, Fla.
He was 79.
His family said he died of congestive heart failure.


Corrections
A map caption on Wednesday about a new area code for part of Pennsylvania misstated the number in some copies.
It is 610, not 601.


Disarming Somalia, Sort Of
U.S. forces in Somalia still operate under a confusing mandate in ever more perilous circumstances.
The perils were underscored yesterday when 400 marines attacked the camp of Mogadishu's treacherous warlord Mohammed Farah Aidid.
But does this clash, the fiercest since Americans landed, really signal a more aggressive stance on seizing weapons?
There was confusion earlier this week on just what weapons should be taken from the roving gangs that prey on a stricken people.
At first, seized weapons were returned to their owners; now there's a different rule.
"If it's American-made and I see it, it's mine," a Marine sergeant told The Washington Post.
"I can't touch an AK-47. I wish I could. But if it's American, it's mine."


Deficit and Economic News Batter the Treasury Market
The prices of Treasury bonds and notes plunged yesterday as traders and investors got a glimpse of a slightly stronger economy.
And they may also have begun to peek at the huge deficit in the Federal budget that President Bush proposed on Wednesday and wonder about President-elect Bill Clinton's commitment to reducing it.
Traders said a lot of selling was also prompted by the need to reduce the risk of losses from the billions of dollars in new corporate bonds that dealers issued this week.
This was accomplished by selling Treasury securities as a hedge.
More than $4.1 billion of new corporate issues were sold yesterday, bringing the total for the week to $10.4 billion.


Massachusetts Asserts Firm Defrauded Clients
Massachusetts filed an administrative complaint against Hibbard Brown yesterday, contending the borkerage firm had used high-pressure, fraudulent practices to sell stocks of small, risky companies.
Neal Sullivan, Deputy Massachusetts Secretary of State in charge of the securities division, said more than 2,600 Massachusetts investors were defrauded of $8.1 million by agents of the Hibbard branch office in Wakefield, Mass.
Mr.
Sullivan said, however, that the total losses in the state had not been calculated.


Hoving's Adventures At the Met
Making the Mummies Dance By Thomas Hoving Illustrated. 448 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a deadline given to Iraq for withdrawing its missiles referred incorrectly in some copies to the parties that declared the air exclusion zone in southern Iraq.
The zone was established by the United States and its allies on the Security Council, not by the United Nations itself.


Diner's Journal
Warwick Hotel's New Restaurant
La Locanda (Hotel, in Italian) is a new and largely undiscovered restaurant in the Warwick Hotel, at 65 West 54th Street in Manhattan.
It is run by Sergio Bitici, formerly a co-owner of three Manhattan restaurants: Toscana on East 54th Street (now closed), Chelsea Trattoria Italiana on Eighth Avenue and Grand Ticino on Thompson Street.
La Locanda is worth a visit, not only for the generally well-prepared if unventuresome Italian cuisine, but also for the fetching 1930's murals around the baronial dining room.


Corrections
A front-page summary yesterday about the obituaries of Rudolf Nureyev and Dizzy Gillespie referred incorrectly to the recording that was playing in Mr.
Gillespie's room when he died on Wednesday at Englewood Hospital in New Jersey.
It was "Dizzy's Diamonds: The Best of the Verve Years," a collection on the Verve label.


HONECKER RELEASE IS NOW EXPECTED
A judge ordered today that the manslaughter charges against the former East German leader, Erich Honecker, be separated from those against his co-defendants because of his advancing illness.
The judge also said he would decide in a week if Mr.
Honecker should be freed because of his "greatly limited ability to face trial."
Mr.
Honecker's lawyers said they expected the decision to be favorable.
One lawyer, Wolfgang Ziegler, called today's announcement "the beginning of the end" of Mr.
Honecker's trial.
"His release is now imminent," Mr.
Ziegler added.


Motorola's Network Attracts Few Investors
Motorola Inc. has never been afraid to think big, but its bold plan to create a worldwide mobile telephone network using 66 satellites may be too big for investors to embrace.
The company said this week that it had received only tentative commitments from a number of "potential investors." It noted that none of the prospects had made binding commitments, and it refused to name any of its potential partners or indicate how much money they might invest.
Financing Hard to Come By
The announcement late Tuesday came three weeks after Motorola passed a self-imposed deadline to line up initial investors for its proposed $3.4 billion Iridium system, which would relay calls to and from wireless telephones anywhere on earth.


Governor Weicker's Bully Bugle Call
Lowell Weicker made honorable use of the gubernatorial pulpit in his annual address to Connecticut's General Assembly.
Rather than reciting state problems, he dealt creatively with just one -- the inequality of education in city and suburban public schools.
It was, said Hartford Mayor Carrie Saxton Perry, a "bugle call."
"There are two Connecticuts when it comes to the education of our children," the Governor said -- "a Connecticut of promise, as seen in its suburbs, and a Connecticut of despair, as seen in its poverty-stricken cities."


Next, Radios Built For A Good Read
The radio industry, which is rarely a source of technological news, announced today that it had reached a standard for transmitting text on FM radio signals.
If the standard for what is being called the radio broadcast data system is widely adopted, consumers may soon be able to see FM station call letters or song titles displayed on a small screen on their radios, scan stations by music type or read advertising pitches like "Drink Coca-Cola."


Sudden Departure By AC&amp;R Executive
AC&amp;R Advertising in New York and Paul Cappelli, the agency's executive vice president and executive creative director since April, unexpectedly announced yesterday that Mr.
Cappelli would leave, effective immediately.
Mr.
Cappelli, who is 37, joined AC&amp;R from McCann-Erickson New York, where he was senior vice president and deputy creative director on the cornerstone Coca-Cola Classic account.
He was hired by AC&amp;R to provide a next generation of leadership behind Alvin Chereskin, 64, chairman and chief executive, and Harry J. Koenig, 53, vice chairman and chief operating officer.


No Headline
"In simple terms, we hit them with a firestorm. " -- MAJ.
GEN.
CHARLES WILHELM of the First Marine Division in Somalia.  [ A1:6. ]


I.B.M. Picks Three to Join A Top Panel
The International Business Machines Corporation promoted three executives yesterday to its top decision-making group, and two of them are viewed as the front-runners to succeed John F. Akers as chairman.
The three are Robert J. LaBant, Ned C. Lautenbach and Patrick A. Toole.
Given I.B.M.'s tradition of chief executive succession, analysts now see Mr.
LaBant, 47, and Mr.
Lautenbach, 48, as being groomed as likely successors to Mr.
Akers.


Review/Art; Restraint and Ebullience In Cuban and Colleagues
"Wifredo Lam and His Contemporaries, 1938-1952" is like a play whose two acts couldn't be more different.
The first is slow and quiet, the second fast and loud; but together they form a dense, thought-provoking unit.
Downstairs at the Studio Museum in Harlem, restraint rules.
Proceeding at an almost stately pace, the show focuses on the unfolding of Wifredo Lam's moody but gentlemanly art in the years just before, during and after World War II.
Lam, who was born in Cuba of a Chinese father and a mulatto mother, went to Spain to study art in 1923, when he was 21, and to Paris in 1938, where he was befriended by Picasso and Andre Breton.
He spent most of the years covered by this exhibition back in Cuba, driven there by the war in 1941, and during this time he integrated Cubist and Surrealist innovations with symbols and motifs of his own Afro-Cuban culture.


Ivanovo Journal; From Where This Boss Sits, Yeltsin Looks Small
Vladyslav N. Tikhomirov, the burly, chain-smoking, backslapping boss of this textile center 150 miles northeast of Moscow, thinks he is a reformer, too.
In the context of Soviet history, maybe he is.
But he is also an unrepentant part of the majority in the Russian legislature that forced President Boris N. Yeltsin to dump the architect of his economic program, Acting Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar, and replace him with the former head of the gas industry, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin.


Science Center Backed at Site of Malcolm X Death
New York State's highest court today cleared the way for construction to begin on a biomedical-research complex on the site of the Audubon Theater and Ballroom in Manhattan, the building where Malcolm X was assassinated in 1965.
The Court of Appeals ruled without comment that it would not hear an appeal of two lower court decisions.
Those decisions concluded that the research center planned for the site in Washington Heights would not pose an environmental threat, as a coalition of people seeking to preserve the ballroom had contended.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows, performances and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"THE SEAGULL," Lyceum Theater, 149 West 45th Street.
Anton Chekhov's play, featuring Tyne Daly, Jon Voight, Tony Roberts, Ethan Hawke, Laura Linney and Maryann Plunkett; directed by Marshall W. Mason.
Through Sunday.
Tonight at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $45.
Information: (212) 239-6280.
"MY FAVORITE YEAR," Beaumont, Lincoln Center, 150 West 65th Street.
A musical based on the 1982 film.
Through Sunday.
Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $37.50 to $47.50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
BIG APPLE CIRCUS, "Goin' Places," the circus's 15th show, at Lincoln Center, featuring the clown Mr.
Gordoon, a Mongolian contortionist, Russian aerialists, French acrobats, acrobatic elephants and galloping horses.
Through Sunday.
Today at 7 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday, 12:30 and 4:30 P.M.
Tickets, $20 to $45.
Information: (212) 268-0055 or (212) 721-6500.
"FRAGILE ECOLOGIES: ARTISTS' INTERPRETATIONS AND SOLUTIONS," Queens Museum of Art, New York City Building, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
An exhibition of work by various artists that combines art and ecology.
Through Sunday.
Today, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: $3; $1.50 for children, students and the elderly.
Information: (718) 592-5555 or (718) 592-9700.
"HELENE SCHJERFBECK: FINLAND'S MODERNIST REDISCOVERED," National Academy of Design, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street.
About 72 paintings and drawings.
Through Sunday.
Hours: today, noon to 8 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: 3.50; $2 for children, students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 369-4880.
"THE CENTURY OF TUNG CHI-CHANG," Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street.
Artist and theorist of the late Ming dynasty.
Through Sunday.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; Sunday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
Admission: $6 for adults, $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 535-7710.
"MAX WEBER: THE CUBIST DECADE, 1910-20," Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
Through Sunday.
Hours: today through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Suggested admission: $4 for adults, $1.50 for the elderly, $2 for students, no charge for children under 12.
Information: (718) 638-5000.
"THE DRAGON KING OF THE SEA: JAPANESE DECORATIVE ART OF THE MEIJI PERIOD," Japan Society, 333 East 47th Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Today, 11 A.M. to 6:30 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 752-0824.
Closing Next Weekend
MARC CHAGALL'S JEWISH THEATER MURALS, Guggenheim Museum SoHo, 575 Broadway, at Prince Street.
Through Jan. 17.
Sunday, Monday and Wednesday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 10 P.M.
Closed Tuesday.
Admission: $6 for adults; children under 12 admitted free.
Information: (212) 423-3500.


Gang Leader Pleads Guilty
A gang leader has pleaded guilty to assault charges for helping plot a commando-style attack last April 26 on other gang members in Meriden.
The gang leader, William Carrasquillo, 24, of Bridgeport, will receive a 12-year prison sentence as a result of a plea bargain reached on Tuesday in Superior Court, authorities said.
He is the first of nine members of the Latin Kings gang charged in the Meriden shooting to be convicted.


Baseball; Intensity Tags Along With 3 New Yanks
It was a problem that Buck Showalter rarely spoke about last season, but it existed on the Yankees.
No manager likes conceding that his team might need an occasional attitude adjustment, so Showalter usually avoided questions about this delicate topic.
At least players did not anonymously criticize him, as they did former manager Stump Merrill.
But Showalter and the Yankees have offered emphatic responses to the question of team attitude with their choice of roster moves throughout the off season.
Three of the newest Yankees visited Yankee Stadium yesterday, brimming with enthusiasm.
Although it is only January, they also displayed winning attitudes.


Preserving History, and Trivia, in Computer Files
The office chatter of the Federal Government at least the chatter conducted via computer -- is about to be preserved for the ages.
A plan by the White House to erase at least some of the millions of electronic-mail messages that have accumulated on computer tapes raised at least the idea that there could be something embarrassing or scandalous on them.
A ruling by a Federal judge on Wednesday means that historians and prosecutors may have the chance to find out, and that every other Federal agency with similar electronic-mail systems will also have to save their tapes.


Review/Art; Geometry and the Painterly Tradition
"The Geometric Tradition in American Art, 1930-1990," at the Whitney Museum of American Art, is an often lovely exhibition that might have been a stunning one if its priorities had shifted a bit.
It is intended to provide a context for the superb Agnes Martin retrospective upstairs.
A small, carefully selected show examining the strain of romantic abstraction that Ms.
Martin's work exemplifies would have made a fascinating experience.
Unfortunately, the museum's decision to draw all 42 of the show's paintings and sculptures from its own collection precluded that kind of concentration and has resulted in an episodic, and therefore unfocused, chronological survey of geometric abstraction's wide and still expanding field.


At the Bar; It may please the court: A dictionary testifies to how lawyers sway the English language.
"Culprit" is short for "culpable: prit d'averrer nostre bille," an Anglo-Norman phrase meaning "I am ready to aver our indictment." It was what court officials in old England uttered when a defendant pleaded not guilty.
Hamilton Burger might have liked the word "immaterial," but Samuel Johnson hated it.
"This sense has crept into the conversation and writings of barbarians, but ought to be utterly rejected," he wrote.


Pro Football; Tale of Two Plans: Redskin Defense vs. 49er Offense
When Larry Peccatiello used to play in the streets of Newark, it was the classic "run down to the Chevy, cut to the manhole cover, and I'll throw you the ball."
Perhaps a preparation for urban life in the 1940's, but not for the San Francisco 49ers.


Nitroglycerin Supply Shrinks, And Heart Patients Scramble
A nationwide shortage of nitroglycerin, a heart drug taken by hundreds of thousands of Americans to relieve pains from angina, has developed because of a manufacturing problem at a plant owned by the pill's only American maker.
The nitroglycerin pills are sold as Nitrostat by Parke-Davis, a division of the Warner-Lambert Company of Morris Plains, N.J.
Problems at the plant in Puerto Rico began in November and have since been corrected, said Peter Wolf, a company spokesman.


Restaurants
Are you this type of indecisive diner?
The menu is presented, and a wave of anxiety washes over you.
You buy time by politely asking others to order first.
When the dreaded moment arrives, you order in a manner that is more question than answer, hoping that the waiter will catch the distress signal and take control by recommending something you might like.
You go for it with a sigh of relief.
As the triumphant waiter begins to walk away, you call out, "Sir!" He returns, and you change your order.
At least once.
If this rings faintly true, then Becco is a restaurant for you.
Under the family-style system, guests may opt for the copious and changing menu, which includes a half-dozen or so appetizer tidbits and three different pastas, all ladled out with gusto until you groan, "Basta!"


A.T.&amp; T. Sets Unitel Deal In Canada
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company, once the sole supplier of telephone services in the United States, said today that it had agreed to acquire 20 percent of Unitel Communications Inc., the telephone company that broke the long-distance call monopoly in Canada.
Under the accord, A.T.&amp; T. will provide Unitel with $40 million (Canadian), or $31.25 million (United States), in capital and advanced telecommunications equipment valued at $150 million (Candian), or $117.2 million.
Limit on Foreign Ownership
Toronto-based Unitel, whose annual sales approach $400 million (Canadian), or $313 million, is owned by Canadian Pacific Ltd., the big rail and hotel company, which holds 60 percent of the shares, and Rogers Communications Inc., a telecommunications company, which holds 40 percent.


Art in Review
Robert Ryman
Pace Gallery  32 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through tomorrow
This group of 16 paintings that Robert Ryman created between the summer of 1991 and the spring of 1992 is almost magical.
Mr.
Ryman has for decades cultivated a narrow territory from which he continues to extract remarkable variety and richness of expression.
These latest paintings involve extremely thin fiberglass panels that resemble sheets of vellum, tacked to the walls by tiny nails; the strips of wax paper along the tops of each work are also stapled to the walls.
The panels are matte-white with occasional hints of silver and blue, and some of the larger ones have grids lightly drawn onto them.
Clouds of thick white strokes, almost like Rorschach tests, evoke abstract shapes and suggest depth.
The interplay between that depth and the utter flatness of the fiberglass supports is one of the dramas that Mr.
Ryman unfolds.


3 Whites Charged in Burning of a Black
Three white men who investigators say abducted a black tourist and set him aflame after seeing him driving a Cadillac were charged with attempted murder and other crimes today.
The police say the attack was motivated by racial prejudice, but because of the severity of the charges the three day laborers arrested late Wednesday are not being charged under Florida's hate crimes law, which allows prosecutors to seek stiffer penalties.


Fun in Times Square
To the Editor:
Your dramatic Jan. 1 photo of the Times Square New Year's Eve festivities brought a big, knowing smile to my face.
For the first time in the 10 years that we have lived in the New York metropolitan area, my husband and I decided to defy conventional wisdom and spend New Year's Eve in Times Square.
Too rowdy a crowd, we were told.
Too young a crowd, we were told.
Too unpredictable a crowd, we were told.


Rabin Faces Problems Cutting Unemployment
In his successful campaign for Prime Minister last spring, Yitzhak Rabin promised to create jobs for thousands of new immigrants while rearranging Israel's economic priorities.
That meant spending less on Jewish settlements in the occupied territories and hacking away at Socialist-inspired Government controls that are widely viewed here as suffocating the economy.
Mr.
Rabin wasted little time carrying out his promises on settlements.
But turning around Israel's state-guided, aid-dependent economy has eluded him, and while Israelis recognize that he has been preoccupied with crises like the recent deportation of more than 400 Palestinians, they nonetheless hold him accountable for his campaign commitments.


Somali Factions Take a Tentative Step Toward Reconciliation
After four days of talks here, the leaders of 14 Somali political factions were reported tonight by United Nations officials to be close to an agreement on the first steps toward ending the war in Somalia.
The leaders are expected to agree on Friday to set up two committees, one to monitor a general cease-fire in Somalia and the other to prepare a national reconciliation conference that would be held in April, probably in Mogadishu, the officials said.


Don't Boycott Colorado, but Help Fight Back
To the Editor:
It is a sad day when reason, dialogue and education are rejected as means of bringing about change in favor of using economic force, but it is even sadder when you advocate that policy in "The Case for the Colorado Boycott" (editorial, Dec. 21).
You call for a boycott of Colorado to protest approval of Amendment 2, a law passed 53 percent to 47 percent by Colorado voters Nov. 3 that repeals antidiscrimination laws in Denver, Boulder and Aspen and prohibits enactment of such laws in the future.


Money Fund Assets Are Up
The total assets of the nation's 613 retail money market mutual funds increased $6.72 billion, to $385.85 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 382 taxable retail money market funds rose $3.5 billion, to $304.25 billion, while the assets of the 231 retail tax-exempt funds increased $3.22 billion, to $81.59 billion.


On Stage, and Off
New Director for 'Goodbye Girl'
It was a newsworthy week for musicals ostensibly headed for Broadway.
The most stunning development occurred yesterday when Emanuel Azenberg, the producer of Neil Simon's "Goodbye Girl," which has been trying out in Chicago, dismissed the director Gene Saks, who has worked with Mr.
Simon and Mr.
Azenberg on eight previous shows, most recently "Lost in Yonkers."


The Spoken Word
POETRY READING, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
A reading by Kathe Burkhardt, tonight at 10.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.
SLIDE SHOW AND WALKING TOURS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street.
"How We Lived: Life in a New York City Tenement," a lecture and tour of a museum exhibition, Sunday at 11 A.M.; "Family Matters," a dramatization of Jewish immigrant life, at noon; "Searching for Your Roots," a workshop in documenting family history, at 1 P.M.; "The Streets Where We Lived: A Multi-Ethnic Heritage Tour," at 2 P.M., and "House of Heritage," a slide show and lecture about the museum's history, at 3 P.M.
Slide shows and lectures: $4.
Walking tours: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Workshop: $10.
Information: (212) 431-0233.


Hockey; Rangers' Plight Falls On Captain Dad Now
Captain Dad knows best.
He is stern but merry, kindly and brave, leads by example playing hard and hurt; you would follow him through fire on ice because he's always right or, even better, because he relieves you of the responsibility to think for yourself.
But when Captain Dad fails to deliver, he takes all the blame; his shame is worse than his honor.


Market Place; Blue Skies at Last For Airline Stocks
THE losses are staggering.
The layoffs are huge.
The future is so uncertain that industry executives are calling for Federal help.
With that kind of environment, would anyone want to own shares of an airline?
Apparently so.
Airline stocks were big movers yesterday, with the share price of virtually every carrier jumping, some by more than 4 percent.
On a day when the Dow Jones industrial average tumbled more than 36 points, the Dow transportation average leaped more than 12 points, driven almost exclusively by the excitement for airlines.


Bad News From The News
Following is the text of a letter from Fred Drasner, the co-publisher, to News employees who lost their jobs.
L.P.
Refers to Limited Partnership.
With great regret, we inform you that your application for employment with the Daily News, L.P. cannot be accepted.


Bush Temporarily Prevented From Dismissing Postmaster
A Federal judge temporarily barred President Bush today from carrying out a threat to dismiss Postmaster General Marvin Runyon and five other governors of the Postal Service who, despite White House objections, had sponsored a lawsuit involving stamp rates.
Mr.
Runyon and the others on the Postal Service's 11-member board of governors voted last year to sue the Postal Rate Commission to stop a special 27-cent discount rate for some machine-processed mail.
In 1991, the Postal Service was seeking a 30-cent first-class rate, but the Postal Rate Commission ordered a 29-cent rate, as well as the cheaper stamp, which was never offered.


Wiberg Is Out for World Cup Season
The reigning women's world and Olympic giant slalom champion, PERNILLA WIBERG, had an Achilles' tendon repaired yesterday and will miss the rest of the World Cup season.
Wiberg was injured in a race at Maribor in Slovenia on Wednesday, and was taken to the town of Falun, in central Sweden, for surgery.
Wiberg was No. 2 in the overall World Cup standing, behind ANITA WACHTER of Austria, when she was injured. (AP)


Victory for Disabled Students
A bill prohibiting Pennsylvania colleges and universities from barring applicants or restricting attendance on the basis of disability has been signed into law by Gov.
Robert P. Casey.
The measure also makes it illegal to ask applicants about disabilities or to dismiss students because of disability.
The law was signed Dec. 21 at King's College here, where a man whose experiences were the basis for the legislation, James B. Post 4th, was a premedical student.


400 U.S. MARINES ATTACK COMPOUND OF SOMALI GUNMEN
In the sharpest clash involving American troops since they landed here nearly a month ago, about 400 marines attacked a camp of one of Mogadishu's chief warlords today, destroying several buildings, capturing a large cache of weapons and killing or wounding many gunmen.
The Somalis were allied to Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, who controls most of the southern half of Somalia.
Much of the camp, enclosed by an eight-foot-high wall and containing four buildings on the outskirts of the capital, was reduced to rubble.





Review/Photography; Seascapes From Different Centuries Side by Side
It is hard to imagine a more intriguing and satisfying two-man show than the one now at the Lowinsky Gallery in SoHo.
Organized in association with Ezra Mack, a private dealer, the show brings together the seascapes of Gustave Le Gray, a 19th-century French pioneer in the medium, and Robert Adams, a renowned contemporary landscape photographer.
By pairing the two artists, the show succeeds not only in presenting two superb bodies of work, but also in contrasting their styles and the centuries that produced them.
Le Gray was a painter who took up photography in the late 1840's, less than a decade after the introduction of the new medium.
During the 1850's he operated a portrait studio in Paris, and he photographed landscapes and historical monuments as well.
Included here are five copy prints he made of the painter Jean-Francois Millet's 1848 copy of the Mona Lisa, indicating another side of his business.


170 Lose Jobs As Zuckerman Buys The News
Mortimer B. Zuckerman opened a new era at The Daily News last night in a tense labor confrontation, beginning the process of telling more than 170 employees, some of whom had worked at The News for decades, that they no longer had jobs.
Mr.
Zuckerman is cutting by one third the number of unionized news and business employees.
The move signaled a low point for the union, the citywide Newspaper Guild, which represents news, advertising and circulation employees at The News, The New York Post, The New York Times and other news organizations.


Sounds Around Town
Tyner, Thunderingly
McCoy Tyner, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 242-1785.
No other pianist in modern jazz has influenced as many subsequent musicians; his innovations with the John Coltrane quartet, the thundering oceanic harmonies, are now just a small part of his arsenal.
Mr.
Tyner was one of jazz's great pianists 30 years ago, and he keeps getting better.
Sets through Sunday at 9 and 11 P.M. and at 12:30 A.M. tonight and tomorrow. $15 cover and $6 minimum.
Harris, Understandingly
Barry Harris, Birdland, 2745 Broadway, at 105th Street, (212) 794-2228.
Mr.
Harris is a repository of be-bop, immensily graceful and lyrical.
He'll play the difficult, beautiful compositions of Bud Powell and take his time at it, and his interpretations of Thelonious Monk's compositions breathe with a real understanding of their contours.
Tonight and tomorrow night at 9, 10:30 and midnight, with a $10 cover and $10 minimum at tables; $5 cover and no minimum at the bar.
S.O.S.
Bosnia, Charitably
S.O.S.
Bosnia, Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, East Village, (212) 219-3055.
Meant to generate money for the American Bosnia-Herzegovina Relief fund, the show collects an all-star lineup of composers and improvisers.
Included are Marc Ribot, Anthony Coleman, Elliott Sharp, Bern Nix, John Zorn and others.
The show, on Sunday, starts at 8 P.M. $10 cover chargews


Israel to Allow Red Cross to Visit Ousted Palestinians in Lebanon
Showing some flexibility in the crisis over 415 deported Palestinians, Israel agreed today to allow two Red Cross officials, including a doctor, to visit the exiles at their tent camp in southern Lebanon.
There was no retreat from the expulsion order itself or from Israel's refusal to let relief supplies reach the camp through Israeli-controlled areas unless Lebanon permits similar access through its territory.
Sympathizers from nearby villages have been providing food and other supplies.


Don't Boycott Colorado, but Help Fight Back; Religious Right Invades
To the Editor:
Re "The Case for the Colorado Boycott" (editorial, Dec. 21): We have lived in Colorado Springs more than 40 years and have seen our city go from a good-hearted, open community to a suspicious, intolerant community.
The reason?
The religious far right has descended upon it like vultures to an innocent lamb.
They have been responsible for canceling library book orders, canceling diversity seminars scheduled by the school district, fielding stealth candidates for elective offices, running graphic abortion video clips.
And, of course, fathering Amendment 2.


Fielder Cracks Tigers' Vault
Barry Bonds and his agent, Dennis Gilbert, might not like it, but Cecil Fielder became, in reality if not in pure numbers, the highest-paid player in baseball yesterday.
Fielder and his agent, Jim Bronner, reached agreement with the Detroit Tigers on a five-year contract worth $36 million.
The package includes an eye-popping $10 million signing bonus, the largest ever given a baseball player.
Just a month ago, the Kansas City Royals gave David Cone, a free agent pitcher, a $9 million signing bonus.


Hockey; Gretzky Still Zigs And Zags In Traffic
When Wayne Gretzky's trick back would not heal up, he explored career alternatives.
"Like if the Toronto Blue Jays needed a first-base coach," Gretzky said.


Battle to Save Bosnians From the Cold
United Nations officials prepared today to evacuate residents of a home for the elderly where more than 20 people have died in the last two weeks from the bitter winter cold.
Their preparations were accentuated by a warning from the senior relief official that other countries would have to do "something radical" to prevent the suffering at the home from being repeated many times in Sarajevo and elsewhere across Bosnia.


Brett Returning to Royals, in His Fashion
GEORGE BRETT, shaking off yet another dispute with the Royals' front office over his pay, announced yesterday that he would return for a 20th major league season.
Brett, who will take a cut to $2.5 million from $3.1 million, was clearly disappointed that the Royals' owner, EWING KAUFFMAN, did not renegotiate the contract.
Brett has agreed to long-term pacts throughout his career, then complained when rises in salaries left him with middle-level contracts.


Tennis; U.S. Open a Step Closer To Line Call by Computer
Dedicated to the proposition that no self-respecting tennis player would have the audacity to argue line calls with a computer, the United States Tennis Association has announced that the electronic line-calling system it tested at the United States Open last summer might be installed for use during this year's event.
"We are satisfied with the results of the testing," Marshall Happer, executive director of the U.S.T.A., said yesterday.
The association began an investigation into the possible replacement of line judges by a qualified computer system two years ago.


Management Shifts at Teachers Fund
TIAA-CREF, which has $112 billion in assets under management and is the nation's largest pension fund, yesterday named John H. Biggs as chairman and chief executive, succeeding Dr.
Clifton R. Wharton Jr., who was nominated last month to serve as Deputy Secretary of State in the Clinton Administration.
Mr.
Biggs, 56, has been president and chief operating officer of the fund since 1989.
Thomas W. Jones, 43, was named to succeed Mr.
Biggs in those posts.
He was the fund's executive vice president for finance and planning, also since 1989.


Guilty Plea In Salomon Case Set
Paul W. Mozer, the aggressive former head of Salomon Brothers' lucrative government-securities trading operation, agreed yesterday to plead guilty to lying to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in connection with a Treasury securities auction.
Mr.
Mozer, who was at the center of the bidding scandal that erupted at Salomon in August 1991, made his first appearance in Federal court at an arraignment before Magistrate Leonard A. Bernikow in Manhattan.


Weicker's Statewide School Plan Could Resolve Hartford Bias Suit
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s call for a statewide school-integration effort will not end a suit challenging segregation in Hartford's schools, but it could lead to a resolution of the suit that would avoid a court imposing a desegregation plan on the state capital and its suburbs.
The outlines of Mr.
Weicker's plan, lawyers for the plaintiffs in the suit said today, meet one of their basic requirements, that integration be approached on a regional basis.


Art in Review
'Message From the Interior'  'The Eakins Press Foundation'
Zabriskie Gallery  724 Fifth Avenue (near 57th Street)  Through Jan. 30
Since it was founded in 1966 by Leslie George Katz, a writer and former publisher of Arts magazine, the Eakins Press has published a distinctive, and distinctively eclectic, range of books and portfolios about art.
This lively show presents a selection of 14 titles produced by the nonprofit foundation, along with examples of work by the artists featured in the books.


Hoving's Adventures At the Met
Making the Mummies Dance By Thomas Hoving Illustrated. 448 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.
In "Making the Mummies Dance," his bizarre, nasty and ultimately disheartening account of his stormy 10-year reign as director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Thomas Hoving gloats about a bit of heads-up detective work.
He writes that as a candidate in 1966 for the directorship, he discovered, unbeknownst to museum officials, that "the relentless State Commissioner for Human Rights, Eleanor Holmes Norton, was preparing to hit the museum with a series of legal charges alleging massive abuses in the hiring practices and promotions of women employees." His "shocker," he recalls, stunned the trustees, and he implies that it helped him to win the job.
This anecdote is vintage Hoving for its combination of skulduggery, one-upmanship, bravado and unreliability.
In 1966, Ms.
Norton was working for the American Civil Liberties Union and had no dealings with the museum; she never served as State Commissioner, although in 1971 she became chairwoman of the New York City Commission on Human Rights.
Furthermore, according to the museum, no such investigation of hiring practices took place until 1971, during Mr.
Hoving's own tenure; and then it involved the office of the New York State Attorney General, not Ms.
Norton, who this week confirmed the inaccuracies of Mr.
Hoving's story.


Poland Acts to Curb Abortion; Church Seeks Ban
The lower house of Parliament approved a bill today that strictly limits access to abortion but falls short of the ban sought by the Roman Catholic Church.
The bill, which exempts pregnancies involving rape, incest, genetic abnormalities or threats to the life of the mother, now moves to the Senate, where it is expected to be approved easily.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FORD MOTOR CO.  will suspend production at four assembly plants next week because of slow sales and plant work.
The plants affected are the Mustang plant in Dearborn, Mich.; the Escort auto and F-series pickup-truck plants in Wayne, Mich., and a plant in St.
Thomas, Ontario, that makes the Ford Crown Victoria and Mercury Grand Marquis sedans.
BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB CORP.  said it had identified 2,250 positions to be eliminated in its pharmaceutical and nutritional divisions.
The cuts are part of a 6 percent overall job cut disclosed in late October.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  AL -- Named Joseph A. Fitzgerald assistant media affairs director.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Named Buddy Bailey manager of the Pawtucket Red Sox of the International League and Rico Petrocelli roving minor league hitting coach.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Agreed to terms with Cecil Fielder, first baseman, on a five-year contract.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Signed Robin Yount, outfielder, to a one-year contract.
Assigned William Suero, infielder, outright to New Orleans of the American Association.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Named Ray Burris assistant for special projects and community development.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Agreed to terms with Jeff D. Robinson and Mike Harkey, pitchers, and Kevin Roberson, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Agreed to terms with Rob Murphy, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
Appalachian League  HUNTINGTON CUBS -- Named Ian Laurie director of media relations and marketing.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  NEW JERSEY NETS -- Signed Maurice Cheeks, guard.
Waived Dan O'Sullivan, center.
Continental Basketball Association  COLUMBUS HORIZON -- Suspended Ricky Calloway, guard, indefinitely because he failed two league-mandated drug tests.
FORT WAYNE FURY -- Signed Charles Thomas, guard.
La CROSSE CATBIRDS -- Signed Jarvis Basnight, forward.
Placed Tom Copa, center, on the injured list.
WICHITA FALLS TEXANS -- Signed Stephen Bardo, guard.
Football  National Football League  CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Promoted Mike Pope, tight ends coach, to offensive coordinator.
Named Ken Anderson quarterbacks coach.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NHL -- Fined the St.
Louis Blues $21,738 and fined Brendan Shanahan, Blues forward, $500 and suspended him without pay for six non-game days for hitting Mike Craig of the Minnesota North Stars in the face with his stick during a game on Dec. 22.
BOSTON BRUINS -- Called up John Blue and Mike Bales, goaltenders, from Providence of the American Hockey League.
LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Reassigned Guy Leveque, center, to Phoenix of the International Hockey League.
Recalled David Goverde, goaltender, from Phoenix.
Colonial Hockey League  FLINT BULLDOGS -- Placed Scott Allen, center, on the injury list.
College
CAL-STATE NORTHRIDGE -- Announced the resignation of Walt Ker, women's volleyball coach.
NORTH CAROLINA STATE -- Declared Donnie Seale, basketball guard, and Chuck Kornegay and Jamie Knox, basketball forwards, academically ineligible.
PITTSBURGH -- Named Charlie Coe offensive run coordinator; Jack Henry offensive line coach; Tom Turchetta defensive line coach; and Brian Williams outside linebackers coach.
RAMAPO -- Announced it has dropped football.
SONOMA STATE -- Named Jeff Ramsey offensive coordinator.
SOUTHWESTERN LOUISIANA -- Named Vic Eumont defensive coordinator and inside linebackers coach.
TUFTS -- Named Michael Friedman interim sports information coordinator.
VANDERBILT -- Promoted Rick George, from assistant athletic director for football to associate athletic director for external operations.
VIRGINIA -- Named Peggy Kellers softball coach.
WASHINGTON -- Extended the contract of Don James, football coach, through the 1996 season.


Critic's Choice/Music; A Side to Tchaikovsky That Is Not Often Heard
Sometimes you get lucky.
Those who missed a rare performance of Tchaikovsky's Vespers last month (as I did), but were not privileged to attend a rehearsal (as I was), still have a chance to hear this glorious music.
Nicolai Kachanov and the Russian Chamber Chorus will perform the work again at 3:30 P.M. on Sunday at the St.
James Chapel of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street in Morningside Heights. (They will also present parts of it during an ecumenical vesper service at 4 P.M. on Jan. 17 at the Church of the Good Shepherd, 240 East 31st Street, Manhattan.)
To anyone unfamiliar with Tchaikovsky's liturgical music (which includes a magnificent setting of the Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom and a number of hymns), these harmonizations of ancient Russian Orthodox chants will come as revelation.
Though the composer ventured into this mine field of arcane traditions with insufficient wariness and ran afoul of churchly critics of his time, the music radiates a subtlety seldom associated with the composer today.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Science Times on Tuesday about a National Weather Service report on last year's weather patterns gave an incorrect date in some copies for a northeaster that caused extensive damage in the New York area.
It was Dec. 11.


Dinkins Plans Shift in Funds For Homeless
Instead of a sweeping overhaul of New York City's beleaguered shelter system for single adults, Mayor David N. Dinkins is proposing to develop more permanent housing for a variety of people, including homeless single adults and moderate-income families.
Under his new plan, Mr.
Dinkins intends to take half the $280 million that had been allocated for improving the lot of homeless single adults and redistribute it to address a broader range of housing needs.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 16 about the discharge of a canister of noxious gas in a Queens intermediate school misidentified the contents.
It was a Mace-like substance, but not Mace.


Selma R. Brody, 66, Education Consultant
Selma Rich Brody, an education consultant, died on Dec. 31 at her home in Westport, Conn.
She was 66.
She died of cancer, her husband, Roy, said.


Audit of Government Says Billions Are Being Wasted
The top Federal auditor told President-elect Bill Clinton today that the Government did "an abysmal job of rudimentary bookkeeping" and had tens of billions of dollars in hidden liabilities.
In a series of 45 transition reports, Comptroller General Charles A.  Bowsher, the head of the General Accounting Office, painted a grim picture of a Government plagued by mismanagement, unable to collect delinquent taxes and unwilling to acknowledge the full cost of its long-term commitments.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Confirmation Roundup; Reich Charts a Path to Return the Labor Dept. to Center Stage
Federico F. Pena
Secretary of Transportation
WASHINGTON (Special to The New York Times) -- Federico F. Pena, the Transportation Secretary-designate, put himself at odds with budget cutters in the Clinton Administration when he said that money now used to keep the deficit down should be spent on public works.


Japan to Continue Restraints On Auto Exports to the U.S.
The Japanese Government said today that it would continue its voluntary restraints on automobile exports to the United States for another year.
Japan will export no more than 1.65 million vehicles to the United States in the fiscal year that begins in April, the same number as in the current fiscal year, said Yoshiro Mori, the minister of international trade and industry.
Production Shifts
The United Automobile Workers union and some executives in the United States have suggested that Japan should further reduce its exports.
But an official of the trade ministry said today that the overall American auto market was expected to expand in 1993, so keeping the quota the same would have the same effect as tightening restrictions.


Sounds Around Town
Wainwright, Maturely
Loudon Wainwright 3d, the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-7880.
The singer and songwriter from Westchester County has grown from a wisecracking, preppy follower of Bob Dylan into a sagacious troubadour whose newest songs about middle age and fatherhood cut more deeply than anything he has written before.
Many of those songs are included on his new album, "History," which is the latest chapter in a recording career that has the resonance of a personal journal spanning more than two decades.
Shows are tonight at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Rosa Maria, Soulfully
Rosa Maria, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, (212) 244-3005.
The Brazilian singer, who has been a star in her homeland since the mid-1960's, makes more direct connections between samba, soul music and reggae than most of her compatriots.
Her show concentrates on uptempo sambas arranged as hybrids of Caribbean and Brazilian styles, performed with a spirited brashness that recalls Chaka Khan with echoes of Tina Turner.
Shows are at 9 and 11:15 tonight and tomorrow night.
There is a $20 cover charge ($25 for ringside) and a two-drink minimum.
Haran, Observingly
Mary Cleere Haran, Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, 65th Floor, (212) 632-5000.
In her brilliant new cabaret act, Mary Cleere Haran pays tribute to 1940's movie songs that range from classics like "That Old Black Magic" and "Last Night When We Were Young" to amusing obscurities like "Minnie From Trinidad" (from "Ziegfeld Girl").
Ms.
Haran's sinuously sunny voice recalls the young Doris Day, and her commentary, which interweaves personal anecdotes with pop-historical observations, sustains a level of style and wit that is unprecedented among modern cabaret singers.
Shows are at 8 and 10:30 tonight and tomorrow.
There is a $35 cover charge.


Ex-Official Admits Guilt
A former top official of the New York City Correction Department pleaded guilty yesterday to taking kickbacks for awarding contracts to a company that provided janitorial supplies to jails.
The former official, 42-year-old William Jenkins, did not say how much he took, but prosecutors in Federal District Court in Brooklyn said the payoffs totaled $24,000 in cash and several hundred dollars' worth of toilet paper over a yearlong period that ended last Oct. 21.


Shetland Spill Damage Threathens to Get Worse


EARLY CREATURES ARE FOUND INTACT
The oldest preserved soft-bodied creatures ever found, single-celled microorganisms that lived at the dawn of the age of dinosaurs, have been identified in fragments of amber from a sandstone deposit in Germany.
The creatures -- protozoa, bacteria, algae, pollen and spores -- are strikingly similar to present-day species, according to a report being published today by the journal Science.
Evolution seems scarcely to have changed these microorganisms in more than 220 million years.


Suffolk Judge Barred Because of Forgeries
A state judicial ethics panel has voted to bar a former Suffolk County Court judge from the bench for life because he forged his late mother's name on credit-card applications to obtain money for gambling.
The panel, the State Commission on Judicial Conduct, acted too late to remove the judge, Rudolph L. Mazzei, a Republican who was not renominated last year and whose term ended on Dec. 31.


Pro Football; Jackson's Struggles Still Register Success
The way Jim Mandich sees it, Keith Jackson is that rarest of tight ends.
"He dictates to a defense what they can and cannot do," said Mandich, a former Miami Dolphins tight end, about the team's present tight end occupant.


A Bronx School Official Is Found Dead in Albany
The body of a superintendent of a Bronx school district, the subject of city and Federal investigations into allegations of financial misconduct, was found in a motel room in Albany, the police said yesterday.
The educator, Alfredo Mathew Jr., 59, was found on Wednesday with a plastic bag over his head by a cleaner at a Howard Johnson motel, the police in Albany said.
He was pronounced dead on arrival at the Albany Medical Center.
There was no sign of foul play or of anyone else's having occupied the room, the police said.
The death is under investigation pending the results of an autopsy.


For News Employees, Thin Envelope Is Knife
After 27 years at The Daily News -- the paper that was once like a real-life Daily Planet with everything but Lois Lane and Clark Kent, the paper whose million-plus circulation and ad-fat Sunday issues made it the nation's largest for more than a generation -- Michael Vincent realized yesterday what his future depended on: whether he got a thin brown envelope or a fat brown envelope.
Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the magazine publisher and real-estate developer, was taking over.
Like the other employees at the paper, Mr.
Vincent had been ordered to report to the first floor of The News's architecturally distinguished Art Deco building at 220 East 42d Street.


Alphabet Soup, With a Dash of Hype
A formidable partnership ladled the name "3DO" into the alphabet soup of new consumer electronics product names at the industry's annual winter trade show here this week, adding more chaos to the most confusing period in the business's history.
Time Warner, Matsushita, MCA and Kleiner Perkins had previously announced the joint formation of the 3DO Company to set a new standard for what are known as interactive multimedia players; the devices use compact disks, called CD-ROM's, that can store enormous amounts of video, sound, graphics and text.
But late Wednesday, the 3DO team surprised the industry by announcing the addition of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, which brings not only another wealthy equity partner but also a company with the telecommunications clout that could eventually give the new standard a tremendous mass-market edge.


Philip Morris Official Sees 20% Profit Rise
After a three-day selloff that pushed down the stock of the Philip Morris Companies by 7 percent, a top executive today tried to reassure stockholders by predicting that the corporation's year-end earnings would rise 20 percent.
At a regularly scheduled meeting here today with investors and tobacco industry analysts, Hans Storr, the company's executive vice president and chief financial officer, said in a statement, "The recent weakness in the price of our stock is based on overreaction to exaggerated and negative media accounts of tobacco industry issues." He said earnings, which are to be released on Jan. 27, would be $5.45 a share.
Investors Bid Up Stocks
The statement apparently helped lift Philip Morris stock, which gained 75 cents a share today, closing at $72.625 on the New York Stock Exchange.


The Art Market
Mass Moca, Round 2
The Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art has been given another chance.
Last week, Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts agreed to give the museum's Cultural Development Commission a six-month extension to raise $12 million.
If it can come up with the money, the Governor said, he will release the $33 million approved by the State Legislature in 1988 to establish the museum in North Adams, Mass.
Governor Weld temporarily froze the money after he took office in 1991.
So far, the commission has secured pledges of $4.1 million from individuals, corporations and foundations.
The project, popularly known as Mass Moca, is billed as the world's largest museum of contemporary art, concentrating on works from the 1960's, 70's and 80's.
The ambitious goal is to fill the abandoned Sprague Technologies plant in North Adams, a complex of 28 buildings on 13.5 acres.


U.S. Ties Secondhand Smoke to Cancer
Secondhand tobacco smoke causes lung cancer that kills an estimated 3,000 nonsmokers a year and subjects hundreds of thousands of children to respiratory disease, the Environmental Protection Agency said today in a long-anticipated report.
The E.P.A. study, issued after four years and several revisions, should serve as a rallying point for government and private efforts to reduce exposure to environmental tobacco smoke, Federal health officials said.


Golf; At Age 50, Floyd Keeps Seniors' Flame Burning
If the most interesting thing about professional golf is that it won't be held hostage to the tyranny of youth, then the most interesting player in the game is Raymond Floyd.
At the age of 50, Floyd is actually playing as well as he ever has in a 30-year career that has produced 22 PGA Tour victories and four major championships.
He is coming off a year in which he joined Sam Snead as the only players to win regular Tour events in four decades and the only player to win on the regular and Senior tours in the same year.


Clapton Is Nominated For 9 Grammy Awards
The guitarist Eric Clapton garnered the most nominations -- nine -- for the 35th annual Grammy Awards.
He will compete with the country-pop singer K. D. Lang and the soundtrack from "Beauty and the Beast" for record, album and song of the year.
The winners will be announced on Feb. 24 in a CBS telecast from Los Angeles.
More than 400 nominations, covering 80 categories of music, were announced yesterday by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences at a news conference at the Hard Rock Cafe in Manhattan.


Resurrecting the Goatee for Hipness' Sake
HEY, Daddy-o, like wow!
Beatniks are suddenly well, hip, man.
They're, um, coming back in all kinds of cool ads, baby.
You dig?
In another example of the cross-pollination of advertising and popular culture, the beatniks of the 1950's and early 1960's are becoming increasingly exposed to the consumers of the 1990's through commercials and print advertisements.


Boating; This Year at Javits Center, Industry Stages Variety Show
It is considered a marine trade exhibition, but the New York National Boat Show this year is offering enough sideshows to fill a circus tent.
The event, in its 83d year, is scheduled to open officially tomorrow at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, at 11th Avenue between 34th and 39th Streets.
It is open for a sneak preview today for anyone willing to pay $20 for a ticket, compared with the regular $8 admission price for an adult.


Retailers' Holidays: Happy Indeed
The nation's chain stores yesterday reported stunningly strong sales in December, their best holiday season since 1988.
Retailers had anticipated moderate gains for the Christmas season, but few had predicted sales as vigorous as they turned out to be.
And even the most optimistic were surprised by the results.


Accounts
*
Giant Eagle, Pittsburgh, to Calet, Hirsch &amp; Ferrell Inc., New York, to handle the supermarket chain's account, previously handled by W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
Calet, Hirsch was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $5 million to $10 million, after a six-month review that also included as the other finalist Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson, Boston.


Dow Off 36.20 for Steepest Loss in 3 Months
A late selloff in the bond market crumpled the stock market yesterday, leaving the Dow Jones industrial average with its largest one-day loss in three months.
The Dow closed down 36.20 points, or 1.1 percent, to 3,268.96, with the broader market off almost as much.
Volume, at 304.9 million shares, exceeded 300 million for only the third time in the last year, as the decline accelerated in the last hour of trading.


Japanese Street Slang Gives Ours Competition
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 2 "Ashigawa Journal: A Festival That Permits Japanese to Be Impolite," about a New Year's Eve tradition in which the Japanese can get pent-up frustrations off their chests in abusive language, implies that Japanese slang is limited.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Confirmation Roundup; Reich Charts a Path to Return the Labor Dept. to Center Stage
Jesse Brown  Secretary of Veterans Affairs
WASHINGTON (AP) -- Despite bipartisan praise as President-elect Clinton's choice for Secretary of Veterans Affairs, Jesse Brown faced suggestions from one Republican Senator that his pension from a veterans' organization would cause him problems.


Don't Boycott Colorado, but Help Fight Back; The Voters Spoke
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 21 editorial supporting a boycott of Colorado as a result of the statewide approval of Amendment 2, prohibiting the establishment of legal rights based on sexual preference.
Among supporters of this amendment, few will be moved to adopt a different position because of any boycott of Colorado, its products or its services.
Even if the amendment is overturned by court action or the electorate, a strong majority of citizens of this state chose not to recognize "sexual preference" as a legally protected right.
Coercive tactics will not erase the sentiment expressed by these 800,000 voters.


Dizzy Gillespie Memorial
A memorial service for the jazz trumpet virtuoso Dizzy Gillespie, who died on Wednesday, is to be held on Tuesday at 1 P.M. at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Morningside Heights.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  MARINES ATTACK A CLAN CAMP  About 400 U.S. marines attacked a clan leader's camp in the Somali capital, destroying buildings, capturing weapons and killing or wounding many gunmen.
It was the sharpest clash involving U.S. troops since they landed in December.
A1  GAINS REPORTED IN SOMALI TALKS  After four days of talks in Ethiopia, the leaders of 14 Somali political factions were reported by United Nations officials to be close to an agreement on the first steps toward ending the war in Somalia.
A8  IRAQ DEFIES ALLIES ON MISSILES  In an apparent rebuff of the allied demand that Iraq remove newly deployed surface-to-air missiles in southern Iraq, Baghdad said it was entitled to station the weapons anywhere on its territory.
A1  RED CROSS TO VISIT PALESTINIANS  Showing some flexibility in the crisis over 415 deported Palestinians, Israel agreed to allow two Red Cross officials, including a doctor, to visit the exiles at their tent camp in southern Lebanon.
A2  ECONOMIC WOES FOR ISRAEL  Turning around Israel's state-guided, aid-dependent economy has eluded Prime Minister Rabin.
And many Israelis are disappointed that he has not pressed more aggressively for rapid economic change.
A3  U.N.
WARNS ON SARAJEVO PLIGHT  A U.N. official said foreign countries would have to do "something radical" to prevent the suffering at a home for the elderly from being repeated in Sarajevo and across Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A6  The Bosnian President arrived in Washington, looking for help.
A6  POLAND ACTS TO CURB ABORTION  The lower house of Poland's Parliament approved a bill that strictly limits access to abortion but falls short of the ban sought by the Roman Catholic Church.
The bill, which exempts pregnancies involving rape, incest, genetic abnormalities or threats to the life of the mother, now moves to the Senate, where it is expected to be approved easily.
A7  SHETLAND SPILL WORSENS  As oil continued to pour from the battered tanker wedged against a cliff in the Shetland Islands, a spreading slick crept toward the salmon farms that are a major industry and inland sheep pastures were covered by an oily film.
A9  El Salvador's president tells why he delayed the military purge.
A9.
Ivanovo Journal: A reformer is in the eye of the beholder.
A4  National A10-14  FURTHER EVIDENCE OF A BIG BANG  An American satellite has made precise temperature measurements showing that 99.97 percent of the radiant energy of the universe was released within the first year of creation.
A1  HEART PILLS IN SHORT SUPPLY  A nationwide shortage of nitroglycerin, a drug taken by hundreds of thousands of Americans to relieve pains from angina, has developed because of problems at a plant owned by the pill's only American manufacturer.
A1  REPORT ON SECONDHAND SMOKE  A long-awaited E.P.A. report said that tobacco smoke caused lung cancer that killed 3,000 nonsmokers a year and that it subjected hundreds of thousands of children to respiratory disease.
A14  CLINTON GETS A GRIM REPORT  The top Federal auditor told President-elect Clinton that the Government did "an abysmal job of rudimentary bookkeeping" and that its hidden liabilities totaled tens of billions of dollars.
A10  ASPIN SENDS A WARNING  Testifying at his Senate confirmation hearing, the Defense Secretary-designate said the Bush Administration's six-year military budget might overestimate savings and underestimate weapons costs.
If so, the President-elect faces an ever tougher job in meeting his pledge to cut Pentagon spending.
A12  Three other Clinton Cabinet choices testified at Senate hearings.
A12  Washington Talk: A neighborhood untouched by inaugural plans.
A12  Perot plans appearances to beef up his grass-roots organization.
A13  JUDGE ACTS IN POSTAL DISPUTE  A Federal judge temporarily barred the President from carrying out his threat to dismiss the Postmaster General and five other governors of the Postal Service who, over White House objections, had filed a suit involving stamp rates.
A13  'A TRAGIC PARABLE'  Three years ago, after his best friend had been badly injured in a 30-foot fall, a Louisiana man switched identities with him so that the injured man, who lacked medical insurance, would be assured of the emergency-room treatment that ultimately saved his life.
Now both of them are going to prison.
A10  THREE SEIZED IN RACIAL ATTACK  Three white men were arrested in Florida and charged with abducting a black tourist and then setting him afire.
A13  Law Page B14  The battle over who can look into Federal workers' computer screens.
Metro Digest B1  ZUCKERMAN CUTS JOBS AT NEWS  Mortimer B. Zuckerman began a new era at The Daily News in a tense labor confrontation, telling 170 employees, some of whom had worked at The News for decades, that they no longer had jobs.
A1  RIGHTS FOR UNMARRIED PARTNERS  Mayor Dinkins moved to give unmarried heterosexual and homosexual couples in New York City some of the rights enjoyed by married couples.
A1  AGREEMENT TO AID BLUE CROSS  One week after the Cuomo administration granted a major rate increase to Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, state officials agreed to give the company an infusion of cash that would reduce the most severe increases premiums.
A1  Neediest Cases B3  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-25  Sports B6-11  Obituaries A16  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials  Breaking Bill Clinton's promise.
Disarming Somalia, sort of.
The incomparable Nureyev.
Mr.
Weicker's bully bugle call.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: On banning Nazis.
Anthony Lewis: Beware of Munich.
John Lukacs: History, wild history.
Charles Murray: Bad lessons.


Bengals Make Ken Anderson a Coach
The Cincinnati Bengals, whose offense slumped during the 1992 season, promoted the tight ends coach, MIKE POPE, to offensive coordinator yesterday, and hired the retired quarterback KEN ANDERSON as quarterbacks coach.


Baseball; Major League Survey Finds Support for More Playoffs
Major league baseball owners, buoyed by a recent poll that indicates that fans would be receptive to expanded playoffs, are trying to determine if the interest is enough to get them to propose such changes to the players in coming labor negotiations.
The results come from a survey in which more than 9,000 fans were recently asked to consider all sorts of changes and options for baseball.
Included were different types of expanded playoffs, including one that maintains the current divisions (with two teams advancing from each division) and one proposing a three-division per league format (with division winners and one wild-card team making post-season appearances).


Westminster Journal; A Defiant Flight Stirs Vietnamese a World Away
Some people here secretly doubted the spectacular story of Ly Tong's escape from Vietnam until they learned of his even more spectacular return four months ago.
Today Mr.
Tong, a former South Vietnamese fighter pilot, is once again a prisoner of the Communists in his homeland after making a flamboyant call for revolution with leaflets dropped from a commandeered airliner.
And in Vietnamese communities across the United States he is acclaimed as a hero, a man who with one grand gesture carried out the desperate fantasy of almost any refugee.


Iraq Apparently Rebuffs Allies On Missiles Deployed in South
In an apparent rebuff of the allied demand that Iraq remove its newly deployed surface-to-air missiles in southern Iraq, Baghdad said today that it was entitled to station the weapons anywhere on its territory.
The Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister, Tariq Aziz, said Baghdad had the right to "deploy air defenses throughout the country." Allied military action to compel removal of the missiles would be a violation of international law, Mr.
Aziz said.


Pro Football; Wannstedt Won't Play Hard to Get
The Giants appear to have themselves a head coach if they want him.
"They know I'd be interested if they'd be," said Dave Wannstedt, the coordinator of the Dallas Cowboys' defense, which led the National Football League in fewest yards allowed during the regular season.


Shetland Oil Spill Is Threatening Salmon Farms and Sheep Fields
As oil continued to pour from the battered tanker wedged against a cliff several miles from here, a spreading slick crept toward the salmon farms that are a major industry in the Shetland Islands, and inland sheep pastures were covered by an oily film.
As Shetlanders like Joseph Kay, a sheep farmer, discovered, the effects of the spill were not limited to the coastline.
His hood drawn tight against gale-force winds and his boots covered with a sheen of oil, Mr.
Kay stood at the edge of grazing land he owns on the coast a few miles from the wreck of the tanker at Garth's Ness, preparing to herd 100 of his sheep further inland.


Keeping Its Shores to Itself; Greenwich Eschews Federal Aid to Repair Recreational Sites
This elegant town, badly damaged by last month's storm, has chosen to stick to its principles and, unlike all other eligible towns in the region, is not seeking money from the Federal Government to fix its parks and beaches.
Town officials said that if Greenwich accepted the money, which would probably amount to no more than $250,000, the Government might require it to open the beaches, now reserved for town residents and their guests, to the public.


2 Economists See Recovery In New Jersey
The recession in New Jersey may be over, according to a new report by Rutgers University economists, but even using the most optimistic forecast of job growth, they say, it will be 1999 before employment returns to 1989 levels.
New Jersey lost jobs in every category but services and government employment from 1989 through 1992, the report found.
Moreover, the slump eroded white-collar jobs in the usually robust wholesale and retail trades and in financial and real-estate services.
Those job categories once seemed recession proof and in fact grew during the brief recession of 1981-82.


Pro Basketball; Knicks to Take Turns Against O'Neal
The Knicks hope to contain Orlando's Shaquille O'Neal with a group effort Friday night.
When the game begins, it will be O'Neal versus Patrick Ewing.
But before the game ends, Herb Williams, Charles Oakley and even Anthony Mason will probably get the chance to defend against O'Neal.


New Studies on Breast Cancer Sought by D'Amato and Women
Rejecting the conclusions of a Federal study, a women's advocacy group and Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato said today that they would seek new studies of the high rates of breast cancer on Long Island.
The Federal report, released in December, found that environmental factors peculiar to Long Island were not responsible for the large numbers of women there who have developed breast cancer.


Hockey; Two for One: Boost for Richter and Victory for Coach
Mike Richter has been tutored lately by Bob Froese, the Rangers' goalie instructor.
They discuss technical skills, including maintaining balance and playing the shooting angles, but they also address the psychological dimension of the extremely stressful position.
"You try to get rid of a lot of nonproductive thoughts," Richter said yesterday.
"This has been a bad part of my career. You try to make this game a turning point. What's good for the team is good for me, and I will try to build on it."


New Tourist Center Opens in Times Square


Albany Reaches Accord to Trim Increase in Blue Cross Premiums
One week after the Cuomo administration granted a major rate increase to Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, New York State officials agreed today to give the company a one-time infusion of cash that would reduce the most severe increases in health insurance premiums.
Under the deal struck by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders, the average increase in premiums for Empire's 1.4 million customers would drop to about 20 percent from 25.5 percent.
Most significant, no customer would bear an increase of more than 25 percent.


Cuomo's Schools Proposal Strikes a Chord
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposal to let counties finance schools with income rather than property taxes is a response to an outcry in many communities over property taxes that have continued to rise, sometimes sharply, even during the economic downturn.
"It points up the desperation single-family home owners feel because their property taxes just keep going up," Edwin L. Crawford, executive director of the New York State Association of Counties, said of Mr.
Cuomo's proposal.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The nation's chain stores reported strong sales in December and their best holiday period since 1988.
A survey of 22 big retailers showed sales rose 8 percent in December.  [ Page D1. ]
The former head of Salomon's government-securities trading agreed to plead guilty to lying at a Treasury auction.  [ D1. ]


CHRONICLE
"We're older than Wellesley; we're older than Vassar, Smith, Hotchkiss, and Choate," ALICE DELANA, the chairwoman of the 150th anniversary of Miss Porter's School, exulted yesterday as she described plans for the 16-month celebration "from sea to shining sea and from Los Angeles to Rome."
Miss Porter's was founded as a private girls' school by Sarah Porter in 1843 in a room above a pharmacy in Farmington, Conn.
She had $32 to her name.
The pharmacy now serves as the library for the school that has expanded into 56 buildings on 30 acres.


PEROT TO USE TV TO PROMOTE GROUP
Texas billionaires don't fade away, it would seem. They just keep coming back on TV.
No matter that the campaign is long over.
On Monday, Ross Perot returns to his favorite venues: a news conference in Dallas followed by CNN's "Larry King Live," where it all began.
Then ABC's "Good Morning America" Tuesday and NBC's "Today" program on Thursday.


Leon Is Waiting for McGirt
They were originally scheduled to fight in November, but a case of tonsilitis kept James (Buddy) McGirt of Brentwood, L.I., from defending his World Boxing Council welterweight championship against Geraro Leon of Mexico.
With the bout now scheduled for Tuesday night at the Paramount at the Garden, Leon appears bent on ruining McGirt's plans for a title match against Pernell Whitaker on March 6.
"I'm happy the fight is here in New York and not in Las Vegas," Leon said yesterday, "because now I will be taking the title away from McGirt in his own backyard."


On My Mind; On Banning Nazis
For the past few days, I have been experiencing a political sensation new to me -- flashes of sympathy for the German Government.
In late November and December last year, Chancellor Helmut Kohl, backed by German parliamentary leaders, took an important step to try to control the wave of Nazi killings, beatings, burnings and riots.


CHRONICLE
Dr.
MICHAEL E. DEBAKEY, the renowned heart surgeon, announced on Wednesday that he would step down as the chairman of the department of surgery at the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, a position he has held for 45 years.
But that does not mean that he will languish in leisure, said JACQUELINE PRESTON, a spokeswoman for the medical school.
"He will continue to be the chancellor of the college, a position he has had since 1979, and he is still performing surgery at the age of 84," she said.


Clinton to Meet Today With Mexican Leader
President-elect Bill Clinton and President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico will not try to settle their highly complicated differences on North American trade issues when they meet Friday, Democrats and Mexican officials said this week.
George Stephanopoulos, the communications director for Mr.
Clinton's transition team, said the meeting in Austin, Tex., would cover immigration and foreign-aid issues as well as the North American Free Trade Agreement, which would eliminate trade barriers among the United States, Canada and Mexico.


Abroad at Home; Beware of Munich
Cyrus Vance is one of the great American public servants of recent decades, a man of courage and unwavering honor.
But I and some others who admire him are increasingly puzzled by where he is going in his search for a negotiated end to the war in Bosnia.
Mr.
Vance and Lord Owen of Britain are co-chairmen of a Geneva conference on the conflict.
When the latest session adjourned this week, they flew to Belgrade to ask the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, to help bring about peace.
Afterward Mr.
Vance said Mr.
Milosevic had promised "he would do everything possible."


Magazines and Presses Share $1.4 Million
The Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund has awarded $1.4 million in grants to 18 nonprofit literary magazines and presses.
Individual grants range from $40,000 to $100,000.
The magazines are The American Poetry Review, Belles Lettres, Calyx, Conjunctions, The Kenyon Review, The Missouri Review, Review: Latin American Literature and Art, Triquarterly and ZYZZYVA.


SALVADORAN SAYS PURGE IS FLAWED
President Alfredo Cristiani said today that he had altered the purge of the Salvadoran Army officer corps envisioned by the peace accords because the commission that selected the men to be removed did not honor their right to answer the charges against them.
He said he realized that some members of the United States Congress would criticize the way he had handled the matter and try to freeze or condition aid to El Salvador.
But he asserted that the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, the former guerrilla group with which the end of the 12-year civil war was negotiated, "has no quarrels with how we are approaching this," so members of Congress should not either.


James E. Conley; TV Executive, 71
James E. Conley, a retired television executive, died on Sunday at Courtland Garden Residence in Stamford, Conn.
He was 71 and lived in Darien, Conn.
He died of pneumonia after a long illnesss, said Craig Maltby, the spokesman for Meredith Corporation in Des Moines.


Free Agents and the Ratings Pie
Is free agency in the National Football League NBC's hope for a brighter future?
Will an influx of big-name National Conference players to the American Conference tilt the ratings balance from historically dominant CBS to NBC?
It has been 17 seasons since NBC, the A.F.C. network, earned higher Nielsen ratings than CBS, the N.F.C. network.
Back in 1975, NBC won the ratings game, 14.2-14.0, after winning, 14.0-13.7, in 1974.
Those were the network's only victories.


Against the Tide
Charles Schwab Corporation, the nation's largest discount broker, bucked the market's retreat yesterday, gaining $3, or 10.5 percent, to $28.375.
The company said that 1992 earnings were likely to set a record of more than $78 million, up from $49 million last year.
The shares of several other brokerage firms rode along for smaller gains.


New Temple Planned to Serve Mormons in the Northeast
The Mormon Church plans to build a multimillion-dollar temple in this area to serve more than 30,000 Mormons throughout the Northeast.
Currently, the nearest temple is in Kensington, Md., just outside Washington.
Most of the other 23 temples in the United States are in the West or Middle West.


Opening Up Japanese Politics
After 36 years of one-party dominance, Japan appears headed toward competitive politics.
The leading faction of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party has shattered, pointing the way to a realignment that could eventually bring an American-style two-party system.
For a time, political infighting could make it harder for Tokyo to deliver on diplomatic deals.
In the longer run, democratic competition would be good for Japan, and the U.S.
Ichiro Ozawa, Japan's most formidable younger politician and its most fiercely ambitious, forced the split.
After building his career as the protege of Shin Kanemaru, the disgraced "godfather" of Japanese factional politics, Mr.
Ozawa has now cleverly, if cynically, reinvented himself as the champion of political reform.


Elvis Comes Alive at the Post Office
Slicked-back hair was the style of the day.
Long lines were the order of the day.
And the catch of the day?
Elvis.
In Birmingham, Ala. -- where Elvis Presley gave one of his first big performances dressed in a velvet shirt his mother had made -- fans, stamp collectors and at least one Elvis impersonator waited to buy stamps honoring the rock legend on what would have been his 58th birthday.


Restaurant Patron Is Slain by Gunmen In Williamsburg
Two gunmen opened fire on employees and patrons at a popular Spanish restaurant in Brooklyn early yesterday, killing one person and sending three others to the hospital, a police official said.
The shooting occurred about 1:15 A.M. at El Pez Dorado Restaurant, at 759 Grand Street in Williamsburg, when two men entered the restaurant, said Lieut.
Joseph Heffernan.
One gunman stayed at the door and the other went to the rear, Lieutenant Heffernan said, then they opened fire.


A "Dream House" Savings Plan
Dana Keeler and Daniel Irons, engaged since last July, need $42,000 by next July to put 20 percent down on the house they want to buy.
They are doing it in a year of lean living on a scrupulous savings plan.
Page 36.  [ Photo ]


First Team Sports reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


In Bad Times, U.S. Should Assist States More
To the Editor:
"A Tax That Rides the Tides" (Op-Ed, Dec. 22), Ralph Bradburd's proposal for a permanent Federal income tax surcharge that automatically varies inversely with the unemployment rate is a sensible way to attack the deficit problem and the need for short-term economic stimulus.
It is one of those long-term structural reforms that, once enacted, would make most people wonder why it had not been done years earlier.


Crips, Bloods and Clintons; A Veteran of Gang Wars Tastes Inaugural Glory
Charles Rachal, convicted killer and former crack user and gang member, stood on the street where he grew up and triumphantly waved his formal invitation to the Clinton inauguration.
"They said I couldn't make it with these," he shouted to a friend, referring to the gang tattoos that cover his hands, chest and neck.
"But what about this invitation?"


BanPonce Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column yesterday about plans for the 150th anniversary of Miss Porter's School in Farmington, Conn., misstated the date of the dinner and symposium, "From New Girls to Newsmakers." It will be at the United Nations on Jan. 19, not this Tuesday.


Perseverance Has Paid Off for Weight
The lowest moment came on Dec. 4 in Landover, Md.
The Rangers lost their ugliest game of the season, to the Washington Capitals, and Doug Weight watched from the front row of the press box.
He was frustrated, angry and more than a little impatient with his fate.
His training camp performance had been inspired, prompting endless compliments from Roger Neilson, then the coach, and his teammates.
He had started the regular season with high expectations and more confidence than he had ever had in his career.


Tents Are Pitched for Inaugural Celebrations


Review/Film; Pogo Stick, Murders And Gold
The title character in the new horror film titled "Leprechaun" is supposed to be fiendish but, though the movie's body count is respectable, he seems to be no more than dangerously cranky.
That may be because the setting is rural North Dakota, which doesn't suit leprechauns, or because the screenplay and direction are amateurish, which doesn't suit films of any kind.


MGI Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Clarcor reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Post Is Seen for Economist
Lawrence H. Summers, the chief economist for the World Bank, will be named Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs, officials in President-elect Bill Clinton's transition team said today.
Mr.
Summers, 38, is on leave from Harvard's economics department and had been in the running to be chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers but did not get that position.
Environmentalists lobbied against him for writing a paper suggesting that toxic waste be stored in the third world, where land is much less expensive.


EUROPEAN INQUIRY SAYS SERBS' FORCES HAVE RAPED 20,000
A team of European Community investigators has estimated that 20,000 Muslim women have been raped by Bosnian Serb soldiers in recent months as part of a deliberate pattern of abuse aimed at driving them from their homes in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The team said there were indications that some rapes were carried out "in particularly sadistic ways so as to inflict maximum humiliation on the victims." The report did not elaborate.


Brajdas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Employers' payrolls grew by a modest 64,000 jobs in December as the nation's unemployment rate remained at 7.3 percent.
The Labor Department report underscores how slowly the job market is reacting to economic expansion.  [ Page 1. ]
New York and New Jersey employment increased in December, offering further evidence that the economic downturn in the states is bottoming out.  [ 52. ]


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6 20,000 BOSNIANS REPORTED RAPED
European Community investigators estimate that 20,000 Muslim women have been raped by Bosnian Serb soldiers in recent months as part of a deliberate pattern of abuse aimed at driving them from their homes in Bosnia and Herzegovina.  1


Carnival Cruise Lines Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


VISA TO BECOME ATLANTA'S OFFICIAL CREDIT CARD
Atlanta, which is host to the 1996 Summer Olympic Games, will make Visa its official credit card for the next five years under an unusual sponsorship program announced yesterday by Visa U.S.A., the City of Atlanta and the Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau.
Joel Babbit, chief of marketing and communications for the city, called the marketing program a first by a city.
The multimillion-dollar agreement is subject to approval by the Atlanta City Council and the boards of the convention bureau and Visa U.S.A., a major Olympics sponsor.


4 Dinkins Advisers in the Running for Jobs in Washington
Four of Mayor David N. Dinkins chief social policy advisers, including Andrew M. Cuomo, who headed his commission on homelessness, are in the running for high-ranking jobs in the Clinton Administration, city and Clinton transition officials said yesterday.
The other Dinkins advisers on lists compiled by President-elect Bill Clinton's transition teams are the head of the city's social-service system, Barbara J. Sabol, the head of the city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development, Felice L. Michetti, and the city's Commissioner of Health, Dr.
Margaret A. Hamburg.


Senators' Hopes Dashed
Having earned 3 points already against the Devils, which was a third of their season total, the Ottawa Senators came into New Jersey with high aspirations tonight.
Could this finally be the first victory on the road for the new franchise after 20 games of defeat?
How about the first tie?
Things sure looked to be going the Senators' way after Ottawa scored a goal in the very first minute of the game, a short-handed one at that.
The Devils tied matters shortly afterward, but Ottawa responded with another goal in its quest to break the ice on the road.


A Founder of Next Resigns; Switch to Software Is Seen
Richard A. Page, a co-founder with Steven P. Jobs of the computer maker Next Inc., resigned as general manager of hardware today, increasing speculation that the company was moving to become a software publisher.
Mr.
Page, who was one of the principal hardware engineers at Apple Computer Inc. involved in the design of the original Macintosh computer, joined Mr.
Jobs and four others in leaving Apple seven years ago to found Next.
Since then, three of the original founders have left the company, leaving only Mr.
Jobs and George Crowe.


No Headline
It was a mistake that I bought it.
It was an even bigger mistake that I didn't sell it. -- CARL C. ICAHN, on Trans World Airlines.  [ 41:3. ]


Review/Dance; Exploring Uneasiness and Perplexity
No one knew what to expect of Onafhankelijk Toneel, a group from Rotterdam that was virtually unknown in America before it appeared on Thursday night at the Theater for the New City.
But before the second of its two offerings was over, it was clear that the Dutch group's New York debut was a success.
The works choreographed by Ton Lutgerink were dramatically fascinating.
What's more, they made one curious about the rest of the company's repertory.
Onafhankelijk Toneel (pronounced oh-noff-HONK-eh-lick toh-NEEL) means Independent Theater.
Since its founding in 1972, this organization, which is run as a collective, has presented, in addition to dances, experimental stagings of plays and operas, and its attractions have ranged from the extravagant to the austere.
One wonders what it will show New Yorkers when it returns here.
And there is no doubt that it will return.


Boston Bank To Double Loan Funds
Officials of the Bank of Boston said today that they would double, to $6 billion, the amount of new loans they had pledged to make in New England by the end of next year.
The nation's 21st-largest bank holding company said it was increasing the amount because of greater-than-expected demand under a loan-marketing program it announced in May to lend $3 billion to consumers and small businesses in New England.


U.S. Tries to Verify Compliance As Iraqi Missile Deadline Passes; U.N. Condemns Iraq Move
The Security Council tonight condemned Iraq's announcement earlier in the day that it will no longer allow United Nations arms inspectors to be flown into Iraqi territory in United Nations aircraft.
Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz, said in Baghdad that the inspection teams henceforth would be required to fly in chartered Iraqi planes.
In a statement, the Security Council said it was "deeply disturbed" by the Iraqi initiative and warned of "the serious consequences that would ensue" if Iraq were to persist in banning the United Nations flights.


Sports of The Times; Planting The Seeds Of Protest
INSIDE a conference room yesterday at the Essex House in Manhattan, in the midst of a conference on racism in sports, the voice of someone not in the room was suddenly heard, causing one man, a minister, to cast his eyes toward the ceiling.
"The heavens are speaking," said the Rev.
Joseph Lowery of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.


Volt Information Sciences Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Shock in a Land of Lifetime Jobs: 35 Managers Dismissed in Japan
The unthinkable has happened in Japan, and it has touched a nerve in the ranks of the nation's middle managers.
A well-known maker of audio and video equipment, Pioneer Electronic, conceded today that it was essentially firing 35 middle managers, a candid admission that Japanese companies have begun to violate their long-cherished policies of lifetime employment.


Advanced Micro Devices Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.87
3.25
3.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.10
3.80
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.19
3.28
3.86
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.40
6.44
6.35
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.46
7.44
7.43
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.48
8.45
8.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.37
6.65
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


German Law Won't End Immigration Problems; Gate Isn't Closed
To the Editor:
The German Government's agreement on a revised asylum policy will not, as you put it, "end the refugee tide" (editorial, Dec. 9).
Most asylum seekers in Germany come from countries such as Turkey and the former Yugoslavia, which will not be placed on a list of countries determined to be free of persecution, or "safe."


Nitroglycerin Pill Shortage Expected to End Next Week
A nationwide shortage of nitroglycerin, a heart drug dissolved under the tongue to relieve pains of angina, is expected to end early next week with the shipment of 300,000 bottles from the drug's only manufacturer, officials of the drug company and the Food and Drug Administration said yesterday.
The supply of the drug, sold as Nitrostat by Parke-Davis, a division of the Warner-Lambert Company of Morris Plains, N.J., is to be sent by air freight this morning to two distribution centers in Illinois and Pennsylvania.
It will be shipped on to pharmacies on Monday and Tuesday.
Each bottle contains 100 nitroglycerin pills.


ISRAEL WARNS U.N. ON 415 DEPORTEES
Israel warned a special United Nations envoy today that the Middle East peace talks could be undermined if the Security Council takes new measures against Israel for having deported 415 Palestinians to southern Lebanon.
Israeli officials said their own participation in the talks was not in question, but they asserted that Arab delegations might find it difficult to resume negotiations with an Israel that was placed under renewed international censure.


Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


German Law Won't End Immigration Problems; Asylum Right Remains
To the Editor:
Re "Germany Closes the Gate" (editorial, Dec. 9):


Clashes Between Hindus and Muslims Leave 22 Dead in Bombay


Emil Mogul Dies at 92; Founder of Ad Agency
Emil Mogul, a philanthropist and a former advertising and radio executive, died on Jan. 1 at Scripps Memorial Hospital in San Diego.
He was 92.
He died in his sleep, said his daughter, Suzanne Mogul Spector of Cardiff-by-the-Sea, Calif.


Taking Reins, Zuckerman Faces Union Challenge
Mortimer B. Zuckerman assumed control of The Daily News yesterday with an olive branch for the news staff he had decimated in an economy measure and a firm pledge to restore his new, $36.3 million property to its glory days as New York's sassy-but-serious hometown tabloid.
"It should be, and has been, a popular and populist paper -- a street smart, sassy, serious journal for the average New York family," the new owner and co-publisher said in an interview, echoing a vision sketched earlier in a meeting with a somber, occasionally defiant news staff.


Capital Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


U.S. JOBLESS RATE SHOWS NO CHANGE
Employers' payrolls grew by a modest 64,000 jobs in December as the nation's unemployment rate remained at 7.3 percent, the Labor Department said today in a report that underscores how slowly the job market is reacting to economic expansion.
The figures were somewhat disappointing in light of recent drops in first-time claims for jobless benefits and other indications that the economy is slowly recovering from the recession.


Makeshift Lineup Makes Losers Out of the Nets
It is not as if the Nets have undergone a complete face lift, rather, there have been a few nips and tucks.
Drazen Petrovic sprains his ankle.
Maurice Cheeks joins the team.
So Coach Chuck Daly is forced to play the Human Shell Game.
You had to look twice tonight to make sure it was the Nets.
But it was them to be sure against the Boston Celtics.
Derrick Coleman.
Kenny Anderson.
Rafael Addison?
This season the Nets cheerleaders have been on the court more than he has.
But that's what it was like.
Rumeal Robinson started at shooting guard in place of Petrovic, Addison played the most (and best) he has all season and Coleman continued to be the Nets' most physical player.


Charter FSB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chief Retires At Carolina Freight Line
Kenneth E. Mayhew said yesterday that he would take early retirement as chairman, president and chief executive of the Carolina Freight Corporation, effective Jan. 31.
Mr.
Mayhew, 58, will be succeeded as chairman on an interim basis by a retired president and chief executive, Ken G. Younger, 67.
Palmer E. Huffstetler, 55, the company's executive vice president and general counsel, was named president.
A new chief executive is expected to be named within a year.


National Bancorp of Alaska reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Transactions
Baseball American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Agreed to terms with Chuck Cary, pitcher, on a minor-league contract and invited him to spring training as a non-roster player.
Named Paul Casanova bullpen catcher.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Agreed to terms with Bert Blyleven, pitcher, and Randy Bush, outfielder, on minor-league contracts and invited them to spring training as non-roster players.


Corrections
The Pulse chart in The Metro Section on Monday misidentified the data source and included an incorrect figure.
The data came from a survey conducted July 6 to Aug. 6 by the Gallup Organization for Kudos Pan Squares Homestyle Snacks, a product of M &amp; M/Mars, not from a Gallup Poll.
To the question about whether working women were better or worse mothers, 13 percent responded "better."


Corrections
A picture caption in the Television section on Sunday, for tonight's highlights, misidentified the actress with John Barrymore in the 1932 movie "Grand Hotel." She is Joan Crawford.


Abuse Case Focuses On Drawings By Woman
Prosecutors in the Glen Ridge sex assault case today used drawings made by a mildly retarded young woman to press their argument that the four young men on trial here forced her to perform sex acts.
Defense lawyers, who have contended that the woman willingly participated, attacked the use of the drawings as hearsay and challenged the interpretations of their meaning offered by an important witness for the prosecution.


Observer; Lean And Mean
In the spirit of the times, we are downsizing the staff that writes these columns.
Thanks to the downsizing, we are at last free to say "downsizing," having downsized Walter Mulmer, whose task was to keep the column free of what he called "mushmouth" words.
Good old Walter.
How we shall miss him.
He would never have let us say we were downsizing.
He would have made us say we were firing people left and right.


Taking the Big Plunge Into the Sea of Mutual Funds
Call them the investments of the 90's.
Millions of people have discovered that mutual funds are a simple, low-cost way to own stocks and bonds.
The funds allow investors to minimize their risks by spreading their money among many securities.
They are easy to buy and sell and, perhaps most important, they give buyers an investment edge because the money they put into funds is managed by professionals.


BeautiControl Cosmetics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Flowers Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 12


Truth on Tap
Some say it tastes better.
Others think it's safer.
But fully 25 percent of the pricey bottled water popular among Americans comes from the same source as ordinary tap water -- notwithstanding brand names and label images evoking natural streams and the great outdoors.
In a welcome, if overdue, step for consumer protection, the Food and Drug Administration now proposes to extend basic truth in labeling to the $2-billion-a-year bottled water industry.
Pressure for tougher and consistent regulation mounted when benzene, a known carcinogen, was discovered in bottles of Perrier in 1990.


Dow Off 17.29 in 4th Fall in Row
Queasy investors sent stocks zigging and zagging yesterday, leaving the Dow with its fourth straight drop in heavy trading and a loss of almost 50 points for the first week of the year.
The Dow finished with a decline of 17.29, about half a percent, to 3,251.67 yesterday after sagging by as much as 37 points earlier in the session.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The President-Elect; Clinton Says U.S. Will Act Fast on Trade Pact If . . .
President-elect Bill Clinton tried today to reassure President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico that his Administration will move quickly to put the North American Free Trade Agreement into effect, but only after Mexico accepts side arrangements to protect American workers and the environment.
At a news conference after his first meeting with a foreign leader as President-elect, Mr.
Clinton said that shortly after his inauguration he would appoint a senior aide to oversee further talks with Mexico.
But he indicated that he would not seek the Congressional legislation that is required to go ahead with the agreement unless the Mexicans satisfied his concerns.


East German Native Is Expected to Be Bonn's New Economics Chief
The Free Democratic Party nominated Gunter Rexrodt, a onetime banker, businessman and native of East Germany, as Economics Minister today in Chancellor Helmut Kohl's beleaguered coalition Government.
Mr.
Kohl, a Christian Democrat, is expected to approve the nomination and appoint Mr.
Rexrodt, 51, as part of a Cabinet shuffle in the next two weeks.


Allwaste Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Hook-SupeRx Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


German Law Won't End Immigration Problems
To the Editor:
In "Germany Closes the Gate" (editorial, Dec. 9) you criticize the accord reached by Germany's major parties severely to limit entry of foreigners seeking to escape persecution or economic hardships in their countries.
Unfortunately, this policy, once enacted into law in 1993, will not solve the problems of illegal immigration, which will increase sharply, and of right-wing backlash.


Economists Meet, and Puzzle Over a Slump
The recession has been pronounced over, but a panel of economists at the annual meeting of the American Economic Association this week said traditional economic theory failed to explain why it ever happened.
"My overall assessment is that you cannot explain this one," said Robert E. Hall, the Stanford University economist who heads the committee that formally sets dates for the beginnings and ends of recessions.
In a paper, he rejected the eight or so standard causes of recession -- things like high interest rates or declining government outlays -- as having caused this one.


PRO FOOTBALL: Round 2 of the Playoffs -- Montana and Kelly Get to Cheer; Bills Travel to a Reality Check
There are enough subplots in this afternoon's American Football Conference divisional playoff game between Buffalo and Pittsburgh on national television to support numerous spinoffs.
Bills quarterback Frank Reich, the backup quarterback who engineered the biggest comeback in National Football League history last week against Houston, will be starting his second playoff game for injured starter Jim Kelly.


Shock in a Land of Lifetime Jobs: 35 Managers Dismissed in Japan
The unthinkable has happened in Japan, and it has touched a nerve in the ranks of the nation's middle managers.
A well-known maker of audio and video equipment, Pioneer Electronic, conceded today that it was essentially firing 35 middle managers, a candid admission that Japanese companies have begun to violate their long-cherished policies of lifetime employment.


21 Reasons to Simply Ask, 'Why?'
Twenty-one times in the year just ended young people tried to set fire to men and women sleeping in subway stations.
In some of these attacks, the assailants threw matches at their victims or lighted newspapers under their shoes but in others they doused human beings with flammable liquids they ignited.
Twice men were burned to death.
In all but eight cases, the burners got away.
All crimes of violence frighten and appall but few can be more mystifying than these fire attacks on the weakest and most vulnerable of strangers.
There is not even a recognizable simple name for these acts like there is for mugging or pickpocketing.
It is not arson, not torching.
Yet they are not new crimes.
Veterans of homelessness and street life talk fearfully of cases where people like themselves have been burned not just in subways but in skid rows and before that in hobo jungles.


Hi-Shear Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Light-Rail Link Between Manhattan and Airports Makes Sense
To the Editor:
I applaud your recognition of rapid transit links to the New York metropolitan region's three major airports, Kennedy, Newark and La Guardia in "It Takes Years to Get to J.F.K." (editorial, Dec. 26).


Chargers Strategist Has a Familiar Look To Shula and Dolphins
Miami Dolphins Coach Don Shula built much of his reputation as one of the National Football League's best coaches with Bill Arnsparger as his defensive coordinator.
On Sunday, in an unlikely but compelling scenario, it will be Shula versus Arnsparger when the Dolphins meet San Diego in an American Conference playoff semifinal in Miami (4 P.M., Ch. 4).


Turkish Envoy Assails U.N. For Not Protecting Bosnian
The Turkish representative to the United Nations, Mustafa Aksin, criticized United Nations observers tonight for failing to protect a Bosnian Deputy Prime Minister who was shot to death in a United Nations armored car in Sarajevo earlier today.
The Bosnian official, Hakija Turajlic, was returning from the Sarajevo airport after greeting Orhan Kilercioglu, the Turkish Minister of State.
Mr.
Kilercioglu had accompanied a shipment of humanitarian aid from the Turkish Government to the people of Sarajevo.


Sun Television &amp; Appliances Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Oklahoman Who Opposed Foley To Lose House Intelligence Post
Speaker Thomas S. Foley will remove Representative Dave McCurdy as chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, a move that senior Democrats said today was made because Mr.
McCurdy had tried to undercut other Democratic lawmakers in an unsuccessful bid to become Defense Secretary.
Mr.
Foley's move is a rare display of power from a Speaker who has demonstrated little taste for political retribution.
It comes after months of bitter internal maneuvering between Mr.
Foley and Mr.
McCurdy, two of the leading Democrats in the House.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Oklahoma Routs West Texas State  Bryan Sallier had 26 points and 10 rebounds last night as No. 11 Oklahoma routed West Texas State, 121-71, in Norman, Okla.
The Sooners (11-2) held West Texas State (9-4), a Division II team, to 34 percent shooting, and forced 29 turnovers and tied a school record with 14 blocked shots, 7 by Kenneth Conley. (AP) Princeton 63, Harvard 39: A devastating 28-6 opening run powered the Tigers to an easy victory at home in their Ivy League opener.
At the end of the first half, Princeton (7-4) led Harvard (3-9, 0-2 in the Ivy League) by 31-12 as the Crimson shot just 8 percent from the field.
Princeton's Chris Yetman finished with 18 points, 12 on 3-pointers, to lead all scorers. (AP)


PRO FOOTBALL: Round 2 of the Playoffs -- Montana and Kelly Get to Cheer; Redskins Hope to Stifle Young
The Washington Redskins might have rattled Minnesota's Sean Salisbury last weekend, but Saturday they'll see a quarterback scads better.
And he'll be on the bench.
Joe Montana will be the 45th San Francisco 49er here.
His four Super Bowl rings won't mean that much because Steve Young -- the league's best quarterback this season -- will lead the team in Saturday's playoff game against the Redskins (Channel 2, 4 P.M.).
Montana's role will consist of listening in during timeouts and keeping his hands warm just in case Young harms himself during one of his patented scrambles.


Edwin Margolis, 63; Was a Sitting Judge For Court of Claims
Edwin Margolis, a New York State judge and former legislative counsel to three Democratic Speakers of the State Assembly, died on Wednesday at his home in North Chatham, N.Y.
He was 63.
He died of a heart attack, said his aide, Virginia Albert.


Insight; Hectic January
Three days this week were among the busiest dozen of the past year on the New York Stock Exchange.
If the past is any guide, there may soon be more: Five Days from January 1992 made the list. 201 million shares were traded on an average day in the past year.


Cuomo Proposes to End 'Back-Door Financing'
It has become a familiar ritual.
Every year, New York State faces another yawning budget gap.
And every year, it comes up with another creative financing maneuver to balance its books and borrow money for things like prisons and roads.
The schemes have given New York State a reputation for off-budget financial legerdemain and saddled the state with one of the lowest credit ratings in the country.
But on Wednesday, to the cautious praise of fiscal watchdogs who have long criticized his borrowing practices, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed changing the way the state does its long-term borrowing.
No More Sleight of Hand
Under the proposal, quasi-governmental authorities like the Urban Development Corporation would no longer be able to float bonds to build things they were never intended to build, like prisons.
Nor would the state be able to sell things it already owns -- prisons, or sections of the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway -- to its own authorities to raise money to balance its budget.


Issues of Survival for Declining Union
The latest painful labor battle at The Daily News is a sign of the decline of the power of unions in the New York City newspaper industry, highlighting deep and, some say, permanent divisions between New York unions that once derived their power from unity.
It showed how weak newspaper unions have become in an age when technology has made it possible for publishers to put out newspapers without union members, and thus is a watershed in the labor movement and in the news industry.


Apple's Share Price Climbs Sharply
Shares in Apple Computer Inc. soared today after a senior executive was quoted as saying that the company's revenue and unit shipments grew significantly in its first quarter, which ended Dec. 31.
Apple also demonstrated the first working prototype of its Newton family of personal digital assistant, a handheld portable computer, at the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, Nev., today.


Acclaim Entertainment Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Making a Home in the House Depends on Luck; New Members of Congress Select Offices from the Discards of Last Year's Election
Amid a jumble of furniture and canyons of boxes, Michael Hutton mapped out work spaces in the sparse new office of his boss, freshman Representative Robert Menendez of New Jersey.
A record turnover of 110 members has spawned the biggest office shuffle in the history of the House of Representatives.
Mr.
Menendez held No. 84 in the freshman lottery -- the worst luck among the delegations from New Jersey, New York or Connecticut.


Light-Rail Link Between Manhattan and Airports Makes Sense; Extend the Subway
To the Editor:
The Port Authority's proposed light-rail link to La Guardia and Kennedy airports, and your suggested alternative of linking the Long Island Rail Road to the airports (editorial, Dec. 26), ignore the obvious choice of the New York City subway system.


Helen of Troy reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


What Daily News Might Become
When Mort Zuckerman was asked today if he had a model for The Daily News, he gave his clearest vision yet: a sassier version of The Daily Mail of London.
The Daily Mail is the most upmarket of London's scrappy tabloid press, with a solid footing among the middle-income and upper middle-income suburban households of southeast England.


Word of Bosnian's Killing Cuts Clinton Briefing Short
The President of Bosnia, Alija Izetbegovic, was briefing Clinton aides on the negotiations in Geneva to end the killing in his country when the news arrived of his Deputy Prime Minister's assassination by Serbian gunmen.
Though Mr.
Izetbegovic struggled to contain his emotions in the face of the news and the open weeping of some of his aides, the meeting broke up about 15 minutes later.
It was a turn of events that vividly illustrated for members of the Clinton transition team the volatile nature of the Balkan crisis they will be responsible for handling in less than two weeks.


Couples Chosen as PGA Player of Year
FRED COUPLES, 33, was selected by his peers for a second consecutive award as the PGA Tour Player of the Year for 1992.
The result of the voting by players was announced Thursday night at the PGA Tour's annual awards dinner.
Also selected as player of the year were LEE TREVINO on the Senior PGA Tour, and JOHN FLANNERY on the Ben Hogan Tour. (AP)


Ewing Waits for Call as O'Neal Gets Last Word
Tonight's game ended with the Orlando Magic celebrating, while Patrick Ewing stared at the referees in disbelief, waiting for a foul to be called against Shaquille O'Neal.
The call never came.
The Knicks lost, despite leading by 10 points with six minutes left.
And Ewing seethed over the game's final play.
"I got fouled, but it wasn't called," Ewing said of his controversial missed shot in the waning seconds that doomed the Knicks to a frustrating 95-94 defeat.
"Down at the other end, if the same situation occurred with him, I'm sure they would've gotten the call," Ewing said, referring to O'Neal.


Rutgers Feels Cuts, but President Won't Cry
Dr.
Francis L. Lawrence's desk in the president's office at Rutgers University is clean and tidy, but his agenda for the state's flagship campus is cluttered with fallout from New Jersey's slumping economy.
State financing for the 48,000-student network of undergraduate and graduate schools has declined outright since the economy went into recession in 1989.
As Dr.
Lawrence begins his third year on the job, Rutgers is scrambling to make up $121 million in salary increases to which it is already committed and to postpone needed maintenance, including work on the balky elevator at the law school that stranded a Federal judge between floors last year.


Lindsay Manufacturing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Cuomo Won't Appoint Crown Heights Prosecutor
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday rejected a request for a special prosecutor in the case of a black man beaten by a group of Hasidic Jews in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
The man's lawyer had made the request because he contended that the Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, was too closely tied to the Hasidic community to investigate the case impartially.
One Hasidic man has been charged with assaulting the man, Ralph Nimmons, 25 years old, but the circumstances have been sharply disputed.


Good Day For Ducks, Azinger And Love
In chilly weather and on a drenched course, Davis Love 3d and Paul Azinger led an onslaught on par today in the first two rounds of the Infiniti Tournament of Champions, the official start of the 1993 PGA and Senior Tours.
Play was postponed on Thursday after the San Diego area was hit by more than two inches of rain over four days.
But today, the field of 30 regular Tour players and 21 senior players took full advantage of soft greens and preferred lies to blister the La Costa Resort and Spa course.
To make up for the lost day, two 18-hole rounds were played.


Team Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Iraq's War of Nerves
The latest showdown between Washington and Baghdad demonstrates once again, two years after the fact, how sharply the denouement of the war in the Persian Gulf differed from what the victorious allies expected at the time.
By defeating Saddam Hussein's armies in the field, President Bush and other Western leaders concluded, they had weakened him to the point that he would either be toppled in a coup or find it impossible to resist the enforcement of the United Nations resolutions designed to curb his powers.


CHRONICLE
Snippet from the Inauguration guest list: the people compiling the invitation list for President-elect BILL CLINTON have cast the a wide net indeed.
Reaching back to Mr.
Clinton's days as a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University in the late 1960's, they invited his college porter, DOUGLAS MILLIN.
As porter, Mr.
Millin took telephone messages and served as security monitor and general factotum at University College.
But Mr.
Millin, 77, will not attend.
"We were delighted that President-elect Clinton issued an invitation to Mr. Millin, but he has been retired for some time and is getting on in years," said Prof.
JOHN ALBERY, master of University College.
"After careful consideration, he decided not to go."


Rowe Furniture Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Seaway Food Town reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


TOP BOSNIAN AIDE IS SLAIN BY SERB
Serbian nationalist troops besieging Sarajevo shot and killed a top official of the Bosnian Government today after halting a United Nations armored vehicle that was carrying him from Sarajevo airport into the city.
Members of a hard-line faction in the Government immediately announced that they would not return to peace talks with their Serbian nationalist opponents until they were given convincing assurances that the Serbs were genuinely seeking peace.


Dispute Adds to Confusion In Search for Missing Girl
Almost two weeks after she disappeared, the Suffolk County police have found no trace of 10-year-old Katie Beers, and the County Police Commissioner said yesterday that the search has been complicated by a long-running dispute between Katie's mother and Katie's godmother, with whom the child spent most of her life.
Marilyn Beers, Katie's mother, and Linda Inghilleri, Katie's godmother, have admitted quarreling for some time over the girl's care.
Over the last few months, the two women said in separate interviews, Katie repeatedly changed her mind about which woman she wanted to live with.


Staff Builders reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
AKZO N.V., Arnhem, the Netherlands, a chemicals company, and Allied-Signal Inc., have signed a letter of intent to create a joint venture in Europe for manufacturing and marketing carpet fiber.
ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO., Decatur, Ill., an agricultural products company, agreed to settle Federal Trade Commission charges that it failed to substantiate claims in television commercials and promotional materials about the biodegradability of plastic products containing its corn starch additive, the F.T.C. said.


Engle Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Shock in a Land of Lifetime Jobs: 35 Managers Dismissed in Japan
The unthinkable has happened in Japan, and it has touched a nerve in the ranks of the nation's middle managers.
A well-known maker of audio and video equipment, Pioneer Electronic, conceded today that it was essentially firing 35 middle managers, a candid admission that Japanese companies have begun to violate their long-cherished policies of lifetime employment.


Clinton Meets With the Mexican President in Texas


Cambex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio listings, normally found at the end of the second section, appear today on pages 18-19.


Review/Opera; Italian Bass Makes Debut In Final 'Semiramide' Series
The time came, on Thursday evening, for the Metropolitan Opera to deploy such big guns as it could muster in Rossini's "Semiramide." The current run of the John Copley production, which began in October with a second-line cast, will end next Saturday afternoon, with the performance to be broadcast over the Texaco-Metropolitan Opera International Radio Network.
But the big news had occurred two weeks before, during rehearsals, when Marilyn Horne withdrew from her three scheduled performances because of "artistic differences," presumably with the conductor, Ion Marin, a young Romanian.
What Ms.
Horne might have contributed to this directionless performance could only be imagined.
Mr.
Marin, for his part, generated not a whit of tension or excitement for all his haste, settling for mere unanimity when he could find it.


Park Electrochemical Corp.  reports earnings for 13wks to Nov 29


Little Switzerland reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Corrections
An article by Reuters on the Business Technology page on Dec. 23 about the use of computers to track stolen art gave an incorrect figure for the number of images stored by the system, operated by the International Art and Antiques Loss Register.
While the data base can store 350,000 images, the number currently stored is closer to 35,000.
The company's New York affiliate was also incompletely identified.
It is the International Foundation for Art Research.


Desormeaux Cleared to Ride Again
Jockey KENT DESORMEAUX, recovering from head trauma sustained when he was kicked by a horse Dec. 11, may return to riding three days earlier than previously announced, his agent said yesterday Arcadia, Calif. (AP)


Japan Takes a Pre-emptive Step on Auto Exports
Japanese auto executives said the Government's decision today that it would extend for another year its current ceiling on automobile exports to the United States was an effort to head off expected demands from the new Administration in Washington for more trade concessions.
But the continuation of the voluntary export restraints at 1.65 million cars for the fiscal year that begins in April is not expected to please United States auto makers, some of whose executives have been seeking tighter limits.
Harold A. Poling, chairman of the Ford Motor Company, has said Japan should cut the ceiling to 1.3 million cars or less.
He said in Detroit today that Japan's decision to maintain export quotas at the current level would not help ease trade problems.
Ministry Denial
Auto executives here say they suspect Japan's Government announced the export cap before President-elect Bill Clinton takes office later this month to pre-empt possible demands for a lower ceiling by the new Administration, which has promised to be more aggressive in helping American industries.


Cloning a Firm for a Clean Record
GENETIC engineering is bigger than you think on Wall Street, where the cloning process works like this: A brokerage firm with a bad regulatory history spins off key executives to start a new firm.
Voila!
A clean rap sheet for the new operation, and no investor memories of damaging news reports.
Bioengineering miracles of this sort were taken to new levels by Robert E. Brennan, the founder of the defunct First Jersey Securities, which was censured by the Securities and Exchange Commission in the mid-1980's.
This week, Massachusetts filed a 96-page administrative complaint citing fraud and deceptive sales tactics against Hibbard Brown, whose management is composed almost entirely of former First Jersey executives.


Floating Through Time at a Seaport Museum


Zeus Components Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Tax Plan That Won't Help Schools
Gov.
Mario Cuomo commanded plenty of attention this week when he proposed allowing New York State's counties to use income rather than property taxes to finance schools.
But what sounded like a broad, lofty reform is really aimed at a narrow problem: helping people whose incomes can't keep pace with rising property values.
The Governor barely touched on the larger issue of achieving broad reforms that would provide more aid to poor school districts.
Mr.
Cuomo said he would address this in his executive budget, due later this month.
So far, he and the Legislature have only nibbled at the edges of a quandary, spending imbalances, that's no less serious than the problem to which Mr.
Cuomo's neighbor, Gov.
Lowell Weicker, devoted nearly all his message to the Connecticut Legislature this week -- racial imbalances among that state's school districts.


Pausing to See Poverty, and to Remember Neediest
Sure, they're New Yorkers -- pushing and shoving and scrapping their way through the day.
But these people belie the popular image of the jaded and grumbling Gothamite.
They do not scorn the homeless men who wander past them on the subway.
They are moved by stories of middle-aged women thrown out of work for the first time in their lives by the recession.
And for them, giving to charity is a cathartic experience.
They send donations to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund because they feel they must try to rid their city of some of its suffering. 'Maybe Next Year'
"How fortunate we are to have the possibility of feeding our hungry as individuals," Jacqueline Simon of Manhattan wrote in a note that she enclosed with her donation of $1,000.
"We do not need the marines, just our personal humanity and your fine services. How shameful it is that there are people in our generous country in the sad and dramatic straits you describe each day."


Policeman in King Case Recants Accusation Against Other Officers
A Los Angeles policeman who broke ranks and accused his fellow defendants of being "out of control" in the beating of Rodney G. King, now says they used reasonable force in subduing Mr.
King, his lawyer said today.
The new assertion by Officer Theodore J. Briseno, who was tried and acquitted along with three other Los Angeles policemen last spring on state charges stemming from the beating, means prosecutors will be deprived of a crucial weapon in the officers' new trial, on Federal civil-rights charges, said the officer's lawyer, Harland W. Braun.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  UNIONS' DECLINE HIGHLIGHTED IN FIGHT
The latest labor battle at The Daily News is a sign of the decline of the power of unions in the New York City newspaper industry, highlighting deep and, some say, permanent divisions between unions that once derived their power from unity.
News analysis, Page 1.
NEW OWNER'S TOUR OF INSPECTION
The new owner of The Daily News, Mortimer B. Zuckerman, made his appearance among the paper's blue-collar workers at the tabloid's Brooklyn plant the night before the newspaper officially became his.
"It's amazing," he said repeatedly as he gazed at his newest $36.3 million acquisition.
Page 1.
OLIVE BRANCH OFFERED TO NEWS STAFF
The new owner assumed control of The Daily News with an olive branch for the news staff he had decimated in an economy measure and a firm pledge to restore his new, $36.3 million property to its glory days.
Page 26.
DINKINS'S AIDES WEIGHED FOR U.S.
JOBS
Four of Mayor Dinkins's chief social policy advisers, including Andrew M. Cuomo, who headed his commission on homelessness, are in the running for high-ranking jobs in the Clinton Administration, officials said.
Page 27.
OFFICIAL LEFT NOTEBOOK AFTER DEATH
In the month before his body was found in an Albany motel room, a beleaguered Bronx school district superintendent filled a notebook with complaints about educational policies in the city, law-enforcement officials said.
Page 27.
LAWYERS REBUKED IN ALLEN-FARROW FIGHT
The judge in the custody battle between Woody Allen and Mia Farrow has upbraided their lawyers for taking the case to reporters.
Page 27.
NO SPECIAL PROSECUTOR FOR CROWN HTS.
Governor Cuomo rejected a request for a special prosecutor in the case of a black man beaten by a group of Hasidic Jews in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
Page 28.
REGION
CHANGE ASKED IN BORROWING
Every year, New York State faces another yawning budget gap.
And every year, it comes up with another creative financing maneuver to balance its books.
But, to the cautious praise of fiscal watchdogs, Governor Cuomo proposed changing the way the state structures its long-term borrowing.
Page 28.
DRAWINGS USED IN SEX-ASSAULT TRIAL
Prosecutors in the Glen Ridge, N.J., sex-assault case being tried in Newark used drawings made by a mildly retarded young woman to press their argument that the four young men on trial forced her to perform sex acts.
Page 29.
FEUD COMPLICATES SEARCH FOR GIRL
Almost two weeks after she disappeared, the Suffolk County police have found no trace of 10-year-old Katie Beers, and the County Police Commissioner said that the search has been complicated by a long-running dispute between the girl's mother and godmother.
Page 29.
MORMON CHURCH PLANS A NEW TEMPLE
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints plans to build a multimillion-dollar temple in the Hartford area.
Page 29.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 27
Neediest Cases 28


Schott to Go Before Executive Committee
The Cincinnati Reds' owner, MARGE SCHOTT, will speak with baseball's ruling executive council on Jan. 22 to answer allegations that she made racial and ethnic slurs.
Her lawyer, ROBERT BENNETT, had asked to have until Jan. 25 to respond to evidence collected by the four-person committee appointed in December to investigate Schott.
The executive council can fine her up to $250,000 and suspend her.
"I've indicated to them that it's impossible to get a full legal and factual response to them, but we'll do the best we can," Bennett said yesterday.


A Year of Lean Living Puts a Couple's 'Dream House' Within Reach
Dana Keeler and Daniel Irons, both 27, plan to be married in October.
When they got engaged last July, they began looking for a house and found a $210,000, three-bedroom colonial under construction in Independence Township, N.J.
With a combined income of $75,000 - he is a policeman and she is a commercial lender at a local bank - they felt the price was was within their means.
Their $30,000 savings, however, were not enought for a 20 percent down payment.
Ten percent down would get them the house, but a considerably higher cost - about $200 more a month - than the higher payment.


Autoclave Engineers reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Beliefs
The next two weeks may determine whether the incoming Clinton Administration and the nation's Roman Catholic bishops lock themselves into a moral and political cold war.
When the head of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops wrote President-elect Bill Clinton a month ago, offering prayers for his success, the good wishes masked some serious difficulties the bishops are having in settling on a stance toward the new Administration.
One sign of this groping is the very date of the letter -- more than a month after Mr.
Clinton's election.
The delay reflects a fundamental disagreement between the church and the new Administration over an issue that has generated more than its share of discord over the years: abortion.
Already there are signs that this disagreement could shape their whole relationship.


U S WEST TO TAKE $1.8 BILLION ACCOUNTING CHARGE
U S West Inc., the regional telephone company serving Midwestern and Western states, said yesterday that it would adopt new accounting rules for retirees' medical benefits in its 1992 financial results.
The company said the rules would result in a $1.8 billion charge against earnings and a loss for the year.


Educator Filled Notebook With Complaints
In the month before his body was found in an Albany motel room, a beleaguered Bronx school district superintendent filled a notebook with complaints about educational policies in the city and with concerns about being stricken by Lyme disease, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
The officials disclosed that the educator, Alfredo Mathew Jr., who was under investigation by Federal and city agencies for suspected financial misappropriations, had been arranging a deal in which he would implicate other suspects in return for a lenient sentence.


U.S. Tries to Verify Compliance As Iraqi Missile Deadline Passes
The deadline for Iraq to remove newly deployed missiles from southern Iraq passed without American action tonight after a last-minute flurry of missile movements by Baghdad.
Bush Administration officials said preliminary analysis of the movements indicated that Iraq might be backing down despite its increased comments in defiance of the ultimatum from the United States and its allies.


Both Sides in Allen Suit Scolded for Courting Press
The judge in the custody battle between Woody Allen and Mia Farrow upbraided their lawyers yesterday for taking the case to reporters, accusing them of duplicity in claiming to want to shield their children from publicity.
"You are trying this case a little bit to me and mostly to the public," Acting Justice Elliott Wilk said in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
"I have asked people to keep it out of the press, and it is being tried in the press."


Season Begins In Arbitration
Jeff Huson, a Texas Rangers infielder, yesterday became the first player to file for salary arbitration.
The filing deadline is next Friday for the 126 eligible players.
Charlie O'Brien, a Mets catcher, had been eligible, but he reached agreement yesterday on a $500,000 salary for 1993, a raise from $370,000.
The remaining Mets who can go to arbitration are Jeff Innis, Mike Maddux and Chico Walker.
Eligible Yankees are Jim Abbott, Melido Perez, John Habyan and Randy Velarde.


Review/Music; A Memorial to Dr. King, Repeated 25 Years Later
Politics swarm around Oskar Morawetz's "Memorial to Martin Luther King." Its composer fled Czechoslovakia and the Nazis in 1940 and began a long teaching career in Canada.
His memorial piece -- revived by the cellist Yo-Yo Ma, Kurt Masur and the New York Philharmonic on Thursday night -- was intended for Mstislav Rostropovich, who in 1968 ran into trouble with the Soviet authorities and was unable to travel to Edmonton, Alberta, to play the premiere.
The central event, the assassination of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., had happened earlier that year.
Mr.
Morawetz's piece is a kind of oratorio without words in which cello solos and a stringless orchestra -- all winds, brass and percussion -- depict violent death and mourning and intermittently comment on it.
The tone is pessimistic in a particularly 20th-century way.
Tragedy equals catastrophe; mourning becomes hopelessness without redemption.
Brass and timpani are by turns angry and ominous.
The cello part emanates in a liquid baritonal legato; the composer has gone out of his way to oblige a player with a big tone and expansive personality.


Review/Dance; Telling a Story About Losing a Job
Remember when people were dismissed instead of dislocated, as the current buzzword goes?
"Dislocations," a new dance work by Phyllis Lamhut, has a theme close to many a current heart.
The Phyllis Lamhut Dance Company's press agent let it be known that the piece "addresses the disruptions, disarray and disorientation of men and women within the environment of their workplace." That "Dislocations" is not your usual alienation study is no surprise.
Ms.
Lamhut's imagination and idiosyncratic vision come into full play here, and her collaboration with the composer Andy Teirstein makes for a lively piece of dance theater.
From the moment that the percussionist, Bill Ruyle, hits the first note by pounding a stick on a shopping cart, it is clear that "Dislocations" will have its own quirky resonance.


Town &amp; Country reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Bush Pays a Farewell Visit to an Old Haunt


Composers Orchestra
Dennis Russell Davies will conduct the American Composers Orchestra in a program featuring two premieres, tomorrow at 3 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
The new works are Chou Wen-Chung's Concerto for Cello and Orchestra, with the soloist Janos Starker, and "Dreaming," by Roger Reynolds.
Also on the program are the New York premiere of Cindy McTee's "Circuits" and Chinary Ung's "Inner Voices." Tickets are $9 to $40.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Argonaut Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


King World Productions reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Parade Permit Will Benefit Gay Marchers
The Dinkins administration yesterday awarded the permit for the St.
Patrick's Day parade to a group that has pledged to allow lesbians and gay men to march under their their own banner for the first time.
The Police Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, the highest ranking Irish American in the Dinkins administration, awarded the permit last evening to the St.
Patrick's Day Parade Committee, a group formed by liberal Irish-American allies of Mayor David N. Dinkins who have pledged to let gay people and other political groups participate.


TCA Cable TV reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


HUNGARIAN MEDIA THROWN IN CRISIS
The heads of Hungary's state radio and television have resigned, saying they can no longer protect the independence of the news programs from growing Government influence.
Elemer Hankiss, the head of Hungarian television, and Csaba Gombar, the radio chief, handed in their resignations to President Arpad Goncz of Hungary this week after Prime Minister Jozsef Antall's office took direct control of the budgets of the two networks.


Region Adds Jobs but Data Remain Mixed
The unemployment rate in December rose a bit in New York State and dropped in New Jersey, but employment among residents of both states increased, offering further evidence that their recession-ravaged economies are bottoming out.
The seasonally adjusted unemployment rate in New York increased to 8.4 percent, from 8 percent in November, while New Jersey's rate fell to 8 percent from 8.7 percent, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported yesterday.
Data on Connecticut were not released yesterday.


Princeton Coach Is Given Reprimand
Princeton Coach BILL TIERNEY was publicly reprimanded by the National Collegiate Athletic Association for his actions during the Division I championships last spring.
The committee found that Tierney's actions toward officials was critical and unacceptable.
Tierney reportedly had several verbal exchanges with the officials during the semifinal and championship games, a university spokesman said.


Giants Accepting Applications
Dave Wannstedt, the Dallas Cowboys' assistant head coach and defensive coordinator, has said he is interested in becoming the Giants' head coach.
Dan Reeves, recently dismissed after 12 years as the Denver Broncos' head coach, has said the same.
George Young, the Giants' general manager, said yesterday he was flattered, but he also indicated that their interest would not play a part in his choosing the next head coach.
"I don't think it means anything in the overall procedure," Young said by telephone from his office in Giants Stadium.
"I'm flattered that people are interested in the job. That's all right with me.


Immigration Official Is Accused of Bribery
An examiner for the Immigration and Naturalization Service was charged yesterday with soliciting cash bribes and sexual favors from women who were seeking Employment Authorization Cards.
The examiner was identified as Allen William Grant, 42 years old, of Staten Island, who worked in a Manhattan office of the Immigration and Naturalization Service's Legalization Center.
He was named in a criminal complaint filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan.


In Florida, Girl Discovers Chill of Life With AIDS
The warm Florida climate, with its promise of better health for a 7-year-old girl with AIDS, lured her family here from Maine.
But Maine was warmer after all, and the family is returning to where it was not only accepted but honored for involvement with AIDS.
Events of the last eight months have taken the family from hope to hurt.
And their experience has embarrassed many residents of this central Florida city of 150,000.
But for a few others, the family's plight has stirred only fear and rage.
These are the ones who, with taunts and insults, have made life too difficult to stay for the girl, Autum Aquino; her mother and stepfather, who both have AIDS, and her 11-year-old half sister, who is not infected.


CHRONICLE
There is no doubt that the crowd of 600 -- including the New York City School Chancellor, JOSEPH A. FERNANDEZ, H. CARL McCALL, president of the Board of Education, TOM BROKAW and BROOKE ASTOR -- who will assemble for a dinner on Monday given by the Bank Street College of Education, will be a mix of sophisticated New Yorkers.
So they may be a bit surprised when they find crayons and paper at their tables at the Waldorf-Astoria.
"Our philosophy believes that education is not simply sitting some place and passively absorbing," said JOHN A. SHUTKIN, chairman of the college's board, "so we are asking everyone to draw a picture" for ELIZABETH ROHATYN.


Shift Urged on Foreign Stakes in Airlines
Many of the original reasons for restricting foreign ownership in United States airlines no longer apply, a Government report published today concludes.
But the report said the Government should approve only those investments that increased competition in the American airline industry.
The report, by the General Accounting Office, the research arm of Congress, noted that the financially beleaguered airline industry, which has lost $8 billion since 1990, was now looking abroad for working capital.
But unless restrictions on foreign ownership are relaxed, financially weak American carriers are unlikely to attract significant amounts of foreign capital, the report says.


Let Them Count Before They Calculate
To the Editor:
Re "Babes in Computerland" (Op-Ed, Dec. 23) by David Gelernter, associate professor of computer science at Yale: As a retired engineer analyst, I have held from the beginning that the use of computers for game playing by youngsters who have not mastered the fundamentals of mathematics is a misuse of the technology.


Family Dollar Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Shetland Oil Tanker Nears Breakup
The tanker lodged against the cliffs of southern Shetland has started to break apart after more than three days of pounding from towering waves, threatening to release the remainder of its 26-million-gallon cargo of oil into the sea.
Salvage experts estimated that more than half of the light crude oil carried by the tanker, the Braer, was still in its holds.


Q &amp; A
Social Security
Q Can beneficiaries over age 70 get all their Social Security benefits if they continue to work?
Norma Weinberg, Woodmere, L.I.
A Yes.
"Beneficiaries age 70 and older receive full Social Security retirement benefits regardless of their annual wages or net earnings from self-employment," said Louis D. Enoff, Acting Commissioner of Social Security.


Another Round on the Homeless
It's New York's grossest housing scandal, and it's no secret: City Hall has allowed $280 million in capital funds to languish unspent for years, rather than invest them in programs for the homeless.
In his State of the City speech this week, Mayor Dinkins announced yet another plan.
Election year dynamics require that something useful be done with the money.
The courts have found City Hall in contempt for mismanagement.
Voters demand better answers.
The Mayor desperately needs to show progress.
All New Yorkers should hope the pressure finally produces constructive action.


Harleysville Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Marines Seize Arms And Close Somali Market
The United States Marines shut down a arms market in the northern section of the city today, confiscating weapons ranging from rifles to a small tank.
It was the first such action by the American-led military force in Somalia, which is stepping up its efforts to reduce weapons in the city.
The action came a day after a gun battle in which the marines destroyed a stronghold of Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, leader of one of this city's two clan factions.
But in today's operation, the only shot fired was to blow the lock off a storehouse door.


Visiting U.S. General Warns Haiti's Military Chiefs
As part of intensive joint efforts by the Bush Administration and aides of President-elect Bill Clinton to settle Haiti's political crisis and avert a renewed flood of refugees, a United States Marine Corps general, in a visit here, has warned Haitian military leaders that they must quickly recognize the country's exiled President.
The officer, Maj.
Gen.
John Sheehan, told the Haitian High Command that any solution of the crisis must include their recognition of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who was overthrown in a military coup on September 1991, Haitians and Americans close to the discussions said today.


Bridge
One of the world's best-known bridge personalities changed her name yesterday, and thousands of her friends will have to get used to it.
Kathie Wei was married in Seattle to Henry Sender, and will live in Nashville.
In preparation for this step, she became a convert to Judaism a month ago.
Marriage will not, however, slow down her bridge activity: later this month she will be in China, competing in several tournaments.
She has long been the standard-bearer of the Precision System, which was devised by her late husband, Charles Wei.
One of the features of that strong-club method is an opening two-diamond bid showing opening values with shortage in diamonds.
An example is the diagramed deal, played 12 years ago in a New York Regional Championship, which permitted Mrs.
Sender, as South, to demonstrate the skill that has won her three world titles.


Body Drama Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about a United States Army investigation of killings in the Somali port of Kismayu included an erroneous reference to the United Nations organization that operated in the port.
As noted elsewhere in the article, it was the United Nations Children's Fund, not Unesco.


Corrections
An obituary headline yesterday about a California surfing figure in the 1950's and 60's referred to him incorrectly in some copies.
He was Dewey Weber


Syracuse Indefinitely Suspends Edwards
Syracuse senior guard MICHAEL EDWARDS was suspended indefinitely from the team yesterday after being charged with using a hammer to smash out the windows of a bar manager's truck in Syracuse.
Edwards, 22, of Voorhees, N.J., was released on his own recognizance after his arraignment in City Court for felony criminal mischief.
The charge carries a maximum penalty of up to four years in jail.


Be Your Own Lawyer In Small-Claims Court
IN a nation of self-helpers, it seems only natural: small-claims court has never been so popular.
It has been discovered not just by those seeking redress from the dry cleaner, but by freelancers, part-time proprietors and small, small businesses that don't have lawyers on their speed dials.
So it was that Paul Hirsh, a freelance scriptwriter in Philadelphia, recently sued to collect his $3,000 contract fee from a film maker who wasnot paying the bill.
"It was very easy, almost mechanical," Mr.
Hirsh said, surprised at the system's efficiency.


History or Heresy? Churchill's War Role Attacked
With a sudden ferocity, scholars, amateur historians and even politicians here have joined an emotional debate that seems as strange as it is inflammatory.
Would Britain be better off today had Churchill been more willing in World War II to negotiate an earlier end to the fighting with Germany?
Over the last week, whoe pages of London newspapers and entire television shows have been given over to historians, book cirtics and former Government officials blustering and fuming over a 649-page political biography that offers a starkly iconoclastic vision of the former Prime Minister, who is lionized as the nation's wartime savior.


OrNda HealthCorp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


John P.W. Vest, 91, An Aviation Leader In Navy and Industry
John P. W. Vest, who was a leader in Navy aviation, an executive in the helicopter industry and Governor of the Marshall Islands Trust Territory, died on Sunday at his home in Centreville, Md.
He was 91.
Captain Vest's 30-year career in the Navy began after he graduated from the Naval Academy in 1922.
He became an aviator in 1926 at the age of 25.
He flew from the Navy's first aircraft carrier, the Langley, and helped in the aerial mapping of the Aleutian Islands in the early 1930's.


New York City Is Star Of Showbiz Expo East
Despite its brassy name and exuberant commercialism, the Showbiz Expo East, which ends tonight, is more than just a trade show.
The high-decibel, high-tech convention that has commandeered the New York Hilton for the last two days has become a continuing referendum on the viability of New York's film-, theater- and television-production industries.
Many of the 6,000 entertainment-industry managers, production workers and technical apparatchiks attending the event expressed delight simply that the Expo, a Los Angeles institution for the last nine years, had actually come to New York for the first time.
This is, after all, a winter in which the city's entertainment industry finds itself still mired deeply in a recession, even though economists tell us the nation is on the rebound.
According to a new study unveiled at the Expo, there are also lingering effects of the talent drain caused by the nine-month Hollywood film boycott that ended in 1991.


Pioneeer Hi-Bred International reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Cami'z Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


INSIDE
Heart Pills Being Shipped
A nationwide shortage of nitroglycerin is expected to end by early next week, as 300,000 bottles are shipped, the manufacturer and a Federal agency said.
Page 7.
Oil Tanker Is Breaking Up
The oil tanker lodged against cliffs in the Shetland Islands has started to break apart, threatening to release the remainder of its 26-million-gallon cargo of oil into the sea.
Page 3.
A Promise to Gay Marchers
The Dinkins administration awarded the permit for the St.
Patrick's Day parade to a group that has pledged to let lesbians and gay men march under their own banner.
Page 25.


Computer Imprint On Yearbooks
JUST AS desktop publishing has become a standard technology in businesses, computers are playing an increasing role in the annual process of capturing school memories for publication in school and college yearbooks.
The results come June will be apparent in sharper photographs, more varied and stylish headlines and layouts, more frequent use of color.


U.S. Attacking New Strain of Whiteflies
THE Agricultural Research Service certainly knows how to get your attention.
A recent issue of its magazine, Agricultural Research, has a full-color cover showing James Duffus, a plant pathologist, wading through a California cotton field and raising up a flurry of whiteflies.
The cover illustrates concern for a multimillion-dollar problem: whiteflies are ruining the nation's crops as well as the home gardener's joys.
Through the magazine, the research division of the United States Department of Agriculture describes its research projects, usually devoting several pages to each project.
But this particular issue has a dozen pages about the whitefly research.


Conference Car On Amtrak Train
Amtrak has introduced a club conference car running twice daily between New York and Washington on the Metroliner express.
Facilities include a conference room for up to eight people with a private telephone and a marker board for presentations or notes.
The car also has two private booths for four passengers, with a table and sliding glass doors for privacy; two semi-private tables each seating two people, and 18 first-class seats.
The service started in the fall.
The conference room and the private booths for four, which are called club salons, must be reserved separately in advance.
The conference car is on the southbound Metroliner from Monday to Friday, which leaves New York at 6:50 A.M. and arrives in Washington at 9:35 A.M., and the northbound return leaving Washington at 4:30 P.M. and arriving in New York at 7:15 P.M.
The intermediate stops are Philadelphia and Baltimore.


Miss Mendelson, Robert Horwitz
Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Mendelson of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Michele Lynn Mendelson to Robert Jonathan Horwitz, the son of Rosalie Horwitz of Chevy Chase, Md., and the late Herbert Horwitz.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Mendelson, 26, is an account executive with Drohan Management Group, an association-management company in Arlington, Va.
She graduated from the University of Maryland, as did her fiance.
Her father is a senior consultant with Newmark &amp; Company, a real-estate management concern in New York.


What Olympus Means In Jobs and Revenues
In their letter  [ Dec.27 ] , Gerald and Elfriede Craddock express support for "sustainable economic growth" and concern over "wildcat industrial development" in respect to the Olympus Corporation headquarters in Melville.
In fact, Olympus Corporation represents Long Island's future.
The Olympus facility is essential to "sustainable economic growth" in this region.
It will make a major economic contribution to the Town of Huntington and to Long Island as a whole.
The company, through direct and secondary employment, today supports 1,122 permanent full-time jobs here on Long Island.
These jobs account for $55 million in annual payroll.
Many of Olympus's employees, vendors and suppliers reside and do business in the Town of Huntington.
More than 50 Huntington Town residents already work at Olympus, earning some $2.5 million annually.
Olympus does $1.4 million of business each year with Huntington Town businesses, a number sure to grow when Olympus moves.
If Olympus were to accept any of the generous financial incentive offers it has received from other states, Long Island would forever lose these jobs and this revenue.


As Crises In Health Grow So Do the H.M.O.'s
VIRGINIA CROWLEY, a mother of three, spends a lot of time worrying about her family's health.
Recently, her husband was treated for cancer, her 20-year-old daughter had to be fitted for a new back brace to treat a congenital spine deformity, and her 17-year-old son broke his arm playing football.
Although her youngest child, a 10-year-old girl, has not had any major illnesses, there have been allergy problems to contend with and recurrent bouts of the flu.
What Mrs.
Crowley has not had to worry about -- since she joined a health maintenance organization -- is the cost of medical treatment.


Virginia to Execute Man Who Uses Wheelchair
The Governor of Virginia today ordered the execution of a disabled prisoner who has said he will need to use a wheelchair to get to the electric chair.
Lawyers for Charles S. Stamper of Richmond, who was convicted of shooting three co-workers to death in 1978, have said he is "extremely disabled" by a spinal cord injury received in prison and his sentence should be reduced to life in prison because he is no threat to society.


Finishing School Next for Knicks
The Knicks are thankful for their 14-2 record at home, because their road performance has been a disappointment.
Their latest failure occurred Friday night, in Orlando, Fla., where they lost by 95-94 to the Magic, putting their road record at 5-9.


This Photographer's No Flop
Steven Klein, one of today's most sought-after fashion photographers, doesn't take a lofty view of his profession.
"I think probably a good photographer would flop out at fashion," Mr.
Klein, right, said recently, sitting in his studio, a Greenwich Village loft once owned by the artist Kenny Scharf.
"In my personal work, I wouldn't go for a fashion point of view at all."


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
FITZGERALD SHOW
Geraldine Fitzgerald, the stage and film actress who added singing to her credits when her career was in its fourth decade, will present her one-woman cabaret show, "Streetsongs," on Friday evening at the Ridgewood Country Club in Paramus.


Tajik Ex-Communists Prosecute Opposition
Two days after declaring a state of emergency in Tajikistan, the former Communists who retook power in a violent countercoup began criminal proceedings today against religious and democratic leaders on charges of treason, the Itar-Tass news agency reported.
It was another sign of the consolidation of rule by the former Communists, and of a parallel crackdown on opposition groups in the former Soviet republic that forced the resignation of the country's long-time Communist boss, Rakhman N. Nabiyev, in September.
In the last two weeks, there have also been local reports of street shootings of opposition figures by armed gangs.


The Bruins' New Goalies Can't Handle the Devils
Andy Moog and Reggie Lemelin have been Boston's solid goaltending tandem for the last several years.
But with Moog out because of an injury that occurred last Tuesday and Lemelin contemplating retirement after he was told to report to the minor leagues, the Devils took advantage of two inexperienced young goaltenders tonight and skated away with a 6-2 triumph.
The Bruins, who have been playing poorly in recent games, losing six of their previous seven contests, have suddenly found themselves with two goaltenders whose total experience in the league is now three games.


Tutoring, the New Growth Industry
AMBER MURPHY, an excellent student in most courses, was struggling with her ninth-grade algebra last year.
"I didn't have a clue," she recalled.
Her mother, Valarie, sought extra instruction for her daughter not from her school in Boulder, Colo., or from a conventional tutor, but from the local outlet of Sylvan Learning Systems, America's largest chain of tutoring franchises.
More and more parents are following Mrs.
Murphy's lead and buying so-called supplemental education for their children from for-profit chains.
Besides Sylvan, the major franchisers are Huntington Learning Corporation and Britannica Learning Centers.
What they offer instead of an unregulated cottage industry of individual tutors is a more organized, quality-controlled approach.
Starting to Grow
The chains have been around for more than a decade, but the business finally appears to be on the verge of rapid growth, helped by the attention given to the ills of the nation's public schools.
"There's more concern about education than ever before, and more parents are paying attention to their children's learning problems," said Terrel Bell, Secretary of Education in the Reagan Administration and now a consultant in Salt Lake City.
"So there's going to be enormous growth in supplemental education."


The Silent Treatment
MOST floor squeaks are caused by loose floorboards, subflooring or the joists underneath.
Shrinkage, a natural occurrence, is usually at fault, but sometimes poor materials or insufficient fastening is the cause.
Most squeaks are fairly easy to fix, once their precise location is found.
To pinpoint a squeaking spot, have someone bounce on the floor while you listen with your ear close to the floorboards.
If the floor is above an unfinished basement, examine it from below.
There, you can also observe the joists to see if they flex or if the subflooring rubs against them.
Use a flashlight, even if the basement is well lighted.
Mark areas with chalk or tape where the squeaks occur.


HOPE IS EXPRESSED ON SHETLAND SPILL
Despite worsening weather and rough seas, salvage officials said today that they were fairly optimistic that the remaining intact oil-storage tanks on board the grounded tanker Braer would not rupture and spill the rest of the cargo into the sea.
Although the stern area of the ship is showing signs of breaking off in the pounding surf, a visual inspection of the wreck from the land and sea suggests that the rest of the ship is "fairly stable" on a sandy sea bottom close to shore, they said.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Blue Bell, Pa.; New Builder, New Project
CONSTRUCTION has begun on a 500-acre golf-course community with a new name, the Blue Bell Country Club, and a new builder, Toll Brothers Inc., which bought the property for $20 million last March.
The project, named Ballenrose by its previous owner, is an example of how the misfortunes of some residential developers have provided growth opportunities for well-financed builders.
Cash-strapped Hansen Properties Inc. sold the parcel to Toll Brothers, a publicly traded building company based in Huntingdon Valley, Pa.
Toll Brothers started from scratch with a new identity.


For Love's Sake, A Desert Garden
YOU don't usually think of rain in the desert.
But there I was in late December, standing among 5,000 species of succulents at the Huntington Botanical Gardens in San Marino, Calif. -- in a downpour.
Without an umbrella, I felt like a lizard without a rock, because every 10 minutes or so, the swollen clouds would momentarily part, allowing a glimpse of the celestial San Gabriel Mountains.
Then they would close in again over a blue-green landscape of spiny cactuses snaking over gravelly slopes, yuccas as big and as gnarled as old beech trees, aloes covered with orange and yellow torchlike blossoms.
"The aloes are just peaking," said John Trager, the curator of the desert collection.
He was wearing a windbreaker with a hood.
"That's Aloe bainsii, from East Africa," he continued, as we admired one with a stout trunk.
It had as many branches as a maple tree, only its leaves hung down like rosettes of fleshy swords.
Salmon-pink blossoms, which are pollinated by hummingbirds, were starting to open at its top.


Recent Sales
Amityville, L.I.  $315,000
136 Grand Central Avenue  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 90-year-old colonial; dining room, basement, 3-car detached garage, 100- by 250-foot lot; taxes $6,300.
Copiague  $130,000
409 Ferndale Court  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car detached garage; taxes $3,100.
Glen Cove  $300,000
55 Hitching Post Lane  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 19-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $5,700.
Hicksville  $150,000
107 Miller Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 31-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement; taxes $3,000.
Old Brookville  $665,000
7 Foxboro Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 34-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, 2.5 acres on cul-de-sac bordering working farm; taxes $7,200.
Roslyn Heights  $290,000
41 Vista Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 32-year-old split level; fireplace, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $8,300.
OTHER AREAS Rye, N.Y.  $370,000
5 Brevoort Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 97-year-old colonial carriage house; dining room, deck, gazebo, pool, tennis court, 1-car garage; taxes $8,453.
New Haven, Conn.  $165,000
179-173 Cold Spring Street  6-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 93-year-old colonial; large entry foyer, study lined with bookcases, 50- by 150-foot lot; taxes $4,424.
Hillsdale, N.J.  $305,000
78 Queen Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, brick fireplace, c/a; taxes $6,753.


Cowardice in Congress
With their new session only days old, House Democrats have already flunked a crucial test of ethics by re-electing an influential colleague, Representative Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee.
Last summer, Mr.
Rostenkowski refused to testify before a grand jury looking into possible corruption in the House.
He was within his legal rights as a citizen, but his unwillingness to talk openly, and under oath, about House operations makes him politically unsuited to so powerful a post as a legislator.


Mammography Campaigns Draw In the Young and Healthy
ARECENT article about breast cancer in Working Woman was typical of those that appear regularly in women's magazines.
Two photographs illustrated it, one showing the torso of a slim, youthful model, her breasts partially revealed by an unbuttoned blouse; the other showing her with two roses artfully arranged.
The message, subliminal yet familiar, was unmistakable: Young women should be alert to the risk of getting this most terrifying disease.
This message, also repeated in television ads for mammograms and in programs on breast cancer, is succeeding.
But, breast cancer experts say, the wrong women are going to get mammograms, the X-ray screening test that can detect cancers too small to feel.


7 SHOT TO DEATH IN CHICAGO SUBURB
The bodies of seven people who were apparently shot to death were found early today in a fast-food restaurant in this middle-class Chicago suburb.
The dead, six men and a woman, included several teen-age employees of the restaurant, Brown's Chicken and Pasta, other workers said.
But the police here refused to identify the victims or provide details about the case.


Cocktail-Party Conversation -- With a Computer
The topic: men and women.
The conversationalists: one reasonably intelligent and inquisitive reporter, and one very clever and mischievous computer program.
Could they have an intelligent keyboard conversation?
And would it seem to the reporter that he was talking to a person and not a PC-compatible idiot savant?
Computer scientists are still far from building a true thinking machine.
In fact many scientists and philosophers think such a feat will forever remain beyond the grasp of technology.
But software that can mimic a human conversation is evolving rapidly.
Computer programs of limited intelligence are already conversing with people in many commercial situations, from automated teller machines in banks to airline reservation systems to supermarket checkout counters.
And in the future such programs will be used in far more sophisticated ways -- for example, to advise experts in fields as diverse as medicine and engineering design.


Unleash the Bells
To the Editor:
I agree that the benefits of the information age should be available to everyone, and not just large financial and corporate institutions.
But your article ("Who Benefits in the Information Age?" Viewpoints, Dec. 20) chides the regional Bell operating companies in saying that ever since the 1984 A.T.&amp; T. divestiture the primary obligation of the regional companies has been to their stockholders, not to society.
The finger is pointing in the wrong direction.


Valerie Silverman and Drew Kerr
Mr. and Mrs.
Rogers Silverman of Jericho, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Valerie Silverman, to Drew Reid Kerr, a son of Herbert Kerr and Alma Kerr, both of Forest Hills, Queens.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Silverman, 30, is a senior vice president at Howard J. Rubenstein Associates, a public relations firm in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father, a retired furrier, owned Furs by Rogers in New York.
Her mother, Anne K. Silverman, is an administrator in the theater department of the State University at Old Westbury, L.I.


Linda Baron and Christopher Lloyd
Linda M. Baron, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin L. Baron of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Christopher Lloyd, the son of Joshua Lloyd of London and the late Anne Lloyd.
Rabbi Albert Sturmer officiated at the Great Hall at Gedney Farm in New Marlborough, Mass.
Ms.
Baron, who is keeping her name, is a freelance photographer and picture editor in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
Her father, now retired, was an associate at Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius, a law firm in New York.
Her mother, Toby Baron, is a partner in Window Designs, a window-design firm in Scarsdale.


All Rules Aren't Created Equal
To the Sports Editor:
The issues raised by Clifton Brown in "No Harm, No Foul? Oakley is Fined $10,000" (The Times, Jan. 1) reflect a series of issues, conflicts and deficiencies that the National Basketball Association must deal with now if the sport is to continue to achieve greater popularity.


Outlets on Board
To the Editor: Your articles on cruise lines (Oct. 11) and the photograph of the Royal Majesty remind me that in August we were guests aboard that ship on a Royal Majesty trip to nowhere, which was most pleasant.
One problem was the placement of the electrical outlet in the bathroom, and the fact that the outlet, which will physically accept a standard 110-volt plug, has a difficult-to-see switch that changes the voltage from 220 to 110 volts.
Thus we inadvertently plugged a 110-volt electric toothbrush without switching it and destroyed it (for a few seconds it brushed like the very dickens).
No signs warned of the hazard.


St. John's Clings to Classics
AS ADVOCATES of multicultural education attack the Western canon and turn many college core curriculums on their heads, St.
John's College in Annapolis, Md., clings to its core of "Western Great Books" as it has for more than 50 years.
St.
John's has a distinctive four-year program that was instituted in 1937 in an effort to revitalize the college, which was struggling financially.
"Dead white European males," as authors of Western classics have been called, are very much alive on this campus and on the college's 28-year-old campus in Santa Fe, N.M.


Home Awaits
To the Editor:
All of us at City Center applaud Anna Kisselgoff's essay "Can the Joffrey Ever Go Home Again?"  [ Dec. 20 ] .
Many major dance companies are experiencing far fewer touring outlets as local presenters give preference and financial support to their own, equally needy regional troupes.
These cutbacks in earned income help put regular New York seasons in jeopardy.
The financial gaps that result must be met by corporate, foundation or government dollars, and these have been greatly reduced by current economic circumstances.


Susan Wuthrich, B. H. Walker Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Wuthrich of Wharton, Tex., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Susan Wuthrich, to Maj.
Benjamin Harrison Walker Jr. of the United States Air Force, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walker of New York.
An April wedding is planned.
Dr.
Wuthrich, 32, is a resident in anesthesia at the University of Maryland Medical System in Baltimore.
She graduated from the University of Texas at Austin and received an M.D. from the University of Texas at Galveston.


The Morning-After Pill: A Well-Kept Secret
It is the morning after and, still half asleep, she begins to remember the night before.
She is 15, and as she dressed for that party, she sure hadn't planned on losing her virginity afterward.


Police Exam Is Attracting More Blacks
Since Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly made minority recruiting a top priority on taking office three months ago, the percentage of blacks planning to take the department's test this year has significantly increased, according to city figures.
From October to January, the number of applicants overall has nearly quadrupled, from 10,800 to 39,700; in past years, 30,000 was considered good.
And the proportion of blacks has increased from 18 percent of the October group to 24 percent of the January total.


JAN. 3-9: Anything Went; Which Centennial Would Willard Scott Announce?
Readers of The Week in Review may have heard something peculiar last week: Cole Porter, laughing in his grave.
Among the anniversaries occasioned by the new year, this section mentioned the centennial of the songwriter's birth in 1893 -- or so the editors believed.
As did "Who Was Who" and some encyclopedias.
But many readers wrote to say that Porter was born in 1891.
His centennial was celebrated in 1991 by the United States Postal Service, which issued a commemorative stamp; and by dozens who performed at a Carnegie Hall gala and hundreds who attended a high school concert in his hometown of Peru, Ind. (pronounced PEA-roo).
So why the confusion?
Cole Porter himself gave 1893 as his birth year in the 1913 Yale Class Book, and there's no birth certificate for him in the courthouse in Peru.
One explanation is that the deception began when Kate Porter sent her 14-year-old son to private school, passing him off as a prodigy of 12.
Several Porter authorities, as well as James O. Cole, a first cousin once removed, say that 1891 is correct.
And so reads Porter's tombstone.
The Week in Review regrets the error.
We suspect that Mr.
Porter, the eternal bon vivant, does not.


Valvano Gets Wish To Throw First Pitch
It turns out that JIM VALVANO, the former basketball coach at Iona and North Carolina State, has harbored a bit of baseball envy.
He has always wanted to throw out the first pitch at Yankee Stadium, he said during an interview last week on WABC Radio, and has envied Coach P. J. CARLESIMO of Seton Hall for doing just that.


No Lockout? No Strike? No Way to Really Tell Until the Labor Talks Begin
In 1981, the owners' chief labor negotiator, Ray Grebey, assured his employers that the players wouldn't strike.
When they did, Grebey assured the owners that once they missed their first pay check, the players would return to work.
Fifty days later, the owners ended the strike when their strike insurance ran out.
The moral of the story: Don't believe everything that is said or thought in baseball labor negotiations.
The story and the moral are relevant now because the latest negotiations between the owners and the players are scheduled to begin Wednesday.
The first meeting between Richard Ravitch, the owners' latest labor executive, and Donald Fehr, the players' veteran union leader, will not produce any dramatic developments.


Gayle Abrams, Stephen Nettler
Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence M. Abrams of Cherry Hill, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Gayle Helene Abrams to Stephen Mark Nettler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul T. Nettler of Greenvale, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Abrams, 25, is a manager in the Mastercard/Visa division of Citibank in Long Island City, Queens.
She graduated from Carnegie Mellon University, from which she also received an M.B.A.
Her father is the manager of process engineering at Hydrocarbon Research Inc., a designer of chemical processing plants in Princeton, N.J.


Margot Bodine, David Congdon
Margot Reed Bodine, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Bodine 3d of Sanibel, Fla., was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to David John Congdon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George C. Congdon of Keene, N.H.
The Rev.
Sue Anne Steffey Morrow, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Princeton University Chapel.
The Rev.
Alfredo J. Balinong, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Congdon, 31, is the senior counsel for labor relations and employment law at the Philip Morris Companies in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton and received a law degree from Boston College.
Her father, who is retired, was a trust and estate adviser in Sanibel.


Murder Most Photogenic
EVIDENCE
By Luc Sante.
Illustrated. 99 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.
Cloth, $40.
Paper, $16.


Bosnian Shifts on Geneva Talks to Protest Killing
The Bosnian President, Alija Izetbegovic, said today that he would not take part in peace talks scheduled to resume in Geneva on Sunday to protest the assassination of a senior member of his Government by a Serbian soldier in Sarajevo on Friday.
But Mr.
Izetbegovic also made it clear that the Muslim-led Bosnian Government was not withdrawing from the peace talks, which are being co-sponsored by the United Nations and the European Community, and he left open the possibility that he might still travel to Geneva on Sunday.
In Geneva, officials said Mr.
Izetbegovic had pledged to come.


Denise Alter, Steven Sandor
Denise Tina Alter, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Alter of White Plains, was married yesterday to Steven Brian Sandor, a son of Dr.
Frank Sandor of Ossining, N.Y., and Dr.
Deanna Sandor of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Rabbi Richard Rheins officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The couple, both 24, are graduates of the University of Maryland.
Mrs.
Sandor received a master's degree in psychology from Yeshiva University, where she is a doctoral candidate in that subject.
Her father is the chief of nephrology at White Plains Hospital.
Her mother, Toby Alter, is a travel consultant at Hamilton Travel Inc., an agency in White Plains.


JAN. 3-9: Secondhand Smoke and Cancer; Report Offers Ammunition To Antismoking Lobby
Antismoking advocates who have long looked for a "smoking gun" in their case against the tobacco industry say they got it last week in the form of a study from the Environmental Protection Agency.
In the 530-page report, the agency declared that secondhand cigarette smoke was a Group A cancer-causing agent as dangerous as benzene, arsenic and radon.
The report estimated that smoke from other people's cigarettes causes 3,000 lung cancer deaths annually in adults and as many as 300,000 cases of bronchitis and pneumonia in children.


Huson Agrees to Deal
A day after becoming the first player in the majors to file for salary arbitration this year, infielder JEFF HUSON yesterday agreed to a one-year contract with the Texas Rangers.
In 123 games last season, Huson, 28, hit .261 with 4 homers and 24 runs batted in.
He made $182,500.
Huson will undergo surgery tomorrow to repair a torn rotator cuff in his left shoulder.
He is expected to start the 1993 season on the disabled list. (AP)


Price of European Unity Is Reckoned in Lost Jobs
Few towns are better placed than this northern French industrial capital to benefit from Europe's push for unity.
The Channel Tunnel and high-speed rail links will soon put Paris, Brussels and London within 90 minutes.
Blue-and-gold European flags, a new train station conceived as a European hub and a massive conference center called EuraLille demonstrate the point.
But in an example of the problems accompanying the establishment of a single European market on Jan. 1, all the fanfare has left the four million inhabitants of the Lille region cold.
The billions of dollars spent on transport, the relentless promotion of the European ideal and the recent removal of border guards at the nearby Belgian frontier have all been overshadowed by a single fact: more and more people do not have jobs.


Christopher Perry and Alison Phelps
Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin J. Phelps Jr. of Ridgefield, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Alison Hewitt Phelps to Christopher North Perry, a son of Mrs.
O.
Endecott Perry of Wilton, Conn., and the late Mr.
Perry.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Phelps, 24, is an assistant in the marketing department of Time Inc., in New York.
She graduated from the University of Rhode Island.
Her father, now retired, was a vice president and the director of financial services for The Reader's Digest in Pleasantville, N.Y.


Paula Weber, Brian E. Ohl
Paula Bodi Weber, the daughter of Norma D. Cavanaugh of Westwood, Mass., and the late Harry A. Bodi Jr., was married yesterday to Brian Eric Ohl, a son of Lillian M. Ohl of West Palm Beach, Fla., and John P. Ohl of Palm Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Dr.
Ralph R. Warren Jr. performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of Bethesda-by-the-Sea, in Palm Beach.
Mrs.
Ohl is 41.
Her father was the director of the electronics division at M/A-Com Omni-Spectra Inc., an electronic components manufacturer in Waltham, Mass.
She is a stepdaughter of the late Joseph P. Cavanaugh.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Ann G. Catalano, Samuel Croll 3d
Ann Garner Catalano, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Garner of Pepper Pike, Ohio, was married on Friday to Samuel Wilbur Croll 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Croll Jr. of East Orleans, Mass.
The Rev.
Mark S. Anschutz performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Croll graduated from Denison University.
Her father is a partner in the Cleveland law firm of Baker &amp; Hostetler.
Her mother, Georgia Garner, is a graphic artist in Shaker Heights, Ohio.


Seduction in Catalonia
SOLITUDE
By Victor Catala (Caterina Albert i Paradis).
Translated by David H. Rosenthal. 216 pp.
Columbia, La.: Readers International.
Cloth, $19.95.
Paper, $11.95.


Sound Bytes; A Manager of Creativity Reigns at Frogdesign
The first personal computers were hardly works of art.
To paraphrase Henry Ford, you could get any style at all, as long as it was a beige box.
Newer designs are much more attractive and functional, in large part because of the influence of Hartmut H. Esslinger and his industrial designers at Frogdesign Inc. in Menlo Park, Calif.
Frogdesign's style-and-function blend show up in Next's distinctive black workstations, Zenith Data's sleek new product line and the futuristic A.T.&amp;T.-Eo communicator, among others.
Mr.
Esslinger divides his time between California and Germany, where he teaches at the College of Design in Karlsruhe.
Question: Why have most personal computers been so ugly?


Ah, Yesterday, When Men Had Absolute Power Over Women!
To the Editor:
Ah, yesterday!
"About Guys" (Op-Ed, Dec. 27), Garrison Keillor's lament, is nothing short of pathetic.
What he really objects to is the loss of absolute power men exercised in the past, mostly over women.
Changing gender roles suggest that men be sensitive and don an apron now and then to help out, rather than be treated as lord and master -- a bitter pill to swallow.


Escaping the Smog of Katmandu
To escape the smog and pollution that in recent years have settled over Katmandu, Nepal, visitors can now choose to stay in one of a growing number of mountain lodges being built above (or just beyond) the rim of the valley that shelters the capital and its sister cities of Bhaktapur and Patan.
The new inns are set in village surroundings above the urban smog line, but most are within an hour of the international airport.
The most attractive is the Dhulikhel Mountain Resort, 20 miles from Katmandu along the road to Tibet and overlooking terraced mountainsides.
The lodge, with its 17 Nepali-style cottages (36 rooms in all) and spacious indoor-outdoor restaurant, climbs the same hillside as village farms.
The modern rooms and suites all have private baths.
Solar energy heats the water.


Michele Crames, Daniel Zenkel
Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Crames of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Michele Lynn Crames to Daniel Robert Zenkel, a son of Lois and Bruce Zenkel of Greenwich, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Crames is an account director at Alcone Sims O'Brien, a marketing consulting firm in Elmsford, N.Y.
She graduated from Amherst College.
Her father is the managing partner at the New York law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler.
Her mother, Ellie Crames, is a travel consultant with Rich Worldwide Travel, an agency in Harrison, N.Y.


A World Tour By Private Jet
Using a chartered L-1011 wide-body jet that normally holds 360, 84 passengers, will make a 30-day round-the world-trip priced at $42,900 a person.
The annual Around the World Private Jet Tour is the 14th organized by Travcoa of California.
It departs Los Angeles Sept. 29.
Hong Kong, Bangkok, East and South Africa, Morocco, Gibraltar and the Canary Islands are among the stopovers.
Participants will stay in such hotels as Raffles in Singapore, Al Bustan Palace in Oman and the Ngorongoro Sopa Lodge in Tanzania.
Excursions that include a five-night cruise off Spain aboard the Sea Goddess I and a hot-air balloon ride in Kenya.


The New Ethics Of Hunting
To the Sports Editor:
"Subtracting the Hunt and Adding Recklessness," (The Times, Jan. 3) by Robert F. Jones has an all too familiar lament even for me living in south-central Idaho.
The fall hunting season has been a rite of passage for generations of Idahoans, my wife included.
During these years, there was an ethical rule of sportsmanly behavior for the "fair chase." Like everything else, times have changed, often not for the better.


Corrections
A picture caption on Dec. 13 with a review of "Kurt Weill: Composer in a Divided World" included an erroneous identification, from the book, for an actor in the 1943 production of "One Touch of Venus." He was John Boles.


Marisa L. Azzariti, Mark E. Bonacci
Marisa Lane Azzariti, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George M. Azzariti of Alpine, N.J., was married yesterday to Mark Edward Bonacci, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Eugene F. Bonacci of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Louis Padovano performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Bonacci, 21, is a senior at Fordham University.
Her father, a pediatrician in Fort Lee, N.J., is the president and chief executive of Pedimedica, a pediatricians' group in Bergen County.
Her mother, Peggie Azzariti, is an associate at Marwill Interiors, a design firm in Alpine.


Julia Parker, Robert Cliche
Julia Thain Parker, the daughter of Gail T. P. Wickes of New York and Thomas D. Parker of Cambridge, Mass., was married yesterday to Robert Cliche, the son of Dorothy Cliche of Chicago and the late Dr.
Robert Cliche.
Walter Lawton, a leader emeritus of the Westchester Humanist Society, officiated at the New York home of the bride's mother and stepfather, R. Paul Wickes.
Ms.
Parker, who is 26, is keeping her name.
She and her husband graduated from Hampshire College, and she is a master's degree candidate in photography at the School for Visual Arts.
Her father is the senior vice president of the Education Resources Institute, a student-loan guarantee program in Boston.
Her mother is the senior vice president of client relations in Weehawken, N.J., for PaineWebber Inc.
The bride's stepfather is a partner in the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.


The Queen Of the Night: A Double Life
Two weeks ago, I wrote about a fragrant night-blooming cereus that blossoms its head off for Dr.
Kate Bernstein, a molecular biologist and urban gardener who has propagated countless plants from a cutting that she got from the Caribbean 35 years ago.
Dr.
Bernstein has believed all these years that her pet Queen of the Night, as night-blooming cereus is called, was Selenicereus grandiflorus (pictured at far right).
It turns out that Dr.
Bernstein's plant is no such thing.


The Executive Computer; Where Giants Tread: A New Biography of Microsoft's Chief
William H. Gates is one of the busiest executives in the world, people who work for him say, yet he still finds time to read books.
If he can do it, so can anyone.
An appropriate one to start with is "Gates: How Microsoft's Mogul Reinvented an Industry and Made Himself the Richest Man in America," by Stephen Manes and Paul Andrews ($25, Doubleday).
It is not the first biography of Mr.
Gates, co-founder and chairman of the Microsoft Corporation and, as everyone seems compelled to add, the richest man in America.
Given that Mr.
Gates is but 37 years old, there will surely be many other attempts.
But this book, written by a veteran computer industry columnist and a reporter for The Seattle Times, is to date the definitive work.


A Tiny Chinese Place for New Canaan
NEW CANAAN, which for decades had not a single Chinese restaurant, now has three.
The newest is Hunan Taste, which is in a sliver of storefront space that once was part of the Deli-Bake delicatessen next door.
The seating in Hunan Taste's narrow space is for 20 at most, with three tables for 4 and four tables for 2.
Despite the close quarters, the tiny dining area is neat and cheerful, with good lighting and walls lined with Chinese art works.
A waiter dances attendance every time your tea cup is empty.
It is somewhat paradoxical that Hunan Taste seems best set up for take-out, yet its eat-in food is infinitely better, perhaps because it comes piping hot right from the kitchen and items that should be crisp arrive as intended.


Mask Making Lends Meaning to Drama
SO there was this king, and all he wanted was power and control.
And Hamlet understood this, but he was an outcast, and society distorted his vision.
"Same as in this society," concluded Robert Cort, a senior at Woodlands High School here, as he cut an eye into the clay mask he was making.
" 'Hamlet,' 'Medea' -- even though they all took place so long ago, it's like everyday life."


Scherzer Illustrates Precise Calculation
A MAJOR sensation of the United States championship, held Dec. 1-20 in Durango, Colo., was the performance of Alex Sherzer.
The 21-year-old international master from College Park, Md., just failed to take the title by a hair's-breadth in a field stuffed with grandmasters.
Going into the last round, Sherzer held a half-point lead over the grandmaster Patrick Wolff of Somerville, Mass.
But when Wolff defeated Boris Men of Cleveland and Sherzer lost to John Fedorowicz, a grandmaster from Manhattan, Wolff had first prize and Sherzer a tie for second with Boris Gulko, a grandmaster from Fair Lawn, N.J.
Sherzer's 10-5 score gave him a norm toward grandmaster rank.


Love Displays Calm Before the Storm
Employing the same newfound coolness with which he has holed three tournament-winning putts in recent weeks, Davis Love 3d made a 15-foot birdie putt on the 18th hole today to take a one-stroke lead after three rounds of the Infiniti Tournament of Champions.
Love's final putt was more significant than usual because a heavy storm is expected to hit the San Diego area Sunday morning and could cancel the final round.
If less than half the field completes the round on Sunday, Love will be declared the winner.


POSTINGS: And a Bank in Harlem; Waldorf a Landmark
Park Avenue gained two new official landmarks Tuesday.
One of them -- the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, between 49th and 50th Streets -- seems so obvious a choice that New Yorkers might be surprised to learn it is only now designated.
The other is the former Mount Morris Bank Building, 75 blocks north at 125th Street, a Romanesque Revival work from the 1880's by the firm of Lamb &amp; Rich.
It has been abandoned since the late 1970's but is still "one of the most impressive buildings in Harlem," in the words of the Landmarks Preservation Commission, and "retains its architectural integrity to a surprisingly high degree."


On Long Island, Little Girl Lost; Even Before She Vanished, Katie's Plight Touched Hearts
The last time Cathy Rossi saw Katie Beers was at 10:30 on a chilly October night in 1991.
The 8-year-old girl had come over on her own to her neighbor's house to bid a tearful farewell.
A bank had foreclosed on the Beers family home here, in a tight-knit suburban neighborhood of split-level ranch homes and manicured lawns.
Katie, who had already endured neglect, poverty and family fights, was being uprooted once again.


American Is Top Junior
He was runner-up among the juniors at Wimbledon and the Australian Open last year, but when the International Tennis Federation cranked out its year-end junior rankings, 18-year-old BRIAN DUNN of Brandon, Fla., was right there, becoming the first American male to be the I.T.F. world junior championship.
DAVID SKOCH of Czechoslovakia, who beat Dunn at Wimbledon, was 200 points back in second place among the boys' ranking, and GRANT DOYLE, who won the junior Australian Open, was third.


Pop Can Survive Almost Anything. But Respect?!
A President who plays saxophone, admires Elvis Presley and came of age in the late 1960's is bound to affect the course of popular music.
Bill Clinton doubtless has memories of a time when popular music helped shake America loose from white-bread 50's illusions, and he clearly likes the stuff; Aretha Franklin sang at his convention.
During the campaign, Al Gore was so up to date he cited R.E.M. albums when facing a young audience in Georgia.
The question for the next four years is whether R-E-S-P-E-C-T from the top will make popular music more innovative, or more complacent.
Under a pluralistic administration, new musical coalitions could be built, but genres that have been screaming in the wilderness may find themselves with less to complain about.


OFF THE COUCH
The fact that we are still debating the possibility of treating schizophrenia or severe depression with "talk" instead of medication shows how strongly we still cling to the belief that mental illnesses are somehow "different" from other diseases.
The brain, after all, is an organ, like the heart, and, like that organ, can malfunction as a result of biochemical imbalances.
ROBERT J. YAES, M.D.
Lexington, Ky.


Now the Sun Begins to Reclaim the Day
To the Editor:
The caption for a beautiful Dec. 22 picture of the sun setting behind the Statue of Liberty refers to Dec. 21 as the shortest day of the year.
This may be so if the duration of daylight is measured in hours, minutes and seconds, but for most of us the duration of 9 hours and 15 minutes made this only one of a series of seven similar shortest days, followed by a few more of the same length before the days start to get longer.


Judith Seibert, Gary R. Schall
February wedding plans have been announced for Judith Anne Seibert, a senior consultant at Price Waterhouse in New York, and Gary Richard Schall, a tax associate at the firm.
Miss Seibert, 27, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
She is a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Seibert Jr.


NOTES
Revelers straggling back from New Year's in Miami Beach are already thinking ahead to next year.
At a party to celebrate an opening at the Robert Miller Gallery on Tuesday, the artist Ross Bleckner said he'd just booked a room in South Beach to ring in 1994.
To his surprise, Howard Rosenman, the film producer, admitted that he, too, had made a reservation for the same time and at the same hotel, the Raleigh.
They can only hope that a hotter spot isn't annointed before then.


U.S. TROOPS BEGIN A DRIVE TO EXPAND HOLD ON MOGADISHU
One month into the United States military deployment in Somalia, the American forces have begun a drive to expand and consolidate their hold over Mogadishu, the lawless capital that is still plagued by sporadic machine-gun battles, looting and confrontations between rival clans.
The military calls this one of the last tasks of its Somalia operation, to create a secure environment and thus pave the way for a transfer of authority to United Nations peacekeeping troops.


Doesn't a Pardon Still Imply Admission of Guilt?; Lesson From Dictators
To the Editor:
President Bush's pardon of those high officials implicated with him in lying to Congress and the public about the Iran-contra affair puts the United States Government in the same league as the two-bit dictators of Latin America.


Thinking About Tomorrow, and How to Build It
And now the Baby Boomers get to build a public realm.
That is the opportunity set before us by the new Administration, alluring or horrifying as the prospect may be.
How will that prospect materialize?
What is the role of architecture in creating a space for change?
Even a mandate for change has a past.
The shape of things to come in the next four years will be partly colored by the history of Bill Clinton's generation and the ideals of community it has formed.
The yearning for a public realm figures strongly in the mythology of the baby boomers.
They came of age, legendarily, at Woodstock, a gathering of strangers brought together chiefly by the chance to be together.
The music was almost a pretext.
The main event was an experiment in tribalism: an instant, two-day city built on a farm's muddy fields.


Material Witness


Stanford Reflects Campus Diversity


Movin' On
IN ANNOUNCING HIS PARDONS for many of those convicted or charged in the Iran-contra scandal, George Bush cited the precedents of James Madison and Lafitte's pirates, and several general amnesties (pardons to a whole class of people) like Andrew Johnson's to the Confederate soldiers, and Harry Truman's and Jimmy Carter's to draft evaders in two wars.
"Notwithstanding the seriousness of these issues and the passions they aroused," President Bush stated, "my predecessors acted because it was time for the country to
move on
."
This locution has become one of the most useful and frequently employed in the modern language.


Recent Sales
Hillsdale  $305,000
78 Queen Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, brick fireplace, c/a; taxes $6,753.
Howell  $183,983
23 Melissa Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; fireplace, full basement, c/a; taxes $3,134.
Jackson  $105,000
511B Crescent Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 6-year-old ranch; above ground pool, deck, c/a; taxes $2,748.
Mahwah  $373,500
2 Heather Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, over-25-year-old ranch; family room, 2-car garage, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $5,150.
Old Tappan  $600,000
7 Perry Street  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 10-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, family room, c/a, back porch; taxes $8,939.
Park Ridge  $175,000
189 Park Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 42-year-old colonial; fireplace, sun room, 1-car garage; taxes $3,722.
OTHER AREAS Amityville, L.I.  $315,000
136 Grand Central Avenue  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 90-year-old colonial; dining room, basement, 3-car detached garage, 100- by 250-foot lot; taxes $6,300.
Rye, N.Y.  $370,000
5 Brevoort Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 97-year-old colonial carriage house; dining room, deck, gazebo, pool, tennis court, 1-car garage; taxes $8,453.
New Haven, Conn.  $165,000
179-173 Cold Spring Street  6-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 93-year-old colonial; large entry foyer, study lined with bookcases, 50- by 150-foot lot; taxes $4,424.


Taking Stock
Undeterred by recent medical recommendations for temperance in the weight-loss department, and undaunted by the Sisyphean task of attempting -- once again -- to shed pounds during the very month when a sane body craves food rich with fat, almost everyone I know greets January with firm resolutions to diet.
It's a national ritual and it usually lasts about a month.
In the first seven days, resolve is fierce and pounds tend to be sacrificed to the pagan god of thinness.
In the weeks that follow, a grey flannel cloud descends, as grim and depressing as a tent dress.
Soon, the reality of life with its social commitments and the comfort of long-held eating habits, conspire to overwhelm the will, and before you know it, the dieter is beseeching the pagan god of sloth to grant release.


Off to U.S., Japanese Pack Words, Like 'Police!'
At 7 o'clock on Sunday nights, television viewers across Japan tune in to see the latest disaster to befall Hyota, a hapless Japanese traveler trying to survive in America with the English he learned in Japan's public schools.
He was recently wandering the streets of Tombstone, Ariz., in search of a security guard.
"I am looking for guardo-man," he said, reaching for one of the thousands of terms Japan has borrowed from abroad and turned into something halfway between English and Japanese.


The Queen Of the Night: A Double Life
Two weeks ago, I wrote about a fragrant night-blooming cereus that blossoms its head off for Dr.
Kate Bernstein, a molecular biologist and urban gardener who has propagated countless plants from a cutting that she got from the Caribbean 35 years ago.
Dr.
Bernstein has believed all these years that her pet Queen of the Night, as night-blooming cereus is called, was Selenicereus grandiflorus (pictured at far right).
It turns out that Dr.
Bernstein's plant is no such thing.


Commercial Property: Manhattan Office Leasing; A Glow at the End of the Tunnel?
IT'S not exactly a rebound.
And if it's a light at the end of the tunnel, it's no more than a 40-watt bulb.
But it looks like maybe, just maybe, the end of 1992 will be remembered as the cheer-up point for the depressed midtown market.
Vacancy rates were down and rents slowed their precipitous slide.


When a Casual Collector Turns Serious
Great collections are often shaped by acquisitive people who happen to be in the right place at the right time.
Take Gregory Henderson.
When he was posted by the State Department to Seoul for two years in 1948, he bought a few gloriously glazed celadons, jade-green vessels with the shimmer of silk.
When he returned in 1958 as the political officer of the United States Embassy, he became a confirmed Korean ceramics collector.
With pioneering zeal, Henderson and his wife, Maria von Magnus Henderson, bought austere white porcelains, ash-glazed storage pots and robust early stonewares.
By the time the couple left Korea in 1963, their completed holdings spanned the second to the 19th centuries.


Corrections
A report in the Business Diary column last Sunday about the Compuadd Corporation, Zenith Data Systems and the competition to win a contract to sell the Department of Defense 300,000 computers for use by the Air Force misstated the outcome of the latest round.
No award was made.
The report also misstated the date of a protest by Compuadd and other companies.
It was in September.


Banking on Clinton Mania
The future First Daughter now has a restaurant named after her.
Two weeks ago, the Chelsea Clinton Cafe opened at 184 Eighth Avenue, near 19th Street.
"We got the idea because we are located in Chelsea, and further up is Clinton," Alain Pizzutti, a co-owner, said.
"There's also the newspaper called the Chelsea Clinton News. It's a great name."


Daily News Survivors Torn and Bitter
All too many of their friends are gone, their desks now eerily empty, their familiar voices missing.
For the people who lost their jobs at The Daily News, life has taken a tortuous turn, but it has been a less than joyous experience to be among the survivors who were retained by the paper's new owner, Mortimer B. Zuckerman.
They find themselves thrust into a fragile new world where they are to carry on work they have performed for years or decades in an environment clammy with sadness and anger.


U.S. SAYS BAGHDAD REMOVED MISSILES
The White House said today that it was satisfied that Baghdad had "backed down" in the face of an allied ultimatum by removing surface-to-air missiles that were threatening allied planes patrolling the skies of southern Iraq.
American officials said it did not appear that Iraq had fully met the allies' original demands that the missiles, which set off a new confrontation over Iraqi military movements, be returned to their "original sites or configurations" within 48 hours.


Master Singers


Art Is Long But Stone Is Eternal
In response to William Zimmer's art column on the Old Croton Aqueduct  [ "Old Croton Aqueduct Is Seen in a New Light," Dec. 27 ] , history buffs and aqueduct aficionados will be interested to know that far from being completely dry, the aqueduct continues to fulfill the purpose for which it was built 150 years ago.
While it is true that the aqueduct is no longer part of New York City's water system, fully 50 percent of Ossining's water customers -- 30,000 people -- depend on water flowing through this underground channel.
If Briarcliff Manor opts to join the Ossining system, 100 percent of these new customers will receive their water via this historic structure.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The Labor Department; Nominee Devoted Years To Rehearsing for Role
Robert B. Reich will no doubt be the first Secretary of Labor who ever staged a production of The Fantasticks.
And he is probably the first to serve as a top economic adviser to three Democratic Presidential candidates, and the first to write seven books in 10 years.


She Played The Organ, The Mets Just Played
THEY don't laugh when Jane Jarvis, a jazz pianist and organist, sits down to play.
She has performed in churches, at funeral services, in elevators and supermarkets through Muzak and at home baseball games of the Milwaukee Braves and New York Mets.
Jazz, mostly in a latter-day traditionalist style, in one form or another, has always been part of her life.
"For me," Ms.
Jarvis said, "jazz is the Mother Earth of music. It is a catchall term which describes any nonconforming artist's improvisations."


10,000th AIDS Death Occurs In San Francisco Since 1981
Mayor Frank Jordan ordered flags on municipal buildings flown at half-staff on Friday and called for five minutes of silence at 9 A.M. to note this city's 10,000th recorded death from the AIDS epidemic.
Officials of the city's Department of Public Health said the latest victim died Wednesday morning at San Francisco General Hospital.
He was identified only as "a gay Latino male in his 30's."


From Astra: Help in Getting Foscavir
To the Editor:
Regarding "The Dark Side of Astra: High Prices on an AIDS Drug" (Letters, Dec. 27), comparing the prices of AZT and Astra's Foscavir is inappropriate.


Tracy Pogue and Michael Hausman
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Pogue of Shaker Heights, Ohio, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Tracy Ellen Pogue, to Dr.
Michael Robert Hausman, the son of Esther K. Hausman of Milford, Conn., and the late Sidney Hausman.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Pogue, 33, is an associate at the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore.
She graduated from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Chicago.
She also received a law degree from New York University.
Her father is a senior partner of the law firm of Jones, Day, Reavis, &amp; Pogue in Cleveland.


Israelis Let 2 Deported Arabs Return
Two of the 415 Palestinians expelled by Israel to southern Lebanon were brought back to Israeli-controlled territory today, the first movement of exiles since a crisis over the expulsions began last month.
An Israeli defense official said tonight that the International Committee of the Red Cross would be allowed on Sunday to return nine other men who were deported by mistake and who in nearly all cases are to be jailed on charges of anti-Israel violence in the occupied territories.


Data Update
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*4*(Residential in millions of dollars)
Nov. 92
Nov. 91
Change
New York
419.5
287.2
+46%
New Jersey
191.8
133.8
+43%
Connecticut
85.1
61.1
+39%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.38
8.37
8.43
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.38
5.47
6.16
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.23
8.24
8.36
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.31
5.31
5.97
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.25
8.25
8.37
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.07
5.08
6.03
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.36
8.38
8.53
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.95
5.98
6.82
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.62
3.64
4.14
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.49
7.49
8.43
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


Not With the Band
To the Editor:
Having been publicly tagged one of "pop's paramours" by Ann Powers, I feel impelled to offer a few facts that Ms.
Powers, who interviewed me at length for a San Francisco publication last May, seems to have forgotten.


Amy, Amy Everywhere
LAST Sunday night at a walk-up in the East Village, a hefty drag performer whose stage name is Faux Pas was watching the ABC and CBS versions of the Amy Fisher story on two television sets with some friends.
He was wearing fish-net stockings and what might have been the largest little black dress in the world.
Faux Pas had beaten the networks by playing the Long Island teen-ager in a drag version of her story in mid-December at the Big Top Follies, a Friday revue at the Show World Adult Entertainment Complex on Eighth Avenue.
"I don't read the papers because I don't like bad news," he said during a commercial, "and I purposely didn't follow her story because it seemed so exploitative. So when I played her, I made a lot of stuff up. I really had to challenge myself. But I was brought up in Hewlett on Long Island, and I know those kinds of girls."


You Can't Always Get What You Want
TAKE ANOTHER LITTLE PIECE OF MY HEART
A Groupie Grows Up.
By Pamela Des Barres.
Illustrated. 304 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $20.


Alexandra Alger And Daniel Chung
Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick M. Alger 3d of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Alexandra Dewey Alger to Daniel Cayley Chung, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kai-Lai Chung of Stanford, Calif.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Alger, 31 years old, is an associate editor at Mergers &amp; Corporate Policy, a financial newsletter in New York.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.
Her father heads Fred Alger Management Inc., an investment management company in New York.
Her late grandfather Frederick M. Alger Jr. was the Ambassador to Belgium under President Dwight D. Eisenhower.


Amy Jorgensen, Cecil D. Conlee
Amy Jean Jorgensen, the president of the Jorgensen Company, a real-estate consulting concern in Atlanta and New York, was married yesterday to Cecil Dean Conlee, the chairman of CGR Advisors, real-estate consultants in Atlanta.
The Rev.
F.
Forrester Church performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
Mrs.
Conlee, 39, graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and received an M.B.A. from Vanderbilt University.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
John J. Jorgensen of Charlotte, N.C., and the late Mr.
Jorgensen.


World Economies


Hollywood's Pet: Schoolteachers
ASK NOT for whom the bell tolls in Hollywood.
It often turns out to be a school bell, tolling for a teacher.
Plots centering on teachers have long been popular among film makers.
One reason might be movie moguls flattering themselves by likening the pedagogical aspects of teaching to the uplifting moral role that Film -- with a capital "F," of course -- is meant to play in the lives of those people out there in the dark.
Kirk Douglas is a stalwart hero in "A Letter to Three Wives" (1949) for declaiming sentiments like "I'm a schoolteacher; that's even worse than being an intellectual."


A Clinton Photo Book For the Home Computer
THE back cover of a book is sometimes more interesting than its front cover.
Turn over "Clinton: Portrait of Victory" (Warner Book/Epicenter Communications, New York, $19.95), which will be published on Jan. 20, and you will find a statement saying the book "is also available as interactive multimedia on CD-ROM for Mac and DOS computers." It continues, "Check software stores nationwide or contact Warner New Media (800) 593-6334."
This is the first book published by Time Warner's Warner New Media division that has an electronic version on disk.
The disk, which costs $39.95, can be used in CD-ROM and DOS drives, making it possible to show the book's pictures -- and more -- on the computer screen.
The print version has about 200 pictures; the disk, about 300.


JAN. 3-9: Kohl's Coalition Setback; German Minister Quits Over Hustling Two-Bit Business
With Germany in turmoil and entering recession, many yearn for the days when people like Ludwig Erhard, father of the "economic miracle," held the post of Economics Minister.
The man who recently held the job, Jurgen W. Mollemann, was often criticized for a lack of qualifications.
Last Sunday, he said that he would resign because of a scandal over a letter he wrote to help a relative's business.


Jackson Runs Again
BO JACKSON has hit the comeback trail again, this time on a running pad in a service tunnel at Comiskey Park.
White Sox officials said that Jackson, who had not run since a hip replacement last year, had taken his first running steps on the pad last week.
Describing his pace as between a jog and a sprint, trainers said he ran for 20 seconds at a time between 20-second rest periods.


Basic Pointers for Baking Potatoes
ONE of the simplest yet most satisfying of all vegetables is a baked potato.
Light the oven, put the potato or potatoes in and roast them till tender.
It hardly calls for skill.
Yet many of the lunch and dinner tables around the nation are laden with unsatisfactory baked potatoes.
Some are undercooked, some lack a suitably crisp skin, some taste steamed and soggy instead of being dry and fluffy, and a substantial proportion arrive at the table encased in foil.


Taking a Tougher Route to College
THIS YEAR more than a half-million high school students are hard at work on some of the toughest courses they have ever taken.
The courses, sponsored by the College Board's Advanced Placement Program, offer college credit in return for college-level work in subjects from calculus to English literature to music theory.
But as Advanced Placement courses have spread across the nation, that benefit has been overwhelmed by the significance that students themselves attach to these classes.
To high school students, as self-conscious about their transcripts as ambitious executives are about their resumes, A.P. courses are considered a requirement for applying to the nation's top colleges.
Signing up for an A.P. course, in many schools, has become a self-imposed test, the ante for hanging out with the bright crowd.


At 50, Rights Panel Catches Up to Itself
THOUGH almost a century after his death Frederick Douglass's vision for an end to racial injustice still eludes the world, to celebrate the anniversary of the oldest racial relations agency in the United States, the words of Mr.
Douglass will be brought to Connecticut.
"Presenting Mr. Frederick Douglass: From Slave to Statesman," a one-person show by the actor Frederick Morsell, will be performed at 8 P.M. on Saturday at the Lincoln Theater at the University of Hartford, to begin the 50th-anniversary celebration of the Connecticut Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities.


Q and A
Primary Residence  Question: I have a friend who has a rent-stabilized apartment in the East 60's.
He uses it for 20 days a year and spends the rest of the time in Europe.
In the interim, the apartment is used by others.
He was recently told by the owner that to qualify for the apartment he must be a city resident and file a city tax return.
Is this true? . . .
Charles Tressan, Manhattan Answer: Most likely.
"For the landlord to be obligated to give the tenant a renewal of his lease, the apartment is supposed to be his principal residence," said David Smith, a Manhattan lawyer.


Emotional Baggage
IF packing were an Olympic event, I'd win a gold medal and be on the Wheaties box.
All I have to do is fetch my suitcase from the closet and I'm filled with a heady sense of power.
Days before I was due to leave on a recent trip to New York, I laid half my worldly goods on the bed, studied my bag as if it were a playing field and plotted how I would conquer by contents.
I like to be prepared for anything -- a freak snowstorm, a power outage, an invitation to a White House dinner.
My husband, Duke, a founding member of the "Forget Something Buy One There" school, thinks this is absurd.
"You pack like you're going to the interior of Antarctica," he complains.
Of course, this is the same man whose idea of a fun vacation is to get as far away as possible from all sources of contact lens solution and wing it.
And the same one who asked on our last trip to Mexico, "Honey, did you happen to bring a bicycle lock?" (Actually, I did.)


Sarah Callander, Peter Beckett
Sarah Alexandra Mary Callander, a daughter of the Countess of Lindsay and Maj.
Ronald Callander of Edinburgh, is engaged to be married to Peter Thomas Beckett, a son of Mrs.
John Armitage of Nantwich, Cheshire, England, and the late Thomas Beckett.
A February wedding is planned.
Ms.
Callander owns Burn Callander &amp; Company, public relations consultants in London.
She graduated from the University of Florence.
Her great-great grandfather Stanley Field was a founder of the Marshall Field department store chain.


Susan Miller, Steven Lloyd
Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Miller of Baltimore have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan McGaw Miller to Steven Wellington Lloyd, a son of Jack W. Lloyd of Lakeville, Conn., and the late Ann K. Lloyd.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Miller, 30, is the director of college counseling at the Boys' Latin School of Maryland in Baltimore.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father, now retired, was a teacher at the Gilman School in Baltimore.


Who Pays Bill? For Adventure?
To the Sports Editor:
In retrospect, it would appear that Mike Plant made some glaring goofs in his haste to get going, all of which Barbara Lloyd touched upon in her articles: untried hull, emergency radio beacon number registration foul-up, less than the best positioning system, etc.
This very likely shows his basic makeup: single-handed sailors just believe they "can make it."


No Fish Story: Many Boats Available
Penny Berryman of Dardanelle, Ark., a world-class bass fishing champion, spends 300 days a year with rod and reel in hand.
She caught her biggest fish, a bass nearly 15 pounds, during a pre-tournament practice session in Florida.
Berryman threw the fish back in the water in hopes of luring it again during the coming tournament.
But she never saw the potential prize bass again.


What's New At the U.N.? Ask Drew U.
THE WORTH of the United Nations may be debated at least as long as Saddam Hussein survives, but its popularity could be measured by Drew University's Semester on the United Nations.
For 30 years, Drew, in Madison, N.J., has offered a semester of formal study at United Nations headquarters in Manhattan; the semester is also open to non-Drew students.
Most of that time Drew has had the only regular on-site campus program there, with its own office across First Avenue from the General Assembly building and a veteran United Nations officer as assistant director.


Nina Troster, Andrew W. Hay
Nina Riggio Troster, a daughter of Dr.
Judith D. Toland of Avoca, Wis., and Vincent Riggio of New York, was married yesterday to Andrew Wellington Hay, the son of Nicholas R. T. Hay of Old Black Point, Conn., and the late Anne P. Hay.
The Rev.
Dr.
Ralph R. Warren Jr. performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of Bethesda-by-the-Sea in Palm Beach, Fla.
Mrs.
Hay, 32, is a student at Columbia University, Her father is an investor in New York.
Her mother is a professor of anthropology at Alverno College in Milwaukee.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Alaska Lodges
To the Editor: The article "Two Not-Too-Remote Lodges" (Sept. 6) describes the North Face Lodge in Denali National Park, Alaska.
This summer two friends and I, caught in a thunderstorm, sought help at this lodge, believing in a wilderness area help can be found at any port in a storm.
Wrong.
The lodge refused to call our lodge, offer us a ride, or even a cup of hot tea.
I would like to suggest to your readers a far superior and friendlier lodge close by: Kantishna Roadhouse, Box 130, Denali National Park, Alaska 99755; (907) 733-2535.
LUCY FREEMAN Chevy Chase, Md.
Wallace and Jerryne Cole, owners of the Denali National Park Wilderness Centers, respond:
We're sorry for the reception Ms.
Freeman described.
Although the lodge is a private facility, her experience is neither our way of showing hospitality nor of providing safe haven.
We cannot believe that if she and her friends were in serious trouble we would not have helped them.
We apologize for what she saw as a lack of intervention in their plight.


A Pattern of Increasing Student Segregation
The state of Connecticut, at the urging of Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., is about to confront one of the most divisive issues in American life, school integration.
How long delayed the debate has been, and how segregated the state's schools have become, is suggested by a single set of numbers.
Black children are more likely to attend predominantly white schools in Virginia, Georgia, Louisiana and Alabama, where they make up more than 30 percent of the enrollment, than in Connecticut, where they are less than 15 percent.


Foreign Affairs; Vance And Powell
Two men whose views must be respected stand in the way of lessening the bloodshed in Bosnia: Cyrus Vance, the heroic U.N. diplomat, who negotiates tirelessly for a peace settlement; and Gen.
Colin Powell, the brilliant warrior, who argues relentlessly against U.S. and allied military intervention.
Peace among Serbs, Croats and Muslims will almost certainly be impossible for generations, perhaps longer.
The hatreds surpass all reason.


Rape Becomes 'a Weapon of War'
Among all the stories of atrocity and violence in Bosnia and Herzogovina are many that tell of an old crime of war: rape.
The practice, investigators from the European Community have concluded, is chillingly systematic.
Last week, they estimated that 20,000 women had been raped as Bosnian Serb soldiers terrorized Muslim towns and villages.
Excerpts from the delegation's preliminary report follow.
RAPE and sexual abuse are neither nationality- nor gender-restricted issues.
Muslim women undoubtedly form the vast majority of rape victims.
However, there are also disturbing reports of rape of Croat and Serbian women as well as sexual abuse of men in detention camps.


7 SHOT TO DEATH IN CHICAGO SUBURB
The bodies of seven people who were apparently shot to death were found early today in a fast-food restaurant in this middle-class Chicago suburb.
The dead, six men and a woman, included several teen-age employees of the restaurant, Brown's Chicken and Pasta, other workers said.
But the police here refused to identify the victims or provide details about the case.


Business Diary/January 3-8
THE ECONOMY A Little Leftover Untidiness From President Bush


Elizabeth Lapp, Antonio Colombo
Elizabeth Terrett Lapp, a daughter of Earl Lapp of Bloomfield Hills, Mich., and Sarah Allison of Birmingham, Mich., was married on Friday to Antonio Colombo, a son of Lilly Demma Colombo of Naples and the late Pasquale Colombo.
The Rev.
Almus M. Thorp Jr. performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church Cranbrook in Bloomfield Hills.
Mrs.
Colombo, 38, was until recently a manager of public relations in New York for ENI, the Italian state-owned petroleum company in Rome.
She is a stepdaughter of Judith Lapp of Bloomfield Hills and Douglas Allison of Birmingham.


G.O.P. to Name Its Own to Board
DESPITE early suggestions of bipartisan cooperation, leaders of the Republican Party, which controls the Board of Legislators, plan to name two of their own to fill vacant seats on the Board at its meeting tomorrow.
The two seats, formerly held by Democrats, are in predominantly Democratic districts.
The 8 Republicans and 1 Conservative control the 17-member Board, but last fall the Board's chairman, Stephen P. Tenore, surprised political observers and encouraged Democrats by announcing he would consider candidates from both parties to fill the two vacancies.
The seats had been occupied by Sandra R. Galef of Ossining and Audrey G. Hochberg of Scarsdale, who were elected to the State Assembly in November.
After redistricting as a result of the 1990 census, the Eighth Legislative District, formerly represented by Ms.
Hochberg, was redrawn to include a 45 percent minority population.


Basic Pointers for Baking Potatoes
ONE of the simplest yet most satisfying of all vegetables is a baked potato.
Light the oven, put the potato or potatoes in and roast them till tender.
It hardly calls for skill.
Yet many of the lunch and dinner tables around the nation are laden with unsatisfactory baked potatoes.
Some are undercooked, some lack a suitably crisp skin, some taste steamed and soggy instead of being dry and fluffy, and a substantial proportion arrive at the table encased in foil.


Mutual Funds; Stock Twists and Turns of '92
Playing the stock market so far in the 90's has been like taking a ride on Coney Island's famous Cyclone roller-coaster.
Stock funds in 1990 suffered a 7.3 percent loss on average, only to attain a return of 30.7 percent in '91 and then skid last year to a gain of just 6 percent.
But even that small return didn't come until the end of the year.
The stock market was flat most of 1992, nervously waiting to learn who would next occupy the White House, and only bounded up in November and December on post-election euphoria.


The Onetime Barnum of the Met Museum
The most tumultuous chapter in the history of the Metropolitan Museum of Art was the 10 years from 1967 to 1977, when a troublemaker named Thomas Hoving headed this proud shrine to cultures of the past.
Fire flaring from his nostrils, Mr.
Hoving set out to make the Met "relevant," as he put it, to the 20th century.
He rebuilt and expanded the museum, broadened its public, shook up the curatorial staff, and merchandised the place with blockbuster shows and bustling shops.
What he accomplished, he writes in "Making the Mummies Dance," his new and hotly debated account of his tenure at the Met, was nothing less than "the most sweeping revolution in the history of art museums."
Whether one agrees with this modest assessment -- and many do -- the fact remains that Mr.
Hoving's days at the Met were a high-wire act one watched with wonder and trepidation.
Today, the former director, his arena much diminished, thinks of himself primarily as a writer, paying little heed to museums and their imbroglios.


Execution of a Child-Killer; First Hanging Since 1965 Likely to Be Last in U.S.
The hanging last week of a child-killer at the state prison in Walla Walla, Wash., proved not to be quite the torturous, prolonged execution that death penalty opponents had predicted.
Westley Allan Dodd died within two or three minutes after the trap door in the gallows was opened, and probably with little pain, according to a coroner's report.
But the country's first legal hanging in 28 years may still end up as the last in America, many experts believe.
Washington is the only state that still uses hanging as the primary method of execution.
Leaders of the state legislature, supported by Governor-elect Mike Lowry, say they will try to pass legislation to make lethal injection the sole means of execution.


The Middle Class Goes Public
DURING the last generation, the idea of middle-class people enrolling their children in urban public schools has become something akin to letting the youngsters play in traffic: too dangerous for any sensible parent to even consider.
So when people move to a new city, they are often greeted with the kind of advice that Susan Krinsky, who lives in New Orleans, heard time and again: "You cannot, of course, send your kids to the public schools. Here is a list of the acceptable private schools."


Bringing Up A TV-Wise Child
WITH THE average household taking in a daily 7.5 hours of television, most of it not made-for-children after-school specials, not even the town preacher has what it takes to fight the influence of today's home-screen menu for children.
Unless, according to a bevy of experts on children's viewing habits, the preacher makes the effort to supervise TV time, then helps youngsters put TV's information into some sort of context. 'Opens a New World'
"Sitting down to watch with your kids is a very good idea, and often opens a new world for parents when they actually see what their kids are watching," said John Murray, head of the department of human development and family studies at Kansas State University in Manhattan, Kan.
"It's easy to walk through the room and glance at the television without knowing what the program is."


Karen Pinsky, Steven Hurwitz
Mr. and Mrs.
Allan Pinsky of Philadelphia have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Hope Pinsky to Steven Allen Hurwitz, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ernest L. Hurwitz of New City, N.Y.
A February wedding is planned.
Ms.
Pinsky, 25, is an assistant account executive at Waring &amp; LaRosa, an advertising agency in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from George Washington University.
His father is the president of Propac Group Ltd. in Philadelphia, a graphics-design concern where Ms.
Pinsky's mother, Iris Pinsky, is the human-resources director.


RECORD BRIEFS
Rodgers and Hammerstein: 'The King and I'
Soloists; Hollywood Bowl Orchestra conducted by John Mauceri.
Philips 438 007; CD and cassette.


Conversations/Johnnetta B. Cole; A Scholar's Convictions Keep Her Pushing the Power of Words
JOHNNETTA B. COLE believes in the power of words at a time when many have given up on them.
A talker by trade and conviction, she is, as usual, aiming her words at several audiences at once -- the young black women she leads as president of Spelman College, other blacks, whites and anyone else she can entice to listen.
She is talking against a tide of public sentiment that says discussions about race are dangerous and futile, too nerve-racking for whites and too frustrating for blacks.
"How do we get under each others' skins?" she asked, warming up, her voice rising and her words racing.
"I hate to be ordinary, but I don't know anything other than education that has worked to create that something called human empathy. If I cannot through human intelligence come to say, 'My God, what must it be like to be in that condition?' what hope is there for the human race?"


Report Details Variations in Police Review Boards
As New York City prepares to institute an all-civilian review board to monitor complaints against the police, a report released yesterday by the New York Civil Liberties Union found that similar agencies throughout the country operate with significant barriers.
The group's report also found that despite budgetary, legal and political constraints, more and more cities are establishing separate civilian agencies to monitor police conduct.
Of the nation's 50 largest cities, 33 now have some form of civilian review procedures, and just over half were established in the last two and a half years, the report said.


Islanders' Quick Start Not Enough to Offset Dry Spell
It was Elvis night at Nassau Coliseum, and the home team got into the act: they rocked past Vancouver in the first period, rolled over in the second and emerged from the third with a tuneless 5-4 loss.
"When it's a close game like that it comes down to confidence, and we're struggling with that," said Islanders goalie Danny Lorenz, whose second start of the season came to an abrupt end when a bad pass created a turnover and a winning goal he didn't see until it was behind him.


Congress And Clinton: A Handshake If Not a Kiss
ALL over the Capitol, moonstruck Democrats are pledging allegiance to Bill Clinton and the legislation for which he stands.
Whatever that is.
For example, Senate aides say campaign finance legislation, a subject of more than casual interest to the lawmakers, simply awaits Mr.
Clinton's improvements.
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, told a subcommittee chairman last week that the committee would do what Mr.
Clinton wanted on health care.
The new chairman of the House Budget Committee, Representative Martin O. Sabo, said the committee would delay work on deficit reduction legislation until it hears from him.


Martin Barell, 71, Who Headed State Board of Regents, Is Dead
Martin C. Barell, who served as chancellor of New York State's Board of Regents from 1985 to 1992 and developed new programs amid controversy over education's failures and the effectiveness of his agency, died yesterday at his home in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 71.
He died of heart disease, his family said.


Conference Car On Amtrak Train
Amtrak has introduced a club conference car running twice daily between New York and Washington on the Metroliner express.
Facilities include a conference room for up to eight people with a private telephone and a marker board for presentations or notes.
The car also has two private booths for four passengers, with a table and sliding glass doors for privacy; two semi-private tables each seating two people, and 18 first-class seats.
The service started in the fall.
The conference room and the private booths for four, which are called club salons, must be reserved separately in advance.
The conference car is on the southbound Metroliner from Monday to Friday, which leaves New York at 6:50 A.M. and arrives in Washington at 9:35 A.M., and the northbound return leaving Washington at 4:30 P.M. and arriving in New York at 7:15 P.M.
The intermediate stops are Philadelphia and Baltimore.


Cracking Up
To the Editor:
In his review of "The Porcupine," by Julian Barnes (Dec. 13), Robert Stone writes that "F. Scott Fitzgerald says somewhere that a good novelist is one capable of holding two opposed ideas in his head at the same time." This is not quite accurate.
The passage Mr.
Stone refers to appears in Fitzgerald's confessional essay "The Crack-Up," the first of three such essays originally published in Esquire in 1936, and it reads as follows: "The test of a first-rate intelligence is the ability to hold two opposed ideas in the mind at the same time, and still retain the ability to function. One should, for example, be able to see that things are hopeless and yet be determined to make them otherwise."


In Translation, Too, the Thought Is Mighty
To the Editor:
In "A Different Face on the L.B.O. Front" (Wall Street, Dec. 27), Sandra Horbach of Forstmann, Little is quoted as saying of her foreign-language background: "I didn't want to just be a translator for someone else who was doing the thinking."


What a Difference a New Chef Makes
ON the cold, blustery winter nights, a crackling wood fire welcomes diners to Danfords Inn in Port Jefferson.
This snug country inn has a homey milieu somewhere between Early American and nautical.
The cozy, woody dining room is circled by flaming candles in attractive metal wall sconces.
Large windows provide panoramic views of the harbor, dock and ferryboats arriving from Bridgeport.


When a Lawyer and Client Are Possible Rivals
When Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.  denounced the economic and racial segregation of Connecticut's public school system in his State of the State speech last week, he did more than set a new legislative agenda for the General Assembly.
He also threw a curve ball right at the state's Attorney General, Richard Blumenthal, an ambitious Democrat who has made no secret of wanting to succeed Mr.
Weicker next year as governor.
As the state's chief civil lawyer, Mr.
Blumenthal has been defending Connecticut in a lawsuit filed by a group of public school students who say that racial isolation in the schools is a violation of the state's Constitution.
Mr.
Weicker, in a powerful speech full of moral thunderbolts, came down firmly on the side of the students and said the executive and legislative branches of government must take action.


Father Earth
About 15 miles west of Taos, a road with no name tapers off into the flat tableland beneath the Tres Orejas, three small volcanic peaks.
Soon the road disappears entirely.
All that remains is a thick carpet of snow and a set of coyote tracks pitching toward infinity.
But if you can envision an Alternative Republic here, you don't need a road.
Thus, a frigid winter morning recently found Michael Reynolds, a one-man Monkey Wrench gang of architecture, barreling through the snowdrifts, his Dodge pickup swerving every which way, destined for an unsightly pile of tires and dirt, his new Atlantis: downtown Star.


The Message Is the Medium
A young man decorated his jean jacket with a collection of more than 100 pins -- from an Armani A/X pin to a guard's badge -- lined in neat rows across the front and back.
Another man decorated the lapels of his leather jacket with a few tack pins, including the Marine Corps insignia.
Between these two extremes, a fad for wearing a collection of pins has emerged as a decoration for a basic leather, denim or varsity jacket.
The collections being worn can be made up of anything from military emblems to commercial giveaways to promotional pins for plays and films.
But some of the displays have themes: a young man's varsity jacket displayed a collection of 17 Hard Rock Cafe pins -- each from a different branch of the restaurant -- around the jacket's embroidered message.


She's Happy To Work The Runway
NAME: Tyra.
IDENTITY: A 19-year-old model with the happiest attitude on the runway.
HOME: Los Angeles.


Flying for Those In Wheelchairs
EILEEN FORD, the co-owner of Ford Models, bought a ticket to Paris on the Air France Concorde last fall while she was recovering from a broken heel.
She was told a narrow wheelchair designed for the Concorde aisle would enable her to get directly from the doorway of the plane into her seat in the first row.
When Mrs.
Ford got to Kennedy International Airport, the agent at check-in knew nothing of such a wheelchair, although Mrs.
Ford was given a conventional wheelchair to get to the aircraft door.
In a letter, she said the rest was a "demeaning experience."


Firefighter Charged With Arson At a Junkyard on Staten Island
A lieutenant in the New York City Fire Department was charged yesterday with second-degree arson after trying to set fire to a building at a junkyard on Staten Island Friday night, the police said yesterday.
The lieutenant, James V. Lafata, 49, was arrested as he sped away in a car from Edkins Junkyard at 2239 Richmond Terrace, in the Port Richmond section, the police said.
His arrest came after officers spotted him leaving the fire, driving erratically and heading in the wrong direction on a one-way street, the police said.


Schools Weigh Risks of Pesticides
ON a Monday morning in late fall, the faculty, staff and students arrived at Eastchester High School to find the floors slick, puddles of liquid on desks and in lockers and a noxious odor throughout the building.
In a short time, the nurse's office was filled with people complaining of headaches, respiratory problems, nausea, dizziness and skin rashes.
At 10:30 A.M. the school was closed, and the students were sent home.
The apparent culprit: too strong an application of pesticides, which had been used the day before to combat roaches.
Days of confusion and anxiety followed.
The community heard conflicting reports about the toxicity of the pesticides and the short- and long-term effects on health of the toxins.
Ultimately, Eastchester High School was closed for three weeks as the County Health Department, the Department of Environmental Conservation and an independent laboratory tried to assure school officials that pesticide residues posed no health risk to those entering the building.


Kitsch, Campiness and the Naked Truth
"Nude" is a female word in contemporary English; when the other gender lets its bloomers down, the word is usually modified: male nude.
So "The Naughty Nude," a cheerful, unpretentious, low-key show at Gallery 292 in SoHo (through Jan. 16), is a gaggle of coquettes, some in brassieres or petticoats, none in jockey shorts.
The operative term for these 19th- and 20th-century come-ons is indeed "naughty." Though there are warrantied works of art among these 60-odd photographs -- a 1950's Bill Brandt, Andre Kertesz's "Satiric Dancer" (who has mysteriously strayed in in a dress) -- the atmosphere tends to the kitsch, the camp and the cozy.
In French postcards, women with bare bottoms smile at themselves in mirrors; others strip down so they can enjoy a cigarette to the full.
A Ziegfeld girl named Gladys Glad poses in a shawl of gauze and lace that exposes everything the censor would allow.
The gallery claims that a group of turn-of-the-century nudes by Albert Penot are in the tradition of Delacroix and Degas -- but let the viewer be the judge.
If pornography is explicit and art is genteel, then these familiar types of ads and postcards and other staples of the titillation trade fall somewhere in between.


The Silent Treatment
MOST floor squeaks are caused by loose floorboards, subflooring or the joists underneath.
Shrinkage, a natural occurrence, is usually at fault, but sometimes poor materials or insufficient fastening is the cause.
Most squeaks are fairly easy to fix, once their precise location is found.
To pinpoint a squeaking spot, have someone bounce on the floor while you listen with your ear close to the floorboards.
If the floor is above an unfinished basement, examine it from below.
There, you can also observe the joists to see if they flex or if the subflooring rubs against them.
Use a flashlight, even if the basement is well lighted.
Mark areas with chalk or tape where the squeaks occur.


Nicholas Mayall, 86, Astronomer
Nicholas U. Mayall, an astronomer and former director of the Kitt Peak Observatory in Arizona, died Tuesday at his home in Tucson.
He was 86.
He died of complications of diabetes, his family said.


New Look for the Stock Tables
The New York Times today introduces new stock market listings for the Business section on Sundays, providing more information than before in a format designed to make the tables easier to understand and easier to read.
The tables, for the New York and American Stock Exchanges and for the Nasdaq over-the-counter market, use underlining to denote stocks that trade in extraordinary volume, and boldfacing for stocks that show large changes in price.


Tumbling School Bus Makes Crash Landing on Garage


The Queen Of the Night: A Double Life
Two weeks ago, I wrote about a fragrant night-blooming cereus that blossoms its head off for Dr.
Kate Bernstein, a molecular biologist and urban gardener who has propagated countless plants from a cutting that she got from the Caribbean 35 years ago.
Dr.
Bernstein has believed all these years that her pet Queen of the Night, as night-blooming cereus is called, was Selenicereus grandiflorus (pictured at far right).
It turns out that Dr.
Bernstein's plant is no such thing.


Topics of The Times; Road Coffee
Trying to drive a car while balancing a cup of hot coffee courts at least the minor disaster of an uncomfortable spill -- and possibly much worse.
But more and more Americans indulge, especially on cold winter mornings, as gas stations and convenience stores invite customers to serve themselves from fresh-brewed pots.
How to make the habit safer?
The market has begun to respond.
Dashboard holders secure the cup, but the coffee still sloshes out.
Cup producers have therefore been developing plastic lids that permit sipping but prevent spilling.
Some simply score a little "V" in the plastic; you tear it out to create a hole.
But too large a hole doesn't prevent splashing; too small a hole allows only a trickle.


'Alive': In the Making, as in Life, a Tale of Survival
As the director Frank Marshall cruised north toward Los Angeles in August 1991, his attention was abruptly commanded by a red pickup truck that swerved recklessly in front of his BMW.
Its bumper sticker bore the legend "Rugby Players Eat Their Dead."
Jeffrey Katzenberg, the chairman of Disney Studios, had just sent Mr.
Marshall the script of "Alive," based on the true story of a Uruguayan rugby team whose plane crashed in the Andes in 1972.
Sixteen members of the team, some of them teen-agers, survived 72 days in the mountains by eating those who had died.


Doesn't a Pardon Still Imply Admission of Guilt?; As Shakespeare Saw It
To the Editor:
After having read your Dec. 25 news report and editorial on President Bush's pardons of those associated with the Iran-contra scandal, I found pardoner defined in Samuel Johnson's Dictionary (sixth edition, 1785) as "one who forgives another." He typically gives an example of its use by quoting Shakespeare:


Redmen Are Beginning to Be Believers
After their most impressive victory this season, the St.
John's Redmen look at where they've been, and they look at where they have to go, and the view is suddenly not so bad.
"What is there to be scared of now?" St.
John's point guard David Cain said after the 85-77 victory over Pittsburgh at Alumni Hall last night.
"We took shots from the best. We can relax now."


Carol Lovell, C. G. Carmody
Carol Ann Lovell, a director in corporate banking at the First National Bank of Boston, was married in Boston yesterday to Christopher Guerin Carmody, a financial consultant with Merrill Lynch in Wellesley, Mass.
The Rev.
Rachelle E. Birnbaum performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church.
Ms.
Lovell, 37, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Denison University and received a master's degree in public and private management from Yale University.
She is the daughter of Ann S. Lovell of Rochester and the late Dr.
George R. Lovell.
Her father was a cardiologist and a physician in internal medicine in Rochester.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Thursday
December producer prices, percent change
-0.2
0.1
Dec. retail sales, percent change
0.4
0.7
Friday
Dec. business inventories, percent change
-0.3
0.0
Dec. consumer prices, percent change
0.2
0.2
Dec. trade deficit, in billions
-$7.03
-$8
Dec. industrial production, percent change
0.4
0.4
Dec. capacity utilization, in percent
78.9
79.2
Monday: Trial scheduled to begin in lawsuit by Ypsilanti Township and Washtenaw County challenging the General Motors Corporation's decision to close its Willow Run assembly plant *
New York state judge says he will rule whether former Secretary of Defense Clark Clifford is fit to stand trial  Wednesday: Automakers announce early January auto sales *
Members of U.A.W.
Local 1853 vote on keeping current innovative contract with the Saturn Corporation or renegotiating a traditional U.A.W. pact.


Coming Soon: Fingerprints at Many Fingertips
SAY the word "fingerprint" and scenes out of Dragnet begin to flicker: A burly cop rolling a suspect's fingers in messy black ink.
Detectives with magnifying glasses poring over smudged file cards.
But think again.


The Year of the Woman? Not in Movies.
Wrapping up the Year of the Woman, political observers found it chic to say it was only a slogan after all, a clever phrase somebody else invented.
Did the pundits have a choice?
To say anything else would be to claim that 1993 and every year after is Not the Year of the Woman.
But in Hollywood, where the belief in cosmetic solutions runs deep, paying lip service to women persists.
Even while Oscar voters are scrambling to find five roles meaty enough to fill the best actress category, this year's Academy Awards show is being prepared.
Its theme: "Oscar Celebrates Women and the Movies."


Ditka Dishes the Jokes
Based on his performance during his final television program as coach of the Chicago Bears, MIKE DITKA seems to have his eye on a career as a standup comic after being fired by the team.


Hold the Hunk Stuff, The Man's an Actor First
Liam Neeson was letting a bit of his subliminated Irishness show, worrying like Yeats about his stony epitaph.
"Is this what's going to be on my tombstone? 'He dated Julia Roberts and Barbra Streisand.' "
The actor, for all his careful study of Hollywood and its narcissistic folkways, was railing pleasantly at how his social and personal life gets misrepresented in what for the last five years has been his hometown, the Hollywood Hills, an ocean and a culture away from Ballymena, County Antrim, the small rural town where he was born in Northern Ireland.


Speaking In Jeans
"WE represent a jeans cult." So reads a T-shirt at the Original Levi's Store, across Lexington Avenue from Bloomingdale's.
Open almost a month, this 6,300-square-foot cathedral of casual wear vaunts no fewer than 12 walls of denim.
On a warm winter Wednesday, the new loose-fit Levi's ad campaign boomed from a nine-panel video screen and Levi Strauss &amp; Company's chief executive posed for a photo shoot, while the chic young staff gently prodded denim-dazed customers.
"You look confused," a salesclerk said sweetly. "May I help you?"


U.S. Helped Defeat Serbian Challenger
To the Editor:
We shouldn't be surprised at Milan Panic's defeat in the Yugoslav elections, as you seem to be in "No Easy Out for Bosnia" (editorial, Dec. 23).
Nor should we blame the voters for it.
In a way, despite Washington's alleged support of his candidacy, we have helped his defeat.


Alexis Robinson, John W. Waller 3d
Mrs.
George E. Summers of Palm Beach, Fla., has announced February wedding plans for her daughter Alexis Pearce Robinson and John Wickliffe Waller 3d, a son of Mr.
Waller Jr. of Old Town, Va., and the late Millicent H. Waller.
Miss Robinson, 26, is an advertising coordinator at Sotheby's International Realty, the real-estate division of Sotheby's in New York.
She is also a daughter of Caldwell C. Robinson of Golden Beach, Fla., and a stepdaughter of Mr.
Summers of Palm Beach.


Antje Buelte, Edward Dolido
Mr. and Mrs.
Horst E. Buelte of Locust Valley, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Antje A. Buelte, to Edward P. Dolido, the son of John Dolido of Waynesville, Mo., and Eleanor Dolido of Northbrook, Ill.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Buelte, 29, is an associate at the New York law firm of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby &amp; MacRae.
A graduate of Bryn Mawr College, she received a law degree from Boston University, as did her fiance.
Her father is the executive vice president of Thyssen Inc., a subsidiary of the Thyssen Industrial Group, in New York.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Education Life/Section 12  A special report on the reformation of college core curriculums.
Also:
*The middle class goes public.
*Hollywood's pet: the schoolteacher.
*Nuclear programs in a meltdown.
*The quiz: Getting from here to there.


Bosnian to Skip Talks
Seeking to protest the killing of a deputy prime minister, Bosnia's President said he would not take part in peace talks that are about to resume in Geneva.
His boycott, though temporary, makes it clear that the slaying will slow efforts to negotiate an end to the war.
Article, page 8.


Artists Otherworldly And Up-and-Coming
THE works of two groups of Connecticut artists may currently be seen at the Mattatuck Museum in Waterbury and at Real Art Ways in Hartford.
But the distance between the two groups is more than the miles between the two cities.
Though the theme at the Mattatuck Museum, "New Worlds," is open to wide interpretation, the show's general cast is unearthly.
But it's not to say unworldly, for most of the 10 participants have been affected by Surrealism and none more so than William Copley, the artist who years ago drained his name of vowels to make it CPLY and who in his work gives the impression of perpetually being at a party in Paris in the 1920's.
One example is the painting of a Victrola beside a half-empty glass of wine and nestling in the machine's trumpet a sketch of a couple.


Bills Use Momentum Instead of Miracle
There was no 32-point rally for the Bills this afternoon.
They didn't need one.
They didn't even need 32 points to beat the Steelers.
Using a deliberate, methodical approach, the Bills dismantled the Steelers, 24-3, at Three Rivers Stadium and advanced to the American Football Conference championship game.
"We didn't have to do anything crazy on offense," said Bills quarterback Frank Reich, who threw for four touchdowns in Buffalo's incredible comeback victory over the Oilers last weekend.
"We didn't have to start bombing away."


POSTINGS: Architects Now On Board; Huge L.I. Federal Court Complex
With the choice of Richard Meier and Michael Harris Spector as architects of the $195 million Federal Building and United States Courthouse planned in Islip, L.I., the Government has shown that it is not looking for a neo-classical temple with fluted columns and pediments.
Mr.
Meier, in particular, is widely known for the spare serenity of his designs: crisp, cool, bright and uncluttered.
"This will be a contemporary, modern court complex," Mr.
Spector declared.
"That's what we presented as our philosophy and what's been accepted by the General Services Administration and the judiciary."


FINANCIAL SCANDAL IS SHAKING KUWAIT
A wave of financial scandals has angered Kuwaitis and brought legislative attempts to take control of public money from the ruling Sabah family.
In the worst scandal, $5 billion is said to have been taken illegally from a publicly held account or lost by mismanagement, according to legislators, prosecutors and economists.
Three former officials of the fund, including two members of the Sabah family, are under investigation.


London Pleasures, and They're Free
WHILE it has become a recurrent lament among travelers that London is just too expensive these days, it is also true that there are still plenty of free things a visitor can do.
No one charges tourists, for example, to pose with the horses and mounted soldiers outside the Horse Guards in Whitehall, or to stand at the iron gates to Downing Street and crane for a view of the bobby standing beside the lacquered black door to No. 10, 50 yards away.
There is also no fee for being swarmed by pigeons while standing in Trafalgar Square, even though some people actually buy cupfuls of pigeon feed, at 45 cents a piece, to attract the birds.
The frugal will be encouraged to learn that veteran observers of this curious ritual have discovered that the pigeons will land on any stationary tourists, whether they have bought the food or not.


Flying to Greece
To The Editor: In your travel articles on Greece ("Echoes Through the Ages in Greece," Oct. 25) no mention was made of the only carrier that flies direct to Greece from Kennedy Airport: Olympic. (Others go through London, Paris, Rome or Frankfurt.) The unsuspecting traveler may book this flight and live to regret it, as we did.
After the push and shove of getting aboard and fighting for a seat -- there was a disregard for seat reservations by the airline as well as by the passengers -- , passengers wandered the aisles during takeoff and landing.
Hand luggage was stuffed everywhere.
The flight attendants gathered in the galley in the nonsmoking section and smoked during the 10-hour flight.
Worst of all, the toilets were left unattended and uncleaned.


PROBLEMS WE THOUGHT WE SOLVED
For those of us who work on health issues in the developing world, it is a reminder of how important our work is and how relevant to the needs of American children.
Worldwide, more than three million children die every year from diarrhea, most of them in countries where the annual per capita spending on all health care is less than the price of that one prescription for Pedialyte.


Touch of Aristocracy In European Events
NORTH America is democratic, but Europe has strong aristocratic leanings.
That is not, as it might appear, an obvious statement about society, but an assessment of bridge tournaments on opposite sides of the Atlantic.
American tournaments are almost invariably democratic, in the sense that anyone can play, subject perhaps to some master-point requirements.
The Europeans often have aristocratic tournaments, in which the best players are invited by a selection committee and the field is relatively small.


Renie Costello, Henri Schelfhout
Irene Siobhan Costello, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. Costello of Plandome, L.I., was married yesterday to Paul Henri Schelfhout, a son of Eva Schelfhout of Porches, Portugal, and the late Paulus Schelfhout.
Msgr.
Lawrence D. Costello performed the ceremony at Corpus Christi Church in Mineola, L.I.
Mrs.
Schelfhout, 26, is known as Renie.
She and her husband graduated from Franklin College in Lugano, Switzerland.
Her father is the founder and managing partner of Costello &amp; Shea, the New York law firm.


Bosnian Muslims Criticize U.N. Over Official's Killing
As crowds of angry Bosnians demonstrated in the streets, leaders of the Muslim-led Bosnian Government accused United Nations military commanders today of failing to protect them from Serbian attacks, including the killing on Friday of one of Bosnia's deputy prime ministers.
The demonstrations came as a group of hard-line political and military leaders who control the Sarajevo Government announced that they had ordered the Bosnian delegation at the peace negotiations in Geneva to boycott the next round of discussions on Sunday.


U.S. Attacking New Strain of Whiteflies
THE Agricultural Research Service certainly knows how to get your attention.
A recent issue of its magazine, Agricultural Research, has a full-color cover showing James Duffus, a plant pathologist, wading through a California cotton field and raising up a flurry of whiteflies.
The cover illustrates concern for a multimillion-dollar problem: whiteflies are ruining the nation's crops as well as the home gardener's joys.
Through the magazine, the research division of the United States Department of Agriculture describes its research projects, usually devoting several pages to each project.
But this particular issue has a dozen pages about the whitefly research.


Nuclear Programs In a Meltdown
NUCLEAR power has grabbed headlines lately because of the premature retirement of several reactors, but something else in the industry is quietly withering away: its educational infrastructure.
Nationwide, only about 1,000 college juniors and seniors are enrolled in nuclear engineering degree programs, down from a peak of about 2,100 in the late 1970's, according to Energy Department surveys.
Enrollment in master's programs stands at about 800, down from 1,400 in the mid-70's.


MIDNIGHT SWIM
Any suit shows up against a golden tan in sunlight.
But in the shadows of moonglow, you want to be noticed.


A Week's Worth of Budget Dining
THERE is much good food to be enjoyed in London these days, but the matter of eating well becomes a bit dicier when you look for satisfying restaurant meals for $25 a person or less.
Traditionally this has meant sweet and sour pork, or curry -- sometimes delicious, sometimes dreadful.
Democratically priced London restaurants are better now, but more often than not they still mean ethnic food -- a Tunisian tajine, Jamaican jerked pork or an Indonesian satay.
But admirable examples of that real minority cuisine -- British -- can be found.


Jennifer Headley, R. K. Herrington
Mr. and Mrs.
Frank M. Headley Jr. of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Lynn Headley to Richard Kirby Herrington, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William K. Herrington of Pittsburgh.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Headley, 24, is an assistant treasurer of Chase Manhattan Bank in White Plains.
She and her fiance both graduated from Denison University.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Bertine, Hufnagel, Headley &amp; Zeltner, in Bronxville, N.Y.
Her mother, Carol Headley, is a teacher at the Greenville Church Nursery School in Scarsdale.


Westin Begins One-Rate Policy
When travelers call Westin Hotels and Resorts to reserve a room they are now quoted only a single rate applicable to that specific date.
The new program at the group's 49 hotels in North America -- called Westin's Best Rate -- has been introduced to make rates easy to understand, sell and book, said Sue Brush, a company vice president.


On Ice


'Falsettos' on Screen?
James Lapine, the director of "Falsettos," the Broadway musical, is close to signing a deal to direct "Falsettos," the movie.
"I'm sort of hesitant to admit to it, but it's definitely under discussion," Mr.
Lapine, right, said.
The film would be a joint production by Disney's Touchtone Pictures and Interscope Films, and produced by Neil Meron and Craig Zadan.


Rostenkowski Inquiry Widens, Lawyers Say
Eight months after Federal prosecutors subpoenaed Representative Dan Rostenkowski's expense records as part of their inquiry into the House post office, the investigation has steadily grown into a broad review of the Congressman's public and private finances, lawyers involved in the case said today.
The grand jury investigation involving Mr.
Rostenkowski, the Illinois Democrat who is chairman of the House tax-writing committee, began in May, focusing on his purchase of stamps from the House post office.


Teen-Age Gambling at Schools and Tracks
SURROUNDED by a group of friends, a 17-year-old high school student from North Arlington sat in the grandstand at the Meadowlands race track, studying his racing program and spitting tobacco juice into a cup on the floor between his feet.
It was nearly post time for the third race on a rainy Wednesday evening.
The boy and his friends had already placed their bets.
"The last time I was here, one of the track people asked me how old I was," he said.
"I didn't even lie. I told her I was 17. She told me, 'Next time, bring ID.' Then she let me bet anyway."


Businesses Join Hospitals to Curb Medical Costs
SQUEEZED by escalating health care costs and growing pressure from the business community to curb costly expansion programs, Connecticut's hospitals are embarking on a wave of cooperative ventures with one another and with the businesses that help pay their bills.
This new mood of cooperation comes after years of intense competition among hospitals across the state, each trying to offer new services and lure patients from the other, and after frequent clashes between hospital and business leaders over the need for rising hospital budgets and expensive building projects.


F. Clifton White, 74, Long a Republican Strategist
F.
Clifton White, who conceived and masterminded the conservative dominance of the 1964 Republican National Convention and its nomination of Barry Goldwater for President, died yesterday at his home in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 74.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Doesn't a Pardon Still Imply Admission of Guilt?
To the Editor:
President Bush's Christmas Eve pardons of key Iran-contra figures triggered outrage and dismay among many Americans, but elation among those pardoned and their supporters.
On television, former Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger registered relief with near glee, reiterating his insistence that he is "innocent."
This flies in the face of what I was led to believe about the requirements surrounding a Presidential pardon.


Margaret O'Brien, William Greason
Margaret Mary O'Brien, a vice president of Lehman Brothers, the investment bank, and William Anthony Greason, an associate at the law firm of Chadbourne &amp; Parke, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Thomas F. Griffiths performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady Queen of Martyrs Church in Forest Hills, Queens.
Mrs.
Greason, 32, graduated from Fairfield University and received a law degree from Georgetown University, where she was an editor of the law review.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael C. O'Brien Jr. of Garden City, L.I.
Her father is the president of M. C. O'Brien Inc., a commercial real-estate concern in Brooklyn.


Q and A
'Leasing' Cars in Europe
Q.
Can you provide information about how one can buy a European car in Europe and resell it to the manufacturer? -- Robert E. Gomperts, Richmond


U.S. Helped Defeat Serbian Challenger; Croatian Anti-Semitism
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 18 article about President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia speaks of his efforts to foster nationalism in his people to justify annexation of Bosnian territory.
Mr.
Tudjman has also expressed blatantly anti-Semitic views and tried to whitewash the Nazi puppet state of Croatia, which participated eagerly in Hitler's policy of killing Jews.


Can Botstein Convince The Young?
With typical irony, the composer Hector Berlioz wrote that "for all the obvious shortcomings of a performance the conductor is not blamed." Except, perhaps, when the conductor is also a college president, whirlwind polymath and minor celebrity.
Leon Botstein, in his first three concerts as music director of the American Symphony Orchestra, fashioned programs on interdisciplinary themes, largely devoid of familiar music; his musicianship did not quite live up to the richness of his aims, and blame naturally fell on him.
Shortcomings were easily found in the first half of the season.
The American Symphony does not have a sumptuous tone, and the conductor is no virtuoso.
Performances sometimes lost momentum, and power was restored in crude climaxes.
Mr.
Botstein distracted himself and the audience with breathless, overstated pronouncements between works: "There's really something very
dangerous
about this piece," he said several times. He offered too many ideas at once. The great German conductor Hans von Bulow, who advised colleagues to keep the score in the head, not the head in the score, might have made an exception here.


Officer Charged in Thefts
A New York City police officer has been charged with holding up drug dealers for cocaine and cash in a string of robberies throughout the city over the last several months, police officials said.
The officer, Fabian Lorenzo, who worked out of the Ninth Precinct in the East Village, was arrested on Thursday along with three other men and charged with the crimes, in which the police said Officer Lorenzo often used his gun and shield to gain entry into a drug merchant's home or dealing base.
Chief Robert J. Beatty, head of the department's Internal Affairs Bureau, said that Officer Lorenzo, 24, who lives in Manhattan, was immediately suspended.


The Cousins Who Would Be King
In recent years Edsel B. Ford 2d has occasionally muttered in the presence of co-workers at the Ford Motor Company that "my family owns the place and I'm not even a vice president."
Those who hear this say his words sound less bitter than wry, or even half joking.
No one is laughing, though.
When Mr.
Ford last expressed vexation with the progress of his career, and that of his cousin William Clay Ford Jr., the company narrowly avoided a nasty spat between the Ford family and Donald E. Petersen, the chief executive.
Even so, Mr.
Petersen retired early, tension with the Fords contributing to his exit.
No one wants to risk a replay, because even though the Ford family doesn't own the whole place, it owns enough of it that it cannot be ignored.


Special rates, vouchers and other frills at London hotels
For travelers who choose not to book their hotels as part of a package or through their airline, a number of London hotels are currently offering special deals, subject to availability.
These deals should be purchased before leaving the United States.
Here are some examples.
Five members of the Rank Hotels group are offering a Pounds Equals Dollars Plus program until March 31.
Prices for single or twin rooms, including tax, are $145 at the Royal Garden, Kensington High Street; $180 at the Athenaeum, Piccadilly; $125 at the Royal Lancaster, Lancaster Terrace; $116 at the Gloucester, 4 Harrington Gardens, South Kensington, and $105 at the White House, Albany Street, near Regent's Park.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
125.40
124.83
127.05
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6475
1.6207
1.5850
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2823
1.2711
1.1546
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5415
1.5105
1.7885
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$329.25
$333.00
$356.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Barney's Pals Send Greetings
Two debuts last week from the dawn of the dinosaurs:
University of Chicago scientists announced that they had unearthed in Argentina the 225-year-old remains of the most primitive dinosaur, a dog-sized predator.
The 40-inch-long beast, called Eoraptor, appeared to be just a few evolutionary steps removed from a still undiscovered creature thought to be the ancestor of all dinosaurs.


Economic Pulse/New York, New Jersey, Connecticut; Though End of Recession Is Here, Prosperity Isn't Even Near Corner
Amid strong signs that the recession was lifting its grip elsewhere in the nation, Martin A. Gardner braced against a cold wind here the other day, waited for his train to Manhattan and described the ordeal of being out of work for 20 months.
"Maybe, if I were a carpenter, I'd go to Florida," said Mr.
Gardner, 55 years old, who has a doctorate in communications and 30 years' experience in advertising, sales and management.
So far, he has sent 300 resumes to New York area companies.


No Headline
This is the first time a President is younger than Mick Jagger.
The Beatles are older than Bill and Hillary Clinton.
When you recognize that, you say to yourself that this is going to bring a completely different judgment to all the issues that are going to face the arts and com munications. -- PETER GUBER, chairman of Sony Pictures Entertainment.  [ 1:3. ]


Randy Lewis, Gregory Berzolla
Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey B. Lewis of Harrison, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Randy Barbara Lewis to Gregory Renato Berzolla, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Renato Berzolla of Riverside, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lewis, 27 years old, is a management consultant in the financial institutions and services group of A. T. Kearney, a management consulting firm in New York.
She graduated from Wellesley College.
She and her fiance both received M.B.A. degrees from Dartmouth University.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 10, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The death of a woman leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
2
50
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
5
THE WASTE LANDS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) The third volume of "The Dark Tower," a series about time travel and a heroic quest.
4
11
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (Pocket, $4.99.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
5
39
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
6
8
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) An American probes a mysterious balloon accident in the Alps.
7
10
HIDEAWAY, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is haunted by visions of evil.
8
10
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $9.95.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
9
16
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a family that operates a large industrialized farm in the Midwest.
10
3
FUGITIVE NIGHTS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Bantam, $6.50.) Three people on the trail of a dangerous fugitive in Palm Springs.
11
2
MCNALLY'S SECRET, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A sleuth's pursuit of a stolen block of priceless stamps uncovers scandals on Florida's Gold Coast.
12
14
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $6.99.) The sequel to "Gone With the Wind."
13
25
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
14
7
ANGEL, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A young woman enjoys a torrid romance while visiting a Texas ranch in the late 19th century.
15
2
COMPELLING EVIDENCE, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A woman charged with murdering her husband is defended by her former lover.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
7
DIANA: Her True Story, by Andrew Morton. (Pocket, $5.99.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
3
2
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President-elect discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save the earth.
4
10
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world.
5 *
13
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
6
479
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
7
72
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
8
10
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Vintage, $11.) Essays about the recent political and cultural scene.
9
86
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
10
9
SEX, ART, AND AMERICAN CULTURE, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $13.) Twenty-one essays on contemporary subjects, ranging from Madonna to Anita Hill to date rape.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
74
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
16
THE INDISPENSABLE CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of previously published cartoons.
3
9
COWS OF OUR PLANET, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $8.95.) "Far Side" cartoons.
4
5
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1993. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
5
26
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


The Waterfront
To the Editor:
Your article on Nov. 15 headed "Charting the Future of the Waterfront" described the efforts of the Department of City Planning to "reclaim" land in each of the five boroughs through its Comprehensive Waterfront Plan.
This plan largely relies on a proposal to rezone, from manufacturing to residential, about two dozen waterfront sites.


A Nation of Readers Dumps Its Writers
In the Summer of 1990, barely six months after the Berlin wall fell, residents of Kommlitz, a small village near Leipzig in southeastern Germany, made a bizarre discovery.
Their local garbage dump had been turned into a mountain of books.
It looked as if a city library had been turned upside down and had its contents shaken out.
It was a curiously arbitrary collection.
Communist tracts were discarded along with German classics; Lenin's "State and Revolution" lay next to the works of Tolstoy.
But most of the books were by East Germany's most celebrated fiction writers: Christa Wolf, Stefan Heym, Hermann Kant and Anna Seghers.
As it turned out, the main East German book distributor had simply dumped some 10 million volumes, emptying its warehouse to make way for a soft-drink repository.
After people had picked through the books, taking what they wanted, the rest were buried in a huge pit.


Reduced Dollars, Reduced Hope
What does it take to rescue a person from the despair and frustration of unemployment, homelessness, drug addiction or mental illness?
Are these problems so overwhelming that their victims are condemned to spend the rest of their days in misery?
Voices from every corner of New York City -- from people like Patricia K. of Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, who has battled depression, and Simon Rutledge of the South Bronx, who has AIDS -- would insist that the answer is no.
These New Yorkers would describe how their lives have been transformed by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Oil Spill Threatens Shetlands Coast


Beyond Start II: A New Level of Instability
A few months ago the Russian delegation negotiating a strategic arms treaty with the Americans in Geneva had to return to Moscow for consultations.
They had a problem, though -- no hard currency.
The Russian airline Aeroflot refused to sell them seats, so they languished in Switzerland until they could round up enough cash.
Arms control negotiators just can't get any respect anymore.
And no wonder.
In negotiating arms control, it seems that when you really need an agreement you can't get it and when you finally get an agreement you almost don't need it.
During the height of the cold war, when Washington and Moscow each had their fingers on the nuclear trigger, the arms control treaties that were hammered out only reduced tensions marginally, because neither side trusted the other to do more.


Would You Believe 40 Years of Corvettes?
TALK about feeling old.
It was the summer of '53 and I was fresh out of high school when I first saw one of those wonderful things.
I was driving a wholesaler's truck, delivering cigarettes and candy to stores, and I spotted it on the sidewalk, on display in front of a Chevy dealer on Hanover Avenue in Allentown, Pa.


Cowher Still Stands By His Man in Loss
The lockers of Steeler quarterbacks Neil O'Donnell and Bubby Brister are side by side in the Pittsburgh locker room.
From there, the two can share their thoughts and eavesdrop on each other's interviews.
It was from this spot that O'Donnell, seated on his stool with his back slightly turned to Brister, heard Brister say that he wanted to move on next season, because it is obvious that the Steelers now belong to O'Donnell.


Back on the Road Again in the N.B.A.
A FAMILY MAN, Bennett Salvatore would have loved to have spent his 43d birthday yesterday with his wife and four children at their home in Stamford.
Instead, Mr.
Salvatore spent it in Sacramento, Calif.
But then Mr.
Salvatore cannot recall when he last celebrated a birthday at home.
Mr.
Salvatore leads a peripatetic existence as a National Basketball Association referee, traveling as many as 150,000 miles a year.
And since the season runs from early October until the playoffs end in June, he has missed many holidays and birthdays.
"Our social life suffers during the N.B.A. season," he said, "but we're still a very close family."


Cowboys and Eagles: Rivals to the End
The rubber match between the Philadelphia Eagles (12-5) and the Dallas Cowboys (13-3) today in Texas Stadium offers much more than bragging rights: The winner advances to the N.F.C. championship game and the loser goes home and will no doubt hang his head in dread.
Let the game -- and the woofing -- begin.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY Steven Extends Streak as Penguins Win  Kevin Steven's 33d goal of the season at 15:27 of the third period broke a tie and gave the Pittsburgh Penguins a 3-2 victory over Calgary yesterday in Pittsburgh.
Stevens extended his scoring streak to nine games.
The victory kept the Penguins unbeaten (26-0-3) when leading after two periods and improved their record to 18-3-3 at home. (AP) Whalers 4, Nordiques 2: Hartford finally got goalie Frank Pietrangelo a victory and ended its six-game winless streak with the triumph in Hartford.
The victory ended six weeks of frustration for Pietrangelo, who had gone 0-6-1 since a Nov. 28 victory against Boston despite some strong performances. (AP) SKIING Tomba Gets His First Victory of Season  Alberto Tomba used a powerful second run in a slalom yesterday in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany, to get his first World Cup victory of the season.
The victory, in the fifth slalom of the season, gave Tomba 100 points and brought his season total to 472 points, He overtook a four-time World Cup champion, Marc Girardelli of Luxembourg, who finished seventh and dropped to second in the standing, gaining 36 points for a total of 423.
Kjetil Andre Aamodt of Norway and Thomas Stangassinger of Austria tied for second place, both clocking 1 minute 39.19 seconds.
Tomba had a winning total time of 1 minute 38.65 seconds for the two runs. (AP)
German Surprises the Field: Regina Hausl, a 19-year-old German, produced the biggest surprise of the women's World Cup season by winning the downhill yesterday in Cortina d'Ampezzo, Italy.
Hausl, whose previous best in a World Cup downhill was fourth place at Grindelwald last year, beat Heidi Zurbriggen of Switzerland by 0.15 seconds and her German teammate Katja Seizinger by 0.18 seconds.
Carole Merle of France placed fourth, ahead of another surprising finisher, Stefanie Schuster of Austria who started with No. 42.
Hausl was so astonished by her victory that she cried as her name was flashed as the winner on the board at the finish line.
Anita Wachter of Austria strengthened her lead in the overall cup standing, finishing seventh and building her total to 451 points after 11 races. (AP) TENNIS Becker and Ivanisevic Advance to Final  Third-seeded Boris Becker beat top-seeded Stefan Edberg, 6-4, 6-4, in the Qatar Open yesterday in Doha.
Becker reached his first outdoor final in more than a year.
In today's title match, he will play Goran Ivanisevic who beat Andrei Cherkasov, 6-2, 6-2.
Becker, who now has a 21-10 career record against Edberg, went through 1992 without getting through the semifinals outdoors. (AP)
Martinez Struggles but Wins: Top-seeded Conchita Martinez survived a first-set scare yesterday and went on to beat the Australian qualifier Michelle Jaggard-Lai in the semifinals of the Australian Women's Hardcourt championship in Brisbane.
Martinez had to stave off four set points in the first set before beating unseeded Jaggard-Lai, 7-5, 6-3, at the Milton Tennis Center.
The Spaniard is ranked eighth in the world to Jaggard-Lai's 158th, but was pushed to the limit as her opponent led, 5-3, 40-0, in the first set and, 2-0, in the second.
Martinez will face 17-year-old Magdalena Maleeva of Bulgaria in today's final.
Second-seeded Maleeva, hampered by a slight thigh strain, struggled past 13th-seeded Shi-Ting Wang of Taipei, 6-4, 7-5, in the other semifinal. (AP) SPEED SKATING  Jansen and Blair Defend Titles  Dan Jansen and Bonnie Blair each won two races yesterday to successfully defend their titles at the National Long Track Sprint championships in Butte, Mont.
By doing so, they earned spots on the United States sprint teams that will compete in the 1993 World Speed Skating Championships.
The women's events will be held Feb. 6-7 in Berlin, and the men's are scheduled for Feb. 13-14 in Hamar, Norway.
Jansen, the world record holder in the 500-meter sprint, won that race yesterday at the United States High Altitude Sports Center in 37.61 seconds and also won the 1,000 in 1:16.28.
Blair, a three-time Olympic gold-medal winner and the world record holder in the 500, swept both women's races after doing the same thing Friday.
Her times yesterday were 40.80 seconds in the 500 and 1:23.51 in the 1,000. (AP)


In Bosnia, Peace at Any Price Is Getting More Expensive
IN 36 hours in Sarajevo last week, 10 people in one unheated home for the elderly died from the bitter cold.
European Community investigators also reported that an estimated 20,000 Muslim women were raped by Bosnian Serb soldiers in recent months as part of a terror campaign to drive them from their homes.
And on Friday, Serb gunmen stopped a United Nations armored vehicle carrying a Bosnian Deputy Prime Minister, Hakija Turajlic, and shot him dead in front of his French military escorts.
Images of horror can sometimes move nations to action, but these events occurred in Bosnia and Herzegovina -- terrain thus far deemed too treacherous for Western military intervention.


Recent Sales
Cross River, N.Y.  $200,000
Debbie Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 9-year-old raised ranch; cathedral ceilings, dining room, family room, 2-car garage, 1.2 acres; taxes $4,410.
Katonah, N.Y.  $1.08 million
201 Croton Lake Road  3-bedroom, 2 full- and 2 half-bath, 63-year-old colonial; library, guest cottage, pool, 3-car garage, 13 acres; taxes $15,871.
Rye, N.Y.  $370,000
5 Brevoort Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 97-year-old colonial carriage house; dining room, deck, gazebo, pool, tennis court, 1-car garage; taxes $8,453.
New Haven, Conn.  $165,000
179-173 Cold Spring Street  6-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 93-year-old colonial; large entry foyer, study lined with bookcases, 50- by 150-foot lot; taxes $4,424.
Stamford, Conn.  $365,000
146 Akbar Road  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 28-year-old ranch; central air-conditioning, new kitchen, cedar closets, 1 acre; taxes $4,448.
Weston, Conn.  96 N. Ladder Hill
5-bedroom, 4-bath, 226-year-old colonial; family room with built-in stone barbecue, pond on property, 5 acres; taxes $8,290.
OTHER AREAS Hillsdale, N.J.  $305,000
78 Queen Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, brick fireplace, c/a; taxes $6,753.
Howell, N.J.  $183,983
23 Melissa Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; fireplace, full basement, c/a; taxes $3,134.
Amityville, L.I.  $315,000
136 Grand Central Avenue  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 90-year-old colonial; dining room, basement, 3-car detached garage, 100- by 250-foot lot; taxes $6,300.


Wall Street; High Hopes for Public Bonds
For the municipal bond market, Christmas came in November with the election of Bill Clinton as President.
After 12 years of Republican efforts to shrink Government at all levels, states and cities, along with the Wall Street firms that underwrite their bonds, now feel that they've got a friend in the White House.
Wall Street, while trying to contain its optimism, expects politically fascinating and financially lucrative days ahead.
What is unclear, however, is precisely what the Clinton Administration, however committed to greater public-works spending, will actually do.
Equally unknown is what these new policies will mean for municipal issuers and underwriters.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
AN OCEAN WORLD.
Written and illustrated by Peter Sis.
Greenwillow. $14. (Ages 3 and up) A whale raised in captivity is released into the sea and searches both the surface and the depths for companionship.
At the end of the wordless journey through waters that are almost every shade of blue, there is the promise of love.


Kristine Simpson, Brian J. Kopan
Kristine Marie Simpson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Simpson of Manhasset, L.I., was married there yesterday to Brian Joseph Kopan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Chester J. Kopan of Lancaster, Pa.
The Rev.
Paul Bryan officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Kopan, 26, is a tennis instructor at the Wynfield Club in York, Pa.
She graduated from Providence College.
Her father is a vice president of Kidder Peabody &amp; Company in New York.
Her mother, Joyanne Simpson, is a saleswoman at the Liz Claiborne store in Manhasset.


Hispanic Journalists to Move Convention, Citing Colorado Boycott
Defusing a dispute between gay and Hispanic journalists, the National Association of Hispanic Journalists voted yesterday not to hold its annual convention in Denver.
The National Lesbian and Gay Journalists Association had lobbied the Hispanic group to move its convention after Colorado voters passed a referendum on Nov. 3 prohibiting the state's cities and Legislature from approving anti-discrimination protections for homosexuals.
The referendum also voiding existing ordinances extending such protection in Aspen, Boulder and Denver. 'Difficult' Decision
Caught in the middle were news organizations, which send executives to the conventions of minority journalists.
The battle presented an awkward situation for news executives because many of them have declared that the industry needs to hire more minorities and homosexuals.


19 Contaminated By Nuclear Leak
A leak of radioactive material has contaminated workers at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and officials asked Friday that the families of some of the workers be tested for radiation exposure.
By the time it was detected on Dec. 29, the leak had contaminated 19 of the 28 workers who were checked, the officials said.
Nine of those contaminated had left the laboratory without knowing they had been exposed, the officials said.
Teams of technicians dispatched from the laboratory to track the contamination found radioactive cesium in the homes of three workers.


The Answers
1.
The sledge, a rectangular platform that was dragged or pushed along the ground by humans.
2. b.


Take Heart: They'll Always Have Edmonton
In 1986 and 1987, when Wayne Gretzky and Mark Messier were the heart and soul of the Edmonton Oilers, the team was the subject of a documentary film called "The Boys on the Bus." This was midway through Edmonton's Stanley Cup dynasty.
One scene shows the two superstars and their teammates at dinner, conversing about many things, including their motivations for playing.


Tech Notes; In Japan, the Loo Goes Electronic
High atop the 39th floor of the ARK Mori Building in a modern 15,000-square-foot showroom overlooking Tokyo's breathtaking skyline is the world's largest collection of advanced bathroom fixtures.
Stylish whirlpool bathtubs from the United States and Europe have whetted the Japanese fancy, and local companies have characteristically improved once-mundane fixtures with the latest electronic wizardry.
The showroom belongs to the Inax Corporation, which has about 25 percent of Japan's fixture market, making it second to Toto Ltd. with 40 percent.
Its piece de resistance, a $50,000 Inax bathroom designed by Kenneth Grange of Britain, includes a sink, shower, bathtub with Jacuzzi and color liquid crystal television and an advanced-function toilet.


Kristin Williams, Stephen Mugford
Mr. and Mrs.
James W. Williams of Radnor, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kristin Kiely Williams to Stephen Andrew Mugford, a son of Robert A. and Phyllis Mugford of Southington, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Williams, 24, graduated from Harvard University, where she and her fiance, 25, are completing graduate studies in business.
Her father is the president of the Fetterolf Corporation, a specialty-valves maker in Skippack, Pa.
Her mother, Sharon Williams, is a special-projects manager at Chilton Research, a market-research company in Radnor.


Miss Pickholz, Mr. Eickelbeck
Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome W. Pickholz of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Michelle Alyce Pickholz, to Steven Eickelbeck, a son of Ralph Eickelbeck of Freeport, the Bahamas, and Sibille Beimel of Stony Point, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Pickholz, 31, is an advertising account executive at the Comedy Central cable television network in New York.
She graduated from Vanderbilt University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct Worldwide, the New York advertising agency.


Hotels Redone in Wilmington
The 216 rooms and suites of the Hotel du Pont, an 80-year-old landmark in Wilmington, Del., were reopened last month after renovations that took a year and eight months and cost $40 million, according to management.
Design features include mahogany cabinets with minibars, TV-VCR units that swivel 180 degrees and desks large enough to hold a computer and fax machine.
Every room has two telephone lines with voice mail provided in three languages.
Rates are from $131 to $175 a night for rooms and $405 for suites.
Reservations: (800) 441-9019. or (302) 594-3100.


A Wrinkle in Time: Bill Clinton's Wonder Years
As the first baby-boom President, the 46-year-old Bill Clinton is the product of many influences -- Chuck Berry, whose "Roll Over Beethoven" came out when Mr.
Clinton was 10, "Ben Hur," released when he was in eighth grade, and "The Donna Reed Show," reported to be his favorite television show. (The Bush generation remembers Donna Reed as the prostitute in the 1953 classic movie "From Here to Eternity"; baby boomers are more likely to think of her as the quintessential mom.) During his time at Hot Springs High School in Arkansas, from 1960 to 1964, the young Mr.
Clinton was no doubt affected by popular culture.
Here are some of the movies, songs and television programs that may have shaped Mr.
Clinton's outlook.  1960 Movies "The Alamo" (starring John Wayne) "The Apartment" (Jack Lemmon)


Differences Of Opinion
To the Editor:
What a difference a year makes!
In the Arts and Leisure critics' roundup for 1991, John Rockwell cited "Les Atrides," Ariane Mnouchkine's four-part cycle of Greek tragedies, as the "outstanding performance of anything, anywhere." However, in the 1992 lists  [ Dec. 27 ] , Frank Rich declared it "the most overhyped theatrical event of the year," and Mel Gussow remembered the cycle only for its starry audience and long lines of entry in Brooklyn.


INSIDE
Mobile but Jobless in Europe
As unemployment nears 10 percent, European Community leaders have a hard time convincing people that a single market will benefit them by promoting job mobility.
Page 3. 7 Slain at Illinois Restaurant
Seven people were found shot to death at a fast-food restaurant in a Chicago suburb where, as one resident said, "nothing bad ever happens." Page 16.
Helping the Neediest Cases
Is it possible to rescue someone from the despair of homelessness or drugs?
People aided by the Neediest Cases Fund would say yes.
Page 27.
Nixon Turns 80
Having survived six crises and now eight decades, the former President took a day to celebrate.
Page 16.


Basic Pointers for Baking Potatoes
ONE of the simplest yet most satisfying of all vegetables is a baked potato.
Light the oven, put the potato or potatoes in and roast them till tender.
It hardly calls for skill.
Yet many of the lunch and dinner tables around the nation are laden with unsatisfactory baked potatoes.
Some are undercooked, some lack a suitably crisp skin, some taste steamed and soggy instead of being dry and fluffy, and a substantial proportion arrive at the table encased in foil.


U.S. Attacking New Strain of Whiteflies
THE Agricultural Research Service certainly knows how to get your attention.
A recent issue of its magazine, Agricultural Research, has a full-color cover showing James Duffus, a plant pathologist, wading through a California cotton field and raising up a flurry of whiteflies.
The cover illustrates concern for a multimillion-dollar problem: whiteflies are ruining the nation's crops as well as the home gardener's joys.
Through the magazine, the research division of the United States Department of Agriculture describes its research projects, usually devoting several pages to each project.
But this particular issue has a dozen pages about the whitefly research.


Nile Cruises
To The Editor: I recently saw advertisements for Egyptian Nile cruises for January.
Since four of us experienced bitter disappointment last January on a six-day Nile cruise sponsored by the Tourlite International agency of New York, I am writing to warn unwary travelers.
A six-day cruise was reduced to one and a half days.
We were told that the water level was too low for navigation and that we would have to use the ship as a floating hotel while visiting the temple sites in an aged bus, without air-conditioning.
We discovered that the water level was always low in January; operators misinformed us that this was unexpected.
We were awarded an 11 percent refund, but this hardly made up for a spoiled vacation.


Why Not Pay Equity for All Women?
To the Editor:
The women's economic agenda described in "Economics as if Women Mattered" (Dec. 13) doesn't go far enough.
We believe in equal pay for work of equal value for all employees, not just government employees.


Quick and Deadly
To the Editor:


Burning of Black Reinforces Troubling Image of Tampa
The New Year's Day attack on a black tourist has come as a jolting reminder, black residents here say, that this fast-growing metropolis has a long history of racial problems, many of which remain unresolved.
The arrest of three white men on Thursday in the burning of the 31-year-old tourist from New York, Christopher Wilson, may have set Mr.
Wilson's mind at ease.
As he said from his hospital bed here, he could now "rest easier knowing they are in jail." But blacks born and raised here see the attack as proof that it is dangerous to let down their guard here.


OFF THE COUCH
The overt message of Elizabeth Stone's article "Off the Couch" (Dec. 6) is that neurobiological and psychopharmacologic measures are taking over psychiatric residency training.
This is indisputable, and of great importance for the treatment of many severe psychiatric illnesses.
Nevertheless, a central figure in your article is a senior psychoanalyst, Roger MacKinnon.
His role as teacher of the psychodynamic approach to patients is presented as a centerpiece of the residents' clinical and training experience.


UP AND COMING: Chris O'Donnell; From College To Prep School
It would be easy to pity Chris O'Donnell.
His eyes are innocent.
His face looks as if it had never been shaved.
His manner is gentle and almost self-effacing.
This is a 22-year-old who shares the screen in the new film "Scent of a Woman" as Al Pacino enjoys his greatest star turn in years as a blind, embittered former soldier reveling in the sins of New York City.


No Right to Cause Death
The rationale for granting smokers the "right" to spread their toxic fumes around has disappeared.
Diehard smokers, egged on by the tobacco companies that supply them, have long tried to cast their habit as a civil liberties issue, claiming they should be free to engage in a practice that harms no one but themselves.
But the evidence is now overwhelming that smokers endanger all those forced to inhale the lethal clouds they generate.
That makes smokers at least a small hazard to virtually all Americans -- and a fitting target for tighter restrictions.


7 SHOT TO DEATH IN CHICAGO SUBURB
The bodies of seven people who were apparently shot to death were found early today in a fast-food restaurant in this middle-class Chicago suburb.
The dead, six men and a woman, included several teen-age employees of the restaurant, Brown's Chicken and Pasta, other workers said.
But the police here refused to identify the victims or provide details about the case.


JAN. 3-9: Iraqi Missiles; After Deadline Passes Hussein Heeds Ultimatum
In a speech at West Point last week, President Bush gave a valedictory on his Presidency by offering guidelines for the use of American force abroad.
A few days later, Mr.
Bush probably wished Saddam Hussein wasn't still around to help him punctuate his remarks.
The Iraqi President engaged the United States and its allies in yet another game of brinkmanship, thereby calling attention to the enduring American entanglement with Iraq nearly two years after the Persian Gulf war.


The Postage Stamps That Ate Hungary
ACADEMICS surveying the road to a market economy in the former Communist countries of Eastern Europe can map many large potholes: trade deficits, transportation problems, the heavy burdens of foreign debt.
Eastern European consumers, however, focus on one enormous pothole: inflation.
Bus fares in Warsaw, for example, went from a few zlotys to hundreds and then thousands of zlotys in recent years.


Sports of The Times; The Pit Bull Who Catches TD Passes
SOME teams do it with talent. Some with power. Some with finesse. Some with mirrors.
The Buffalo Bills are doing it with an aspiring World Wrestling Federation masked hero, a 285-pound backup guard-center who yesterday lined up as a wingback, hurried out as a pass receiver, was ignored by the Pittsburgh Steelers and caught a 1-yard touchdown pass from Frank Reich.


Wanted: New Action Stars
WANTED: PROSPECMtive action heroes.
Must be able to deliver minimal dialogue and project maximum force.
Should look convincing with a gun and delivering fatal body blows.
Should be handsome but not pretty.
Appeal must be 100-percent heterosexual.
Must look great without a shirt. (Athletes encouraged to apply.) Call H-O-L-L-Y-W-O-O-D.
With age thinning the credibility of most action-movie heroes, and some, like the reigning he-man Arnold Schwarzenegger, hungrily eyeing less athletic roles, the search is on in the Hollywood arena for fresher, younger muscle -- the better to play to an audience consisting mostly of 15- to 25-year-old males.


Oil Becomes the Substance of Saga
Late in his life, the oil magnate John D. Rockefeller liked to recite a little rhyme: "A wise old owl lived in an oak/ The more he saw, the less he spoke/ The less he spoke, the more he heard/ Why aren't we all like that old bird?"
Rockefeller saw the bit of doggerel as a description of his own close-to-the-vest philosophy of business.
But in many ways it also summed up the hermetic world view of the kingdom of oil that he, more than anyone else, helped define.


A la Carte; Bargains on the East End in the Off Season
RELATIVELY few people venture to the East End in the winter, but those who do will find top-drawer restaurants offering dining bargains unknown during the summer season.
Among the specials being offered recently were an all-you-can-eat Monday buffet meal and a 2-for-the-price-of-1 entree on Tuesdays and Wednesdays at C. J. Thorn, Main Street, Bridgehampton (537-0667); a $24.50 fixed-price dinner, including wines, every night except on Fridays and Saturdays at the Maidstone Arms, 207 Main Street, East Hampton (324-5006), and all entrees for $10.95 on Thursday and Friday nights at Violet's, 341 Pantigo Road, East Hampton (329-0600).


PROBLEMS WE THOUGHT WE SOLVED
There was no mention of teen-age fathers in Klass's article.


Melissa Neubert, Drew Steffens
Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey P. Neubert of Columbus, Ohio, have announced the engagement of their daughter Melissa Page Neubert to Drew Cullen Steffens, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Steffens of Princeton, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Neubert, 26, is an associate in the private banking division of Morgan Guaranty Trust Company in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College, as did her fiance.
Her father is an executive vice president of Banc One Corporation, a bank in Columbus.


Japanese Discuss Expanded Role In Peacekeeping for the Military
Less than four months after Japan sent troops abroad for the first time since World War II, several of the country's leaders are talking openly about greatly expanding the Japanese military's role in peacekeeping operations, including purchasing long-range aircraft and ships that Japan has barred itself from having for nearly 50 years.
In a series of speeches over the last week, Michio Watanabe, the Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, has called for major changes in the laws governing the use of Japan's Self-Defense Forces, permitting their transformation into a global peacekeeping force.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
JOCASTA CARR, MOVIE STAR
Written and illustrated by Roy Gerrard.
Unpaged.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $15. (Ages 5 to 8)
THE RETURN OF FREDDY LEGRAND
Written and illustrated by Jon Agee.
Unpaged.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $15. (Ages 5 to 8)


At Milton, a Headmaster With a Difference
SOON AFTER Edwin P. Fredie assumed duties as Milton Academy's new headmaster in the fall of 1991, he surprised the campus at the season's first assembly by standing outside the hall and personally greeting each student.
His friendliness went against the stereotype of the aloof headmaster of a venerable, prestigious New England boarding school.
Then, having established a reputation for accessibility at the school, in Milton, Mass., Mr.
Fredie also demonstrated his authority.
At an assembly in the spring where candidates running for student-body president gave campaign talks, one junior laced his speech with expletives.
Mr.
Fredie promptly stood up to object, saying that such language was inappropriate in a public assembly.


RECORD BRIEFS
King Crimson: 'The Great Deceiver'
Discipline Records Carol 1597-2; CD only.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
MUSEUM ANNIVERSARY
The Katonah Museum kicks off its 40th-birthday celebration today with an exhibition of 65 plein-air oil sketches and graphite drawings and 4 finished paintings by Frederic E. Church, one of the best known of the Hudson River School painters.


Travel Agencies See Smoother Sailing
RECESSION has taken a high toll among travel agencies.
Many have merged or closed their doors.
Yet the worst may be over, according to an assessment of current activities in the industry.
"Clients are very budget conscious and searching for bargains," said Alberta D'Aloia Wort, owner of the Yonkers Travel Bureau.
"Still, many say a winter vacation has become a necessity, more important to them than one in the summer. We have just come off the best holiday season we've had in the past three years. And the most popular destination was Disney World."


Marilyn Foo and Gary Au
MARILYN FOO, 26, and Gary Au, 30, began their wedding last Sunday with an old Chinese tradition: the bridegroom, his best man and the ushers arrived at the bride's house to "negotiate" for her.
"In Chinese weddings, the groom has to go pick up the bride at her home," said George Au, the bridegroom's brother and best man, "but before the groom can get inside to the bride, the ushers negotiate with the bridesmaids. We have to do everything they say, or they will not surrender the bride."


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE FIRST ENGLISH ACTRESSES Women and Drama 1660-1700.
By Elizabeth Howe.
Cambridge University, $59.95.


Corrections
A credit line last Sunday with a picture of President Jimmy Carter and his brother Billy, with an article about the public's attitude toward presidents as their terms progress, referred incorrectly to the photographer.
She is Teresa Zabala.


Topics of The Times; P.C., 1841 A.D.
William Henry Harrison -- the Tippecanoe of "Tippecanoe and Tyler, Too" -- took his oath as President on March 4, 1841.
History buffs know he died of pneumonia a month later.
Trivia buffs know that he spoke at his inauguration for an hour and 45 minutes, and no one has yet spoken longer.


Ah, Yesterday, When Men Had Absolute Power Over Women!; Shorts in a Knot
To the Editor:
I write in astonishment and sadness over Susan Faludi's decision in "The Power Laugh" (Op-Ed, Dec. 20) to indulge in just the sort of gender and regional ridicule she has worked so hard to expose.
Ms.
Faludi alludes to men who "have their shorts in a knot" over Hillary Clinton's role.
What would her reaction be if a male writer were to use the phrase "panties in a twist" about something that upsets women?


Dinkins Urging Radio Stations To Curb Talk-Show Bigotry
Looking for ways to calm ethnic tensions in New York City, Mayor David N. Dinkins says he wants to persuade local radio stations to deter talk-show hosts and callers from making bigoted comments on air.
The Mayor said he was sending intermediaries to "all the offending radio stations" to try to curb the comments that have made their way, with increasing frequency, onto the city's airwaves.


A Centennial in Typography, Celebrated Amid Potted Palms
AS a spectacle, "Printed Letters," at the Jersey City Museum, is elegant to the point of stylishness.
And no wonder, for it is the work of a designer, J. Abbott Miller, who is co-founder of Design Writing Research.
This Manhattan company counts among its achievements a recent Massachusetts Institute of Technology show titled "The Process of Elimination: The Bathroom, the Kitchen and the Esthetics of Waste" and is currently engaged in designing "a graphic identity" for the American Center, a new building by Frank Gehry, in Paris.


Dehere Is Tops For Pirates
After they had played for 17 1/2 minutes, Seton Hall had a 32-point lead over Providence tonight, a team that had the best defensive socring record in the Big East this season.
"That's as good as we can play," said Pirates Coach P. J. Carlesimo when the game finally ended with Seton Hall on top, 91-79.


Perspectives: The New York Gains Tax; An Added Weight on a Struggling Market
THE tax collectors of New York State sat happily in the 80's in a cart pulled by a frisky horse, the active market in real-estate sales.
They collected hundreds of millions of dollars from a tax that no other jurisdiction decided to levy -- 10 percent of the gain on sales of more than $1 million.
But the horse has staggered.
And as the gains tax enters its second decade, it has become an element in retarding recovery, inarguably so in the case of workouts of troubled properties.


Talking: Seller's Fees; The Costs Keep Going Up, Up, Up
BACK when it was easy to make a profit selling a home nobody cared much about the fees involved.
Any cash that was needed could readily be taken out of the abundant proceeds.
Besides, in those days the broker's commission was the only large outlay, and even that could be sidestepped, since a classified ad could often do the job.
Moreover, brokers eager to acquire additional listings were more willing to negotiate lower commissions.


Sarah Van Dyck, Barnaby Noble
The Rev.
Dr. and Mrs.
Nicholas B. Van Dyck of Princeton, N.J., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Sarah Paxson Van Dyck and Barnaby Lloyd Noble, a son of John J. and Madeleine G. Noble of Geneva.
Ms.
Van Dyck, 26, is a candidate for an M.B.A. degree at the Insead business institute in Fontainebleau, France.
She and her fiance graduated magna cum laude from Brown University.
Her father heads Religion in American Life, a national interfaith agency in Princeton.
Her mother, Marcia Van Dyck, is a special-education teacher at the Riverside School in Princeton.
The bride's grandfather Dr.
George A. Perera of Kennett Square, Pa., retired as a professor of medicine at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons.


Streetscapes: The Barthman Clock; Fixed in Cement, Not in Time
THE brass-framed clock set into the sidewalk at the northeast corner of Broadway and Maiden Lane has long been a reference point for hurried pedestrians.
But for exactly how long?
Oral tradition is that the clock was put in by Barthman Jewelers, but the best date from firm documentary sources is frustratingly vague -- between 1923 and 1951.


The Death Of the Sales Pro
IT CAN BE a smooth and almost pleasurable experience: the salesperson makes an informative and attentive pitch, the product is just what the customer wants, the price seems right and the deal is closed.
This waltz of enlightened capitalism can create the kind of good will that led one car salesman's customers to deliver home-cooked meals to his desk during long shifts.
But the dancing skills of salespeople that consumers encounter at their front door, on the telephone or at the local mall seem to be declining, several experts say.


Putting Her Demons to Rest
THE FURIES
By Janet Hobhouse. 293 pp. New York: Doubleday. $22.50.


Mutual Funds; A Performance to Boast About
While most mutual funds turned in so-so performances in 1992, closed-end stock funds were barn-burners, beating the market handily with an average gain of 11.2 percent versus a 4.2 percent rise in the Dow Jones industrial average.
Prices for closed-end funds, which trade on exchanges, are set by supply and demand, so shares trade at a discount or premium to the value of the fund's portfolio holdings.
The year's strong performance let the funds expand their capitalization through a series of rights offerings.
But few new funds were launched, probably because the group's strength resided mainly in older funds.


BEST SELLERS: January 10, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
6
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) After being accused of murdering her employer, a woman tells of killing her husband almost 30 years earlier and of her life ever since.
2
2
8
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.50.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
3
3
10
MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) While researching the lives of his ancestors, an American journalist learns about the history of the land south of the border. (LP)
4
5
12
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $24.) Lestat embarks on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
5 *
4
44
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
6
7
13
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) The fortunes of a businesswoman are imperiled by secrets from her past. (LP)
7
9
26
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
8
10
8
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter, unearths scandals in the military.
9
12
11
MOSTLY HARMLESS, by Douglas Adams. (Harmony, $20.) In the fifth volume of the "Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" series, a survivor tries to cope with new predicaments.
10 *
8
13
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
11
11
19
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
12
6
22
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
13
13
19
WHERE IS JOE MERCHANT? by Jimmy Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A couple on the trail of a dead rock star who has been sighted.
14
6
RED SQUARE, by Martin Cruz Smith. (Random House, $23.) Investigator Arkady Renko, returning to Moscow and Berlin after the collapse of Communism, still faces a perdurable mafia.
15
27
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
17
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
2
14
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general who commanded the allied forces in the gulf war.
3
3
19
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
4
4
30
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
5
5
22
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
6
6
12
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the co-host of the television show "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."
7
7
16
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
8
8
5
JFK: Reckless Youth, by Nigel Hamilton. (Random House, $30.) The first 29 years of the 35th President.
9
11
8
MY LIFE, by Earvin (Magic) Johnson with William Novak. (Random House, $22.) The autobiography of the retired Los Angeles Lakers basketball player.
10
10
10
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life and achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
11
13
4
DAVE BARRY DOES JAPAN, by Dave Barry. (Random House, $18.) The life and culture of the Land of the Rising Sun, as observed by the syndicated humorist.
12
14
3
HANG TIME, by Bob Greene. (Doubleday, $22.50.) Life as lived and perceived by Michael Jordan during two championship seasons with the Chicago Bulls.
13
9
10
SEX, by Madonna. (Warner, $49.95.) Erotic photographs of the pop star by Steven Meisel, and her reflections on them.
14
12
19
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
15
1
THE GOOD SAMARITAN STRIKES AGAIN, by Patrick F. McManus. (Holt, $17.95.) Two dozen essays about the absurdities of everyday life.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
26
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
2
2
5
CREATING LOVE, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $23.) Ways to establish healthy relationships with other people.
3
3
16
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $12.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
1
BETTY CROCKER'S COOKBOOK. (Prentice Hall, $22.) More than 1,000 recipes in an edition celebrating the book's 40th anniversary.
5
5
15
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) The third edition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
MAKING THE MUMMIES DANCE: Inside the Metropolitan Museum of Art, by Thomas Hoving. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The seventh director of the Met tells all about the benefactors, critics and crooks he met as he dusted off the art and swept in the fun.
MANUSCRIPTS DON'T BURN.
Mikhail Bulgakov: A Life in Letters and Diaries, by J. A. E. Curtis. (Overlook, $25.) These moving records reveal how, despite the Soviet Government's vicious attacks, the author of "The Master and Margarita" managed to write and die as he wished.
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED: A True Story of Obsessive Love, Murder, and Betrayal, by Ann Rule. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A harrowing look at a modern-day Southern psychopath who knew how to bat her eyelashes and annihilate a family.
AROUND THE CRAGGED HILL: A Personal and Political Philosophy, by George F. Kennan. (Norton, $22.95.) These curmudgeonly reflections on Americans' bad social habits, incompetent government and the servant shortage prove that anachronistic conservatism can be bracing.
SHAMAN, by Noah Gordon. (Dutton, $23.) This intricate historical novel follows an impious doctor making his way from Boston to the territories of Illinois and the battlefields of the Civil War.
THE LOOP, by Joe Coomer. (Faber &amp; Faber, $21.95.) A deadpan novel whose tender protagonist, significantly, has the job of clearing road kill and debris from the beltway circling a city.
THE ISLAND: Three Tales, by Gustaw Herling. (Viking, $20.) These stories by a Polish writer are unified by a common theme -- the persistence of life in the face of pain, humiliation and extremes of solitude -- and told with a humane, compassionate detachment.


Smith Spells Out Rangers' Defeat
Coaches rarely blame one player for a loss, but who would could question Ranger Coach Ron Smith for dumping his team's 4-3 defeat to the Philadelphia Flyers today onto the shoulders of Mike Richter?
There was no other way to explain it.


The Hartford Symphony Returns to the Bushnell
THE Hartford Symphony gets the 1993 orchestral ball rolling with Tuesday and Wednesday evening concerts at the Bushnell, followed by Friday and Saturday returns as the Hartford Symphony Pops, and even a Saturday morning children's program as part of the musical bargain.
Anton Webern's reverent transcription of the Ricercare from Bach's "Musical Offering," opens the 8 P.M. program Tuesday and Wednesday, after which it's Tchaikovsky's B-flat minor Piano Concerto (with William Wolfram as soloist) and Beethoven's "Eroica" Symphony.


Haitians Take Clinton at His Word
The arrival of a record boatload of Haitian refugees and the launching of a hunger strike by another large group of Haitians detained at an immigration facility last week offered Miami a glimpse of what its immediate future may be like.
The consequences of Bill Clinton's campaign pledge of more lenience toward those fleeing Haiti are already being felt.
Mr.
Clinton's advisers have promised that the President-elect will make a statement intended to preserve the principle of asylum while staving off a mass exodus after he takes office later this month.
But that was of little consolation to officials in South Florida, who were unnerved by the sudden appearance in Miami harbor of a rickety freighter crammed with 352 Haitians, who claimed to have assembled for the four-day, 600-mile trip on the spur of the moment after hearing that free passage aboard a stolen vessel was available.


On the Town
O.K., so the holidays are over.
New Yorkers know how to keep the parties, both large and small, going.


Correction
A picture caption with the Thing column last Sunday, about cowlicks, referred incorrectly to the actor who played Alfalfa in the "Our Gang" series of comedy shorts.
He was Carl Switzer.
The caption also referred incorrectly to the way the series was produced on television.
The shorts were originally produced for movie theaters and later appeared on television under the name "The Little Rascals."


Did Wall Street Vigilantes Take a Snooze?
They're known as Wall Street's vigilantes, the professional skeptics who buy and sell bonds for a living and who can reputedly see inflation threats visible to no one else.
Their hypersensitive reactions to shifting Federal budget prospects are now studied by politicians as well as investors.
But the vigilantes, at least until the past few days, seem to have gone to sleep.
How else do you explain a yield of less than 7 1/2 percent on 30-year Treasury bonds, a quarter percentage point less than when Bill Clinton was elected President, in the face of a hemorrhaging Federal budget?
Perhaps the Street is reassured by the prominence in the new Administration of two of its own -- Robert E. Rubin of Goldman Sachs as chairman of the National Economic Council and Roger Altman of Blackstone Group as No. 2 at Treasury.


Aide Says Weicker's Plan Doesn't Hurt Court Case
Connecticut's legal standing in a lawsuit charging that the segregation in Hartford's schools violates the state's constitution was not changed by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s call this week for a statewide school integration effort, Attorney General Richard Blumenthal said today.
In the suit, lawyers for 19 city and suburban children charge that the state is violating the constitution's guarantee of equal educational opportunity by allowing the segregated conditions.
They maintain that it does not matter how the segregation came to be, only that it exists.


Getting an Inside Look At the Concert Process
ALMOST everyone enjoys going to concerts, but not everyone has an opportunity to observe the way performances take shape.
For the curious, the New Orchestra of Westchester has scheduled an open rehearsal Friday at 11 A.M. at the State University of New York at Purchase.
The music director, Paul Lustig Dunkel, will be dividing his attention among the three works scheduled at the regular weekend subscription concerts: "La Valse" by Ravel, a Suite from Stravinsky's ballet "Petrouchka" and in its county premiere, Piano Concerto No. 3 by Francis Thorne.
The concerto, featuring the American virtuoso Ursula Oppens, is being recorded next week by New World Records.


Kew Gardens Sighs for Its Bridge of Stores
As Lefferts Boulevard in Queens meanders through the leafy streets of Kew Gardens, past the neo-Tudor homes and elegant garden apartments, it arches gently over an architectural oddity: an aging bridge, lined on both sides by shops, that passes over the sunken tracks of the Long Island Rail Road.
An outsider passing through might overlook its significance -- might, in fact, not even realize it is a bridge -- but to the local residents it is a gem that gives the neighborhood its charm and anchors its cluster of stores.
To many, it recalls the Ponte Vecchio in Florence, and that is what they call it.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
TALL TALES The Glory Years of the NBA,  in the Words of the Men Who Played, Coached, and Built Pro Basketball.
By Terry Pluto.
Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.


The Silent Treatment
MOST floor squeaks are caused by loose floorboards, subflooring or the joists underneath.
Shrinkage, a natural occurrence, is usually at fault, but sometimes poor materials or insufficient fastening is the cause.
Most squeaks are fairly easy to fix, once their precise location is found.
To pinpoint a squeaking spot, have someone bounce on the floor while you listen with your ear close to the floorboards.
If the floor is above an unfinished basement, examine it from below.
There, you can also observe the joists to see if they flex or if the subflooring rubs against them.
Use a flashlight, even if the basement is well lighted.
Mark areas with chalk or tape where the squeaks occur.


Basic Pointers for Baking Potatoes
ONE of the simplest yet most satisfying of all vegetables is a baked potato.
Light the oven, put the potato or potatoes in and roast them till tender.
It hardly calls for skill.
Yet many of the lunch and dinner tables around the nation are laden with unsatisfactory baked potatoes.
Some are undercooked, some lack a suitably crisp skin, some taste steamed and soggy instead of being dry and fluffy, and a substantial proportion arrive at the table encased in foil.


A Harsh Start to a New Beginning for Winnowed Daily News
After two days of canceled editions, missed deadlines and other disruptions caused by a change in ownership and the dismissal of scores of reporters, editors and other staff members, news operations at The Daily News returned to near normal yesterday as a smaller staff got out a full Sunday newspaper.
But problems of adjustment were expected to linger.
With a smaller staff, news assignments will be made more carefully, editors said.
And to minimize problems during the staff's transition this week, publication of the Brooklyn, Queens and suburban sections has been suspended for five days, starting tomorrow.


Genie McPherson, J. B. Trevor 4th
Mrs.
Gregory A. Sharp of Northford, Conn., and Stephen M. McPherson of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Eugenie C. McPherson, to John B. Trevor 4th, the son of Mrs.
Eugene Quinn of Washington and Mr.
Trevor 3d of Lake Placid, N.Y.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
McPherson, 27, is known as Genie.
She is the assistant to the executive director of Planned Parenthood of Rhode Island in Providence.
She and her fiance graduated from the University of Colorado.
She is the stepdaughter of Mr.
Sharp of Northford and Tina McPherson of New York.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The Banking Industry; Bankers Lining Up Lobbyists Tightly Aligned With Clinton
In a striking example of how an interest group can lay the groundwork to influence the Government, the banking industry has assembled a powerhouse team to take on the Clinton Administration and the new Congress.
The bankers are keenly interested in seeing banking regulations relaxed and in being allowed to branch out across state lines and to compete more directly against securities firms.
They are also watching carefully to see if new consumer protections will be enacted.


Andrea Casey, Timothy O'Neill
Andrea Maura Casey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Casey of Larchmont, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Timothy Adam O'Neill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kevin O'Neill of Irvington, N.Y.
Msgr.
Joseph Boyd performed the ceremony at SS.
John and Paul Church.
Mrs.
O'Neill, 29, is a registered nurse in the surgical-trauma intensive-care unit at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from Marymount College of Virginia and received a master's degree in critical-care nursing from Columbia University.


Data Bank/January 10, 1992


Why Civic Groups Oppose the Move
Why do we and other civic associations object to the Olympus Corporation's moving its North American headquarters onto public land in our residential neighborhood?
Why is New York State selling these 53.7 acres for $7.2 million, which is $134,000 per acre, to the Parr Development Company Inc.?
Who are we fooling by calling this a lease when Parr pays rent of $1 per year with an option to buy for $10?
If Swissair paid $800,000 per acre when it bought its site on the nearby Route 110 corridor, why is New York State giving Parr a $35 million Christmas present?
Would this have happened if there was competitive bidding before selling the property?
When taxes are increasing, budgets' getting cut and people are being laid off, do we need a repeat of the Mitchel Field giveaway?


Optimism Unshared
To the Editor:
Ann Powers's essay on Pamela Des Barres's chronicles of the groupie life style  [ "That Girl by the Stage, and Why She's There," Dec. 20 ]  contributes to our understanding of the "dark side" of rock-and-roll's fraternalism.


Topics of The Times; The New York Walk
As they slowly made their way through the pedestrian traffic on Fifth Avenue, a New Yorker said to his visitor from Boston, "C'mon, walk like a New Yorker."
What, she wondered, does that mean?
He was referring to walking with one's feet.
But New York, she thought, is a place also to walk with one's eyes.
Store windows, peddlers, street musicians: whether one walked fast or slow, there was much to look at.
Most interesting of all was the variety of people bustling past.


Benefits
Education Award
MONDAY -- The Bank Street College of Education will honor Elizabeth Rohatyn with its President's Medal, in recognition of her varied contributions to public education at the college's annual awards dinner.
The black-tie benefit at the Waldorf-Astoria will begin with cocktails at 6 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 838-2660.
Comedy at La Mama
MONDAY -- La Mama, the 30-year-old experimental theater company, will stage a benefit performance featuring the raucous sketches of the High Heeled Women and Zora Rasmussen among others.
The 8 P.M. show will be at its second-floor club at 74A East Fourth Street.
Tickets, $15, from (212) 475-7710.
Amfar Benefit
WEDNESDAY -- A 6:30 P.M. reception and a talk by Pamela Stafford Kuritsky, a fashion consultant, will benefit Amfar, the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
The event, at the Green House on the eighth floor of the Atrium Club, 115 East 57th Street, is sponsored by the Women's Forum.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 333-6133.
Songs for Children's Fund
THURSDAY -- The German singer Ute Lemper will bring her interpretations of Kurt Weill songs as well as music made famous by Edith Piaf and Marlene Dietrich to a 5 P.M. party at Tatou, 151 East 50th Street.
The reception and performance will benefit the Children's Health Fund, which provides mobile medical units for poor children in New York City.
Tickets, $20, from (212) 535-9400.
Cuban Jam Session
SATURDAY -- The Cuban-born actor Andy Garcia will sing along with Cachao and his Mambo Orchestra at a "Celebration of Cuban Music" at Radio City Music Hall.
The 8 P.M. performance will be preceded by a Cuban cocktail buffet at the hall and followed by a dinner at Victor's Cafe, 236 West 52d Street.
The evening will benefit the performing arts programs of Boys Harbor, the Harlem youth services agency.
Tickets, $350, or for the cocktail buffet and performance alone, $175, from (212) 838-5944.
A Voice for Kids
SATURDAY -- Demi Moore, Robert De Niro, Whoopi Goldberg and Phoebe Snow will be among the performers at a benefit with music, comedy and drama at the Paramount Theater at Madison Square Garden.
The 8 P.M. performance will benefit the Citykids Foundation, an eight-year-old organization that promotes a wide range of activities for urban youngsters.
A dinner at Planet Hollywood, 140 West 50th Street, will follow the show.
Tickets, $500 for show and dinner, or for show alone at $250 and $100, all from (212) 972-2268.
Other tickets for the show, at $50 and $25, from (212) 307-7171.
Dance Library Awards
JAN. 17 -- The Dance Library of Israel will present its annual Documents of Dance Award to Dame Alicia Markova, the English prima ballerina, at Tavern on the Green.
The late Gower Champion will also be honored, with his son Gregg accepting the award.
The event, a 5:30 P.M. reception, followed by a dinner and entertainment, will benefit archival and educational projects of the library in Tel Aviv.
Tickets, $175, from (212) 532-4949, extension 292.
Friends for Life Benefit
JAN. 18 -- Children's Friends for Life, a privately financed group of volunteers who help New York-area children with H.I.V. or AIDS and their families, will benefit from a show, "Stars Under the Stars," at the Whitney Museum.
The 8 P.M. event will include excerpts from the new Armando Acosta film "Romeo-Juliet," described as a "film-concert experience," as well as a buffet dinner.
Tickets, $175, from (212) 570-3670.


U.S. Opens the Door Just a Crack to Alternative Forms of Medicine
The National Institutes of Health, the country's pocketbook for biomedical research and long a stern protector of the most rigorous brand of science, is about to start venturing into the realm of alternative medicine.
Some researchers hail the initiative as visionary, but others liken it to governance by horoscope.
In the next few weeks, the institutes' new Office of Alternative Medicine will begin seeking proposals from researchers who want to explore the merits of therapies outside mainstream healing.
These could include homeopathy, herbal medicine, electromagnetism to heal bones and soothe arthritis, mind-body control techniques like visualization and guided imagery, and touch therapy, which is akin to the tradition of laying on of hands.
Pressure From Congress
The office was established last year under pressure from the Congressional subcommittee that finances the institutes.
The idea was that fresh approaches were needed to treat chronic, degenerative diseases like cancer, AIDS, arthritis, autoimmune disorders or other illnesses for which standard medicine often has no remedy.


Suzanne Rosencrans, Michael Novicoff
May wedding plans have been announced for Suzanne Rosencrans and Michael Novicoff, lawyers in Los Angeles.
Ms.
Rosencrans, 30, is an associate at the law firm of Hansen, Jacobson &amp; Teller.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University and received her law degree from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Dr.
Martin Rosencrans and Sandra Rosencrans of Roslyn Heights, L.I.


Warning: Underneath Lies A Hard-Rap Fan
The label that says "Parental advisory: explicit lyrics" on the cover of a CD may make some youngsters want the disk even more.
What record companies may not have foreseen is that the words, altered slightly to read "explicit rap," would one day be used as a fashion statement.
A hooded nylon jacket by Rock Embassy bears the message on two embroidered patches -- one on the chest, one on the back.
The jacket, black with blue sleeves, costs $90 at Rock Embassy shops in Sam Goody and Musicland stores.


Nets Hit Switch From Off To On
On a night when their best shooter and leading scorer was in the locker room getting treatment for an injury, the Nets had their best shooting performance of the season and the most lopsided victory in their history.
The Nets (18-15) shot 59.6 percent from the field -- without Drazen Petrovic -- and outrebounded the Washington Bullets by 67-41 in a 124-79 victory at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Nets' previous best shooting performance this season was 59 percent in a 119-114 triumph over Cleveland on Dec. 26.


SILENCE OF THE FROGS
As an environmentalist, I monitor clues to the health of our planet.
Emily Yoffe's article "Silence of the Frogs" (Dec. 13) responsibly stated that the population fluctuations of many frog species may be simple, natural cycles, unrelated to greater environmental change.
But if our activities are causing a mass extinction, it is more than simply unfortunate for the frogs.
As science learns to use new genetic techniques to improve human life, we may find we have cheated ourselves out of yet another wonderfully diverse and instructive gene pool.
TERENCE MCADAMS
Moorestown, N.J.


A 'Dead' Symphony Is Reborn
There are various ways to measure the gap separating the first performance of Shostakovich's 13th Symphony and its New York Philharmonic premiere on Thursday evening at Avery Fisher Hall.
As measured by the calendar, three decades have passed since the tension-filled Moscow premiere of the symphony, which generated great acclaim in the auditorium (no review was allowed to be printed in Pravda) and then for several years virtually disappeared.
In the end, however, what has disappeared is not the symphony but, astonishingly, the seemingly implacable Soviet system, which had furnished the symphony's subject matter, and then imposed that awful silence.
This might be called a geopolitical measurement of the gap.


Harrods Food Gets a Rival
Harrods department store in London, long famous for its Food Halls, has a new competitor some 200 yards away.
Harvey Nichols, another of London's most fashionable department stores, has moved into food and wine for the first time and turned the whole of its fifth floor into a food emporium.
This upscale supermarket and wine shop sells everything from basic groceries to exotic goods, fresh fish, meat and poultry, bread and patisserie, cheeses, fruit, vegetables and flowers and 250 products with the store's label.
The food market, which opened in November, also has a cafe, bar and restaurant.
The store is on the corner of Sloane Street and Knightsbridge, opposite Knightsbridge Underground station.


THE WEDDING GIFT
When I saw the title of Carolyn Marks Blackwood's Hers column "The Wedding Gift" (Dec. 13), I thought it would be about "things." And, in a way, it was; but this time it was about things that matter.
I read on with tears streaming down my cheeks.


Coastal Flood Warnings Continue in the Region


Wachtler Defense Focuses On Temporary Insanity
Two months after he was arrested on charges of extortion and threatening to kidnap the daughter of a woman who jilted him, New York State's former Chief Judge, Sol Wachtler, and his lawyer are apparently building a defense based on a claim of temporary insanity caused by depression and the abuse of prescription drugs.
Friends and associates of Mr.
Wachtler say that he does not deny the months-long campaign of threatening letters and telephone calls made to his former lover, Joy A. Silverman, and her 14-year-old daughter.
But they said his defense would rest on what they described as medical evidence that will show he was not mentally responsible for what he did.
Favorable Light
For weeks after Mr.
Wachtler's arrest, friends, associates and relatives have declined to talk about the humiliating arrest that led Mr.
Wachtler to resign from his position as head of the State Court of Appeals, the highest judicial office in New York.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Instant Water and Fire
ANOTHER day, another explosion at East Islip High School.
"I heard a bang this morning," the chairman of science department, Robert Sigda, said.
"I thought, 'Oh, chemistry class.' "
"Was that you blowing something up?" Mr.
Sigda asked a chemistry teacher, Dr.
Chirakkal Krishnan.


Tara Losquadro, Jeffrey Liddle
Tara Jeanne Losquadro, a pediatric physical therapist, and Jeffrey L. Liddle, a lawyer, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Paul Wancura performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Caroline Church in Setauket, L.I.
Mrs.
Liddle, 31, is the coordinator of pediatrics in the department of physical therapy at Lenox Hill Hospital.
She graduated from New York University.
She is the daughter of Anthony Losquadro of Shirley, L.I., and Karen Losquadro of Stony Brook, L.I.
Her father is a councilman of the Town of Brookhaven, L.I.
Her mother is the assistant director of permanent personnel of the Suffolk County Board of Elections in Yaphank, L.I.


Public &amp; Private; Not A Movie
It was a free ride for the headline writers.
Take one sure-fire human interest story of parental abandonment and one hit movie, and the words almost wrote themselves: Home Alone.
Overnight David and Sharon Schoo, who went to Acapulco and allegedly left their two little girls to fend for themselves, were billed as "the most hated couple in America." When they were arrested at the airport and led away in handcuffs, one bystander hissed "Scrooge!" And across America parents asked aloud: How could anyone leave a 9-year-old and a 4-year-old by themselves and go off on vacation like that?


Clinton's Bright Ideas Get to Meet the Ugly Facts
IN campaigning for President, Abraham Lincoln promised not to abolish slavery.
Franklin D. Roosevelt vowed to balance the budget.
Lyndon B. Johnson said he was not "about to send American boys 9,000 or 10,000 miles away from home to do what Asian boys ought to be doing for themselves." Richard M. Nixon had a secret plan to end the war in Vietnam.
Jimmy Carter said he would remove price controls on natural gas.
Ronald Reagan said he would never negotiate for the release of hostages.
And, of course, George Bush promised not to raise taxes.
So when Bill Clinton seemed to back off last week from his campaign pledge to cut the Federal budget deficit in half over the next four years, hardly anyone was surprised.
As Mr.
Bush said in 1990 when he announced he had changed his mind about taxes, "That's the American system."


SURFACING
RECREATION --
Snowrunners:
Forget the poles.
These lightweight boots with sole-length skis give you the option of "skating" down the slopes.
Best when conditions are less than ideal (groomed or packed snow), as in parts of the Northeast right now.
MUSIC --
Mini disks, or MD's:
Compact versions of the compact disk.
Buying them is easy, but listening to them may be a challenge, since some retailers are still waiting for the mini players to arrive.
FOOD --
Green tea:
Taking a cue from the Japanese, some American chefs are using the tea for seasoning because of its nutritional value and pungency.
Dishes include tea-smoked salmon and green-tea-marinated quail eggs.


Family Party
When the son of Le Cirque's owner marries, the feast is -- where else? Jan. 2.


49ers and Young Almost Mess Up in the Mud
Steve Young's uniform was caked in mud today, mostly from digging for his own fumbles.
Certainly, the San Francisco 49ers were in position to rout the Redskins, yet instead they had to squelch a last-quarter rally to beat Washington, 20-13, and advance to the National Football Conference title game.
"Interesting, wasn't it?" Young said.


Portraits of Gay Men, With No Apologies
Gay-rights demonstrators sometimes brandish placards proclaiming "We are everywhere," as a reminder that homosexuals are in all strata of American society.
"Everywhere" certainly includes the stages of New York theaters, for gay male and lesbian characters are part of the casts of an increasing number of plays, dances and mixed-media productions.
Several choreographers and performance artists have recently offered especially vivid portraits of gay men.
Late last month, Tim Miller's autobiographical "My Queer Body," at Performance Space 122, candidly depicted the experience of growing up as an outspoken, politically minded homosexual.
In contrast, an incident from Paul Taylor's "Company B," a work choreographed in 1991 which his troupe performed this autumn at the City Center, looked back upon the closeted past.


Breed Added For Registration
The American Kennel Club, which began classifying breeds with eight in 1878, has accepted the Australian shepherd for registration, raising the number of breeds eligible for A.K.C. championship to 135.
The Aussie, as the breed is better known, is medium-sized and measures from 18 to 23 inches at the withers.


World Markets; Bright Forecasts for the Far East
The Hong Kong stock market's stellar performance last year might have stunned and dazzled overseas investors, but local investors are grumbling.
They are distressed that nearly half the gains they scored when the Hang Seng index hit a record in mid-November were erased in December.
From a high of 6,570.83, the index tumbled by year's end to 5,512.39.
Still, that was up 28.3 percent for the entire year, the highest growth of all the world's markets.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The Inaguration; This Inaugural Thing Just Irks Hollywood
The town's celebrities, who are accustomed to royal treatment, are colliding head-on with President-elect Bill Clinton's inaugural team, which is treating them like, well, ordinary people.
With 11 days to go before the President's inauguration, and with several celebrities miffed at the way they've been treated, the Clinton team is mounting a virtual outreach program to the stars.
And like any other special interest group that feels mistreated, Hollywood wouldn't mind a little Justice and Equality.


Conference Car On Amtrak Train
Amtrak has introduced a club conference car running twice daily between New York and Washington on the Metroliner express.
Facilities include a conference room for up to eight people with a private telephone and a marker board for presentations or notes.
The car also has two private booths for four passengers, with a table and sliding glass doors for privacy; two semi-private tables each seating two people, and 18 first-class seats.
The service started in the fall.
The conference room and the private booths for four, which are called club salons, must be reserved separately in advance.
The conference car is on the southbound Metroliner from Monday to Friday, which leaves New York at 6:50 A.M. and arrives in Washington at 9:35 A.M., and the northbound return leaving Washington at 4:30 P.M. and arriving in New York at 7:15 P.M.
The intermediate stops are Philadelphia and Baltimore.


At Work; Pushing Nurses to a Breaking Point
Labor market shortages are supposed to be the drive trains of improvements in employment conditions, so by the laws of supply and demand right about now should be a very good time to be a registered nurse.
In fact, a shortage of nurses dating from the mid-1980's has driven up wages in some parts of the country, enough so that the number of men entering the traditionally female-dominated field is on the rise.


Corrections
A quiz on Dec. 27 about best-selling books misidentified the first black author to have a book reach No. 1 on the New York Times best-seller list.
He was Richard Wright.
Lillian Smith, author of "Strange Fruit," was white.


The Silent Treatment
MOST floor squeaks are caused by loose floorboards, subflooring or the joists underneath.
Shrinkage, a natural occurrence, is usually at fault, but sometimes poor materials or insufficient fastening is the cause.
Most squeaks are fairly easy to fix, once their precise location is found.
To pinpoint a squeaking spot, have someone bounce on the floor while you listen with your ear close to the floorboards.
If the floor is above an unfinished basement, examine it from below.
There, you can also observe the joists to see if they flex or if the subflooring rubs against them.
Use a flashlight, even if the basement is well lighted.
Mark areas with chalk or tape where the squeaks occur.


On Sunday; Town Guardian Is Appreciated, Not Supported
THIS summer community for the wealthy is famous for strict zoning.
There are many rules and they are constantly violated, resulting in illegal store signs, illegal apartments and illegal decks.
Almost anything built will upset someone, whether it's a second-story addition to the summer home of Alec Baldwin, the actor (a dispute that's only in its second year), or a new caretaker's cottage for Jann Wenner of Rolling Stone magazine. (The town planner felt he should convert his poolhouse instead.)
It took a rare person to maintain order, but officials agree Roger Walker was a great code enforcement officer.
"Best of the best," says Town Justice James Ketcham.


As Home to the Affluent, Brookville Follows Homespun Route
THE residents of Brookville are some of the wealthiest and most powerful homeowners on the North Shore.
Yet village taxes are lower than any of the other North Shore villages.
One reason, Mayor Richard Goodwin said, is that the village does not have a Village Hall.
Instead, board meetings are in the Brookville Reformed Church, a 260-year-old church built by Dutch settlers who moved in the early 1700's from Jamaica, Queens.
The church, complete with a clock tower and a steeple, resembles a typical early American meeting place.


The Quiz
When it comes to getting people and goods from here to there, humans loafed or pushed along at walking speed or slower.
A breakthrough came in about 2000 B.C., which increased the speed of transportation to about 10 miles an hour.
That became the standard pace until the late 19th century, which heralded a period of stunning acceleration.
So hop aboard -- and bring your parachute.
Answers on page 14.


Karen Stein, David Solomon
Mr. and Mrs.
Burton K. Stein of Philadelphia have announced the engagement of their daughter, Karen Stein, to David Scott Solomon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marshall Solomon of Longmeadow, Mass.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Stein, 30, is a producer at NBC News in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, from which he also received an M.B.A.
Her father is a senior partner at the law firm of Cozen &amp; O'Connor in Philadelphia.


Ms. Lieberman and B. D. Pergament
Mary W. Lieberman of Yonkers has announced the engagement of her granddaughter, Randi H. Lieberman, to Bruce D. Pergament, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Pergament of Old Westbury, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lieberman, 28, is a production planner for Gryphon Development, a division of the Limited Inc., in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Buffalo.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  NO EASY EXIT FROM SOMALIA


Challenger Disaster As Corporate Tool
NEARLY seven years after the space shuttle Challenger exploded during its launch, a cross-disciplinary management training project is using the incident as a teaching tool.
Its purpose is to address many of the problems plaguing American corporations and other organizations.
The project, titled "A Major Malfunction . . . The Story Behind the Space Shuttle Challenger Disaster," was produced by Mark Maier, assistant professor of leadership and organization studies in the School of Education and Human Development at the State University of New York at Binghamton.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The Fashion Scene; More Inaugural Dresses Change Into Pumpkins
Some will glitter, others will shimmer, certainly a few will trip on their unusually long hemlines.
On inauguration night, nothing less than an absolutely elegant dress will do for the women lucky enough to land ball invitations.
But when the party is over, many of these dresses will go back where they came from -- the rental shop.


Passing the Buck


Packages Unwrapped: A Sampling
IF the thought of traveling to London during the most off of the off-season months has never crossed your mind, tour operators with package deals to Britain will be happy to supply reasons why you might consider switching your July vacation to January or February.
You won't have to stand on line to see the Crown Jewels; the theater season is in full swing; Harrods winter sale is on.
They will also assert that a week in London can be surprisingly inexpensive, even for the traditionally slow off-season.
How is it possible that six nights in London, including air fare, can cost as little as $449?
The dollar's new-found strength -- at the end of December the pound was worth only about $1.55, compared with $1.93 a year earlier -- is the major reason.


Good Buys On Theater Tickets
GONE are the days when a West End ticket cost a mere fraction of one on Broadway.
But putting on a show in London is still cheaper than it is in New York, and ticket prices reflect that.
Thanks, too, to the stronger dollar (about $1.55 to the pound at the end of December), theater tickets are once again good buys for American tourists.
While the cheapest ticket for the musical "Five Guys Named Moe" in New York is $15, some balcony seats for the same show in London, where it originated, are as little as $4.65.
It is playing at the Lyric Theater.
The top ticket for "Cats" in London costs $43.40, while the top seats for the show in New York are $65.
Those prices do not include booking fees -- levied both by ticket agencies and also by some theaters themselves for phone reservations -- which raise the ante considerably.
Tickets bought through the New York office of the British company Edwards &amp; Edwards (1 Times Square Plaza, New York, N.Y. 10036;  [ 212 ]  944-0290), for instance, will be marked up by 20 percent; there will also be a service charge of $6 a ticket.


Nixon Is 80 (And Elvis Joins Party)
He listened through the static as off-key well-wishers sang "Happy Birthday" over the phone from California.
Later he dug into his favorite dinner, pot roast, and posed for a photograph with his four grandchildren.
Wearing a good Republican cloth, uh, suit.
Former President Richard M. Nixon turned 80 yesterday.
Now, it is possible to say this about that: his philosophy on birthdays is unsentimental ("Don't look at the past, look to the future," he said yesterday, "because if you do, you may live long enough to enjoy it.") Having survived "Six Crises" and now eight decades (three since he promised that the press would not have him to kick around anymore and nearly two since he resigned the Presidency), he celebrated.
Double Celebration
"I hated the idea of becoming 80 years of age until I thought of the alternative," he said.


JAN. 3-9: Combat in Somalia; As Marines Open Fire, Hopes for Early Return Begin to Fade
Mogadishu awoke Thursday to the thud of artillery fire.
United States marines, attacking with tanks and Cobra helicopter gunships, swooped down on two compounds in the capital used by the forces of Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, a major Somali warlord.
One compound was reduced to rubble and the marines captured a large arsenal -- the first time they had gone into direct combat against a warring Somali faction, which could have unpredictable political consequences.


College Curriculums Shaken to the Core
EVER SINCE Stanford University overhauled its curriculum in 1988 from a rigid core of courses dealing with Western civilization to one that includes few required courses and a larger, more varied menu of subjects on women and minorities from which students can choose, life hasn't been the same at the nation's colleges and universities.
College core curriculums, those courses that supposedly represent the core of learning that each institution wants to instill in its graduates, are undergoing a reformation.
The process is leaving the intellectual underpinnings of some institutions teetering and others firmly set upon a new educational path.


Accord With Cree Will Allow Quebec Utility to Finish Dams
Hydro-Quebec, the provincial utility that is a major supplier of electricity to New York State, has signed an agreement with the Grand Council of the Cree and two Cree Indian communities on compensation payments for environmental damage, allowing the electric company to finish a giant hydroelectric project in the remote James Bay region.
Under the agreement, which was signed in Montreal on Friday after two years of negotiations, the utility will pay the Cree $50 million "for various community and economic activities" including recreational centers and public works.
The Cree will drop lawsuits that sought to block the project.


In Europe, Unity Begins With Freedom to Shop
THE Promised Land of 1993 has arrived in Europe, and to a horde of British shoppers in this French port town it resembles nothing so much as the "section liquide" at the Continent supermarket.
The "booze section," as the British call it, is startlingly cheap and, since the long and painful birth of Europe's frontierless market was completed Jan. 1, there has been no limit to what may be carted back across the Channel.
The result: a British invasion not unlike 1066 in reverse.


Sports of the Times; Is Hockey Entering A Sensitive New Age?
THE first sign Roger Neilson was in big trouble was when they traded his goon.
It was like the canary dying in the coal mine, a sure sign of deadly methane gas.
If Tie Domi could be offed, Neilson was vulnerable.
The bizarre part of Neilson being sacked last Monday was that it made a sympathetic figure of a cynical and impersonal hockey coach with a duke-it-out philosophy that, with any luck at all, just might be going out of style.


Cave Dwellers
"KID DESK": $39.95 list price, The Edmark Corporation, P.O.
Box 3218, Redmond, Wash., 98073-3218; telephone (206) 556-8484.
For DOS computers.
Minimum requirements: 640KB system memory, EGA or VGA color monitor, DOS 3.1 or a more recent version, hard disk, mouse.
Recommended options: Sound Blaster or compatible sound card, printer.


When Old Replaces Young And Hero's Not on Menu
Once upon a time, young heroes came to New York to make their names: Joltin' Joe, Broadway Joe, Dollar Bill, Tom Terrific, L. T., Doc.
We were happy to see them, of course, to feed off their fresh energy and to give them a shot at the top of the heap.
But it wasn't as if we needed them.


New &amp; Noteworthy
ANNE SEXTON: A Biography, by Diane Wood Middlebrook. (Vintage, $14.) Like Sylvia Plath, Anne Sexton is sometimes remembered more for her suicide than for her poetry.
This biography, controversial for its use of tapes of therapy sessions with one of Sexton's psychiatrists, helps redress that injustice.
In 1991 our reviewer, Katha Pollitt, found it "a wonderful book: just, balanced, insightful, complex in its sympathies."
WISE CHILDREN, by Angela Carter. (Penguin, $10.) According to Shakespeare, "It's a wise father that knows his own children," and Sir Melchior Hazard, a great classical actor, won't acknowledge his.
But that hasn't held back his illegitimate twin daughters, Dora and Nora Chance.
Dora relates the irrepressible sisters' family history in this novel, which was published just before the author's death from cancer last year.
It is "a giddy souffle of a novel," Joyce Carol Oates said here, "mock memoir, mock confession, mock romance, a post-modernist parody of a familiar genre."


Lobsters in Baja
To the Editor: The article by Martha Stevenson Olson on Baja California ("In Baja's Lobster Village, 30 Menus in Three Blocks," Dec. 13) brought back some pleasant memories.
We happened to be spending a few weeks back in the 1950's at the adobe house of some relatives on the beachfront in the settlement of La Mision.
Acting on some local rumors, we drove a few miles up the coast to a small fishing village halfway to the village of Rosarita.
We found what we were looking for -- lobsters!
The fisherfolk in the village had gone out early that day, snagged what they wanted and upon returing had dumped their catch into a tall oil barrel.
When we got there, the water was boiling over a hot driftwood fire and the lobsters were getting red.


The Prince and the Superwoman (A Very Modern Tale)
AH, for the easier days of imperial romance.
The last time the chamberlains who run the lives of Japan's royal family went searching for a future empress, they quietly arranged for a "chance" meeting on the tennis courts between Akihito, then the Crown Prince, and an elegant, demure commoner of impeccable social credentials, Michiko Shoda.
But that was 1957.
By the time the current heir to the Chrysanthemum Throne was spurning computer-generated lists of young ladies from proper families to search for the woman of his dreams, life and Japanese women had changed.
Prince Naruhito's choice, Masako Owada, who was trained at Harvard and Oxford, had a promising career in the Foreign Ministry and little interest in giving it up for the stifling life of Japanese royalty.
So for most of the last six years Miss Owada politely stiff-armed the earnest Prince while she jetted to and from Washington, negotiating how much of Japan's semiconductor market to reserve for American manufacturers.
Mixed Signals
The chase ended over Christmas, when Miss Owada, by now 29, agreed to put love ahead of microchips.
But her decision has created more than just a joyful national uproar and endless television documentaries that seem intent on transforming a savvy, American-educated diplomat into a perfect princess, interested in cooking and babies.
It has also sent mixed signals to a new generation of Japanese women, signals as complex and conflicted as their own lives.


SILENCE OF THE FROGS
Regarding your very interesting article "Silence of the Frogs," has anyone investigated to determine if there are an unusual number of heretofore unknown princes abroad in the land?
PAT MOFFAT
Madison, N.J.


Consultants Sift Leases In Audits For Tenants
BACK in 1985, the big media company negotiated the escalation clauses in its new 10-year lease, and then basically forgot about them.
It was an expensive lapse of memory.
It seems that year after year the company had been paying for a 100 percent pass-along of Consumer Price Index increases, even though its lease called for only a 50 percent pass-along.
The landlord owed the company $145,000; the company settled for three months' free rent and a "highly favorable" renewal on its lease.


Games in Buffalo Head Events List
The World University Games scheduled for July 8 to 18 in Buffalo have been designated the overall best event of the year in the American Bus Association's Top 100 Events of 1993.
The trade group's annual roster of leading events in the United States and Canada is based on their popularity and accessibility to bus travel.
The university games are being held in the United States for the first time in 80 years of biannual competition.
A Cajun festival in St.
Martinville, La., on Feb. 21 (the Sunday before Mardi Gras) and spring flower shows in Boston, March 6 to 14, and Philadelphia, March 7 to 14, are also among the events.
The top event in Canada is Folklorama, a cultural festival featuring 40 pavilions of food, entertainment and cultural exhibits in Winnipeg from Aug. 1 to 14.


Alexa Zwack, Niklas Peterstam
Alexa Key Zwack, an assistant expedition leader on the exploration cruise ship M. S. Caledonian Star, was married yesterday to Niklas Per Hakan Peterstam, the ship's chief officer.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark Anschutz officiated at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
The Rev.
Johan Wierup, a Lutheran minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Peterstam, 33, graduated from Lake Forest College.
She is a daughter of Iris Argento of Far Hills, N.J., and Peter Zwack of Budapest and Bolgheri, Italy.
The bride's father owns J. Zwack &amp; Company, a distiller of liqueurs in Budapest, and was until recently Hungary's Ambassador to the United States.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Anne Marshall Zwack, a freelance writer in Bolgheri, and of the late Henry F. Argento.


POSTINGS: Replacing 'Pan Am'; Lighting Up 'MetLife' at 200 Park
The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company and its chief spokesbeagle, Snoopy, are hoping that Wednesday is not a dark and stormy night.
Sometime between 5 and 7 P.M. -- the exact moment has yet to be selected -- the company's new illuminated "MetLife" signs will be turned on at 200 Park Avenue.
They take over for the "Pan Am" signs that graced (or marred, depending on one's point of view) the New York skyscape on top of the north and south facades of the structure that opened in 1963 as the Pan Am Building.
Met Life has owned the 58-story building since 1981 and announced in September that it would replace the signs of the defunct Pan American World Airways.
"We thought that with Pan Am out of business they weren't a positive symbol for New York," said Joe Madden, a Met Life spokeshuman.
"We decided to replace them with a symbol of strength and financial stability, the symbol of a company that has been in New York since 1868." In addition to the "MetLife" signs, the company's logo, four interlocking M's, has replaced the Pan Am globes on the east and west facades.


Rock Shirts and Hip-Hop Hats
YOU'VE heard the compact disk; now buy the jacket.
That's the high concept behind Rock Embassy, a chain of music-related apparel boutiques installed last November in 32 Sam Goody and Musicland record stores throughout the country.
Rock Embassy goes beyond T-shirts, selling hooded jackets ($90), embroidered nylon button-down shirts ($50), long-sleeve cotton shirts ($25 to $30) and baseball-style caps ($20).
Made by various manufacturers, the clothing is often emblazoned with the logos of rap and heavy-metal artists.


'Martin Guerre' as Mystery Rather Than History
A HUSBAND.
A lover.
A stranger.
Though it reads like the blurb for a steamy novel or an X-rated film, the advertising copy is a come-on for "Martin Guerre," which is being billed as a new musical, in it world premiere engagement at the Hartford Stage.
Taken from an actual judicially documented case history, involving a strange disappearance and an even stranger reappearance, in a 16th-century village in southwestern France, the tale has been told and retold, most popularly, in the 1983 French film "The Return of Martin Guerre" with Gerard Depardieu.
Other accounts include fictional ("The Wife of Martin Guerre" by Janet Lewis, published in 1941) and nonfictional ("The Return of Martin Guerre" by Natalie Zemon Davis, 1983).
An opera by William Bergamo, based on Miss Lewis's novel, may be the story's most esoteric adaptation yet.
In contrast, a revisionist American film version set after the Civil War ("Sommersby" with Richard Gere and Jodie Foster) is to be released next month and is the newest contender for the mainstream.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
'CHILDREN OF PARADISE'
Marcel Carne's classic 40's film "Les Enfants du Paradis" is the basis for a production by the Theatre de la Jeune Lune of Minneapolis, to be presented at the Yale Repertory Theater in New Haven Friday through Jan. 30.


In the Ozone, A Child Shall Lead Them
THANKS to American children the environment may still have a fighting chance, according to an environmental research group.
"The Power of Children," a study released in October by Environmental Research Associates in Princeton, N.J., shows that many children have persuaded their parents to make choices as consumers that tend to protect the environment.
Children are more concerned about the environment than their parents are, the group concluded.


Alison Wilbur, Mark Thompson
Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Packer Wilbur 4th of Southport, Conn., have announced March wedding plans for their daughter Alison Mary Wilbur and Mark Jeremy Thompson, a son of Jeremy W. Thompson of Burnham Market, Norfolk, England, and Janie Preece of Fakenham, Norfolk.
Miss Wilbur, 25, is a real-estate consultant with Debenham, Tewson &amp; Chinnocks, property-investment consultants in London.
She graduated from Richmond College in London.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Southport Financial Corporation, a real-estate investment company in Southport.


Technology; Capturing Methane From the Coal Mines
Douglas C. Alexander stood slightly stooped and completely intent before his battered, hissing hydraulic drilling machine, which was wedged between the floor and the low ceiling of a coal mine 500 feet beneath the surface.
The machine had forced a slender steel pipe 1,480 feet into the wall of unexplored coal before him, but suddenly its progress had slowed, and two pressure dials, one measuring the fluid that pushed the pipe forward and the other the water that turned the drill bit at the tip, had shot higher.
He had missed his target.
Mr.
Alexander, a veteran of 14 years of coal mining, now turned driller, is at the literal cutting edge of a new technology intended to slow the greenhouse effect.
In an environmental experiment sponsored by the New England Electric System, Mr.
Alexander was drilling a well to capture the methane gas found here.
The methane, better known as natural gas, which is found in most deep coal mines, is 21 times more potent than carbon dioxide, ton for ton, entrapping heat when it is released into the atmosphere.


GENEVA TALKS TO PRESS ON
Negotiators trying to end the warfare in the Balkans said today that they would continue to press for a compromise despite indications that the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government was suspending its participation in the talks because of the killing of a Bosnian Deputy Prime Minister.
In another development that complicated the talks, Mr.
Boban, leader of the Bosnian Croats, asserted today that Muslim extremists had killed three ethnic Croats in Sarajevo on Thursday, including Josip Gogala, director of the Republic's Agency for Social Resources.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about the links between industry and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology misidentified a student working with M.I.T.'s New Products Program.
She was Amy Battles.


'Soul to Soul'
To the Editor:
Eric Foner's review of "Soul to Soul: A Black Russian American Family 1865-1992," by Yelena Khanga with Susan Jacoby (Dec. 13), is perceptive and enlightening, but seriously flawed by two instances of a saddening ideological thrust.
The first deals with Mr.
Foner's criticism of the author's "nostalgia for the prerevolutionary past, as if Stalin had invented Russian poverty, and neither prison camps nor stifling bureaucracy had existed under the czars."


U.S. Attacking New Strain of Whiteflies
THE Agricultural Research Service certainly knows how to get your attention.
A recent issue of its magazine, Agricultural Research, has a full-color cover showing James Duffus, a plant pathologist, wading through a California cotton field and raising up a flurry of whiteflies.
The cover illustrates concern for a multimillion-dollar problem: whiteflies are ruining the nation's crops as well as the home gardener's joys.
Through the magazine, the research division of the United States Department of Agriculture describes its research projects, usually devoting several pages to each project.
But this particular issue has a dozen pages about the whitefly research.


Where Olympus Stands on Its Move
Bennett Rechler's letter  [ Dec. 20 ]  incorrectly described the circumstances surrounding our firm's planned relocation to the Long Island Developmental Center site in Melville.
Olympus wishes to move the employees of its two major Long Island facilities into a modern corporate headquarters.
Mr.
Rechler's firm, We're Associates, holds the lease on our Lake Success office and has been aware of our plans to move for some time.
Additionally, Mr.
Rechler is familiar with our reason for wishing to relocate, as he has shown us larger Rechler-owned facilities, with the hope of retaining Olympus as a tenant.
Unfortunately none of the Rechler buildings meet our requirements.
Contrary to Mr.
Rechler's letter, the state is not offering Olympus special incentives to change sites.
Suffolk County is providing our builder with the benefits of a tax-abatement program that is comparable to similar assistance extended to firms delivering hundreds of new jobs and tens of millions of dollars of payroll activity to the county.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Dec. 26 MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village  $600,000
2 Cornelia Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2,400-sq.-ft. duplex condo in a loft building; part-time doorman, elevator, dining area, 11-ft. ceilings, 2 exposures, Washington Square view; common charge $1,034, taxes $300 (abated) Brokers: Sotheby's International Realty-Silverman Group)  SoHo  $350,000
100 Grand Street  3,000-sq.-ft. open-loft co-op; elevator, 13-ft. ceilings, 1 bath; maintenance $1,250, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Benavi Real Estate)  Upper East Side  $850,000
1010 Fifth Avenue (82d St.)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned elevator, 2 maids' rooms, dining room, fireplace; maintenance $4,001, 43% tax-deductible (Brokers: Corcoran Group-Sotheby's International Realty)  Upper West Side  $417,500
15 West 72d Street  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, windowed eat-in kitchen, 2 exposures, Central Park view; maintenance $1,099, 47% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side  $166,000
161 West 75th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; part-time doorman, eat-in kitchen, 9 1/2-ft ceilings; maintenance $760, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Solarz Realty)  BRONX  Parkchester  $20,000
1596 Unionport Road  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 626-sq.-ft. postwar condo; elevator, dining area, 2 exposures; common charge $187, taxes $300 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  Pelham Parkway  $180,000
2416 Matthews Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, rear deck, hospitality suite in finished basement, 1-car garage, 19- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,874 (Broker: ERA/Best Match Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Park Slope  $305,000
422 Sixth Avenue  2-family, 3-story attached brick house; 3 bedrooms, 2 bath, dining room in primary duplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; den in each; 19.6- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Frederick Palmer Real Estate)  Park Slope  $228,000
415 12th Street  2-family, 3-story brick Federal building; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room in owner's duplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, den in other; 16.8-by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,030 (Broker: Sommers Real Estate)  Sheepshead Bay  $212,000
1927 East 28th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, remodeled eat-in kitchen, finished basement, hospitality suite in finished basement, 2-car garage, 17.9- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,360 (Broker: Jacob Gold Real Estate)  QUEENS  Astoria  $240,000
30-16 32d Street  3-family detached wood-frame house; 2 bedrooms, dining room in second floor unit; 1 bedroom in others; 1 bath in each; finished basement, private driveway, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Century 21/Tri-Boro Terrace Realty)  Forest Hills Gardens  $625,000
23 Middlemay Circle  4-bedroom, 3-bath, one-family attached town house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Brokers: Century 21/FH-Greenways Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  New Bright  $88,000
113 Pendleton Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family attached brick town house; dinette, wall-to-wall carpet, hardwood floors, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $967 (Broker: Salmon Realty)  Tottenville  $135,000
118 Fisher Avenue  2-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family semi-attached wood-frame house; dining area, eat-in kitchen, sliding-glass doors to back yard, stand-up attic, 24- by 105-ft. lot; taxes $652 (Broker: Century 21/Papp Realty)


Flights Added For Carnival In Trinidad
BWIA International will add extra flights and use wide-body L-1011 planes to cope with demand during Trinidad's Carnival on Feb. 22 and 23.
The airline will also fly Trinidadian customs and immigration officers to Kennedy International Airport to clear passengers bound for the island.
Tickets for carnival concerts and parties may be reserved through the National Carnival Committee in Port of Spain, Trinidad, (809) 623-7510.
General information on the event is available from the Trinidad and Tobago Tourist Board, (212) 719-0540.


Dolphins Disregard the Rain, Pressure and Chargers
It came down to poise and a Dolphin game plan of such exquisite craft that Miami's offense, defense and special teams today cut through the pelting rain and romped over the mushy turf.
And so the confident Dolphins, who have performed in 27 playoff games, all under Coach Don Shula, guaranteed themselves still another one.
They routed the upstart San Diego Chargers, 31-0, in the divisional playoffs.


Quendale Journal; The Afflicted Shetlands Pray, for Man and Beast
With winds gusting at nearly 80 miles an hour, the mountainous surf explodes against the grounded tanker, each shuddering blow sending a thick oily spray over the enfolding cliffs.
The wind-blown oil is everywhere, giving off a cloying odor, making the eyes burn and leaving a bitter taste in the mouth.
The jagged rocks and steep muddy pastures above the wreck glisten with a slick black sheen.


Cowboys are Quicker on the Draw
Dallas's third touchdown, which gave them a 24-3 lead and put the game all but out of reach, came on a 23-yard run by Emmitt Smith in the third quarter.
It came on a draw play that is one of the Cowboys' favorites; that also means they often execute it better than other plays because they enjoy running it.
They have used it all season long and in both previous games against Eagles.
No doubt Philadelphia had prepared for the play, so the fact that the Cowboys scored on it indicates how well it was executed.
Basically, it's a cutback draw.
The Eagles knew this draw would be run but did not recognize it from this formation, which was a formation Dallas had been using in this game but not running the draw play on.
Dallas also says that this is Smith's best play and he makes things happen on it.


No Headline
"Half my friends are dead. For a gay man friends are everything. It's not like we have kids and families." -- JAFFE COHEN, a gay New Yorker who is not infected with H.I.V.  [ A1:1. ]


Yes, St. John the Divine Is the Largest Cathedral
To the Editor:
Your otherwise excellent Dec. 28 article on the centennial celebration at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine refers (in some editions) to the cathedral as the world's "second largest" and identifies St.
Peter's Basilica at the Vatican as the largest.


In Economics, a Subtle Exclusion
The glass ceiling for women in economics is rather thick.
Only a handful are tenured professors at the nation's top-ranked universities.
Men dominate the prestigious specialty of theorizing about how economies work.
And whenever women ask the American Economic Association to set up a child-care center for the group's annual three-day meeting, their request is turned down.
How to break into the top ranks is a subject of endless discussion among women in the field.
Lacking female mentors in the best graduate schools, burdened with child rearing and generally less interested than the men in becoming high priests of theory, the women view themselves as subtly excluded from the mainstream of their profession.


Boys Clubs' 'Positive' Ads
The Boys and Girls Clubs of America is introducing a multimedia pro bono campaign to recast the image of the not-for-profit organization in the local communities it serves.
The television, radio, print and outdoor campaign, created by Lintas New York, features the theme "The positive place for kids," replacing "The club that beats the streets," which had been used since 1982.


Life Takes Sales Of Ads In-House
Life will resume using its own staff to sell ads in the magazine, starting in March, after more than a year of being represented by ad sellers at its sibling, People magazine.
Nora McAniff, who was named Life's publisher last month, said a separate sales staff "is a critical ingredient in clearly defining and communicating" the magazine's message to potential advertisers.
Life had its own sales force from 1978, when it was revived as a monthly, until November 1991.


Open Markets Before Open Societies?
To the Editor:
"Schools in China Try a Sideline: Making Money" (news article, Dec. 27), on China's national obsession, coupled with your front-page report the same day on the struggle for a free press in Eastern Europe, suggests it is easier to start the pursuit of material well-being than to spread democratic ideas and practices in Communist societies, past or present.


Florio to Stress Fiscal Recovery in Address
Trying to capitalize on warmer relations with the Republican leadership in the Legislature, Gov.
Jim Florio will propose no new taxes when he delivers his State of the State Message Tuesday, aides to the Governor say.
They say the Governor, who is up for re-election in November, plans to emphasize a "new spirit of cooperation" with the Republican majority that swept into office on a tide of resentment over the $2.8 billion tax increase in 1990.


Ellen Sklar, Gil Elmaleh
Ellen Elizabeth Sklar, a daughter of Herbert and Dr.
Sheila Sklar of Bedford, N.Y., was married yesterday to Gil Elmaleh, a son of Stanley Elmaleh and Ellen Elmaleh, both of New York.
Cantor Raymond Smolover officiated at Le Chateau restaurant in South Salem, N.Y.
Mrs.
Elmaleh, 27, is an advertising sales representative at Advertising Age magazine in New York.
She graduated from Clark University.
Her father is the president of Sklar, Meshnick, Foran Advertising in Armonk, N.Y.
Her mother is a clinical psychologist in Hartsdale, N.Y.


Manning's Courtship With Brown Hits Rocks
DANNY MANNING wants to be traded from the Los Angeles Clippers because he wants a divorce from Coach LARRY BROWN.
"I think it's time for me to get away from Larry Brown," Manning was quoted as saying by The Orange County Register in Saturday's editions.
"It's just time to go our separate ways.


Corrections
A picture caption in Weekend on Friday, with an article about the Algonquin literary crowd and Hollywood, misidentified the actress shown with Claude Rains in a scene from "Crime Without Passion." She was Margo; Carmen Brown was the name of the character she played.


Child Custody Trial: Witch Hunt Or Protecting a Youth's Future?
The trial of a Long Island woman accused of fabricating her 8-year-old son's illnesses is to resume on Monday with final witnesses appearing in a case that her supporters say is a witch hunt against a caring mother.
The mother, Ellen Storck, is on trial in Suffolk County Family Court, fighting for the custody of her son, Aaron.
The child was removed from her care last July after doctors at Schneider's Children's Hospital in New Hyde Park said they believed she was fabricating her son's illnesses because she had a psychological condition known as Munchausen's Syndrome by Proxy.


Review/Dance; A Crop of Characters (Mostly Margie Gillis) With a Nature Theme
It may seem odd to quote Aristotle in connection with a dance program for children.
But he did declare that plot "is the first principle and, as it were, the soul" of drama, and, he added, "character holds the second place." There were lots of characters in "Margret of Roseland," which Margie Gillis presented on Saturday afternoon at the Joyce Theater.
But there was not enough plot.
Most of the characters in the hourlong production were portrayed by Ms.
Gillis herself.
The plot was the invention of Stephanie Ballard, who conceived, wrote and directed the show and choreographed it with Ms.
Gillis.
This Roseland was not the venerable New York City ballroom, but a garden explored by a pert, pigtailed little girl named Margret (Ms. Gillis) and a sad clown, played by Pierre Lavoie.
What made the clown sad was the way the earth is being polluted.
Yet when the two wanderers met the ever-so-cute creatures residing in the garden, they were refreshed by the spirit of positive thinking.


China Builds Its Military Muscle, Making Some Neighbors Nervous
Buoyed by a strong economy, China is making far-reaching improvements in its armed forces, leaving many Asian countries feeling increasingly threatened by the behemoth in the neighborhood.
While there is no sign that a war is likely any time soon, some military experts say that the equipment China is acquiring from Russia and other countries may upset the balance of power in Asia by the end of the decade.


Meredith Bowman Neuffer, Oriental Brush Painter, 70
Meredith Bowman Neuffer, 70, an artist who specialized in Oriental brush painting, died on Friday at her home in Weston, Conn.
She died of lung cancer, her family said.


Books of The Times; Court Drama: Rape Victim or Killer?
Degree of Guilt By Richard North Patterson 548 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


POLICE SAY LITTLE IN ILLINOIS KILLINGS
The police continued to give out little information today about the shooting deaths of seven people, whose bodies were found early Saturday morning in two coolers in the back of a fast-food restaurant here.
And although most residents said they understood the authorities' reluctance to discuss the murders publicly, some said they were angry because they did not know enough to decide whether to be scared.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A tax cut for the middle class might have to be delayed because of the soaring Federal budget deficit, three Democratic Congressional leaders said.  [ Page A1. ]
The glass ceiling for women in economics is rather thick.
Only a handful are tenured professors at the nation's top-ranked universities, and men dominate the field.  [ D1. ]


Nicholas U. Mayall, 86, Leader Of Studies on Nature of Universe
Nicholas U. Mayall, an astronomer and former director of the Kitt Peak Observatory in Arizona, died Tuesday at his home in Tucson.
He was 86.
He died of complications of diabetes, his family said.


Review/Music; A Britten Farewell to the Holidays
In what may have been the last and oddest program of the Christmas season, the Riverside Choral Society, under the direction of Patrick Gardner, performed Benjamin Britten's dramatic cantata "St. Nicolas" on Wednesday at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in Manhattan, together with choral music by Ariel Ramirez, an Argentine composer.
The program had been postponed from Dec. 11.
The juxtaposition of Church of England theatrics and South American tradition was initially jarring, but the performances had enough conviction to make the combination seem almost logical.
The Britten work is based on the life of the fourth-century bishop Nicolas, a rather fierce and fanatic dispenser of good works whom the modern figure of Santa Claus echoes as faintly as possible.
The narration of various miraculous episodes culminates in Nicolas's bringing back to life three boys who had been killed and cooked by an unscrupulous butcher (sort of "Peter Grimes" in reverse).
While the music is not Britten's finest, it has an immediate ceremonial effectiveness.
Mr.
Gardner expertly balanced and controlled the various vocal and instrumental forces, even though his chorus did not have an especially polished sound.
Stephen Oosting gave powerful, accurate and at times moving renditions of the tenor solos.
The audience enthusiastically joined in for two hymns.


Amgen and Miles Sign Small Biotech Concerns
Two fledgling biotechnology companies are planning to announce collaborations this week with established concerns to pursue new therapies for blood deficiencies.
The deals are typical of recent strategic links between large pharmaceutical or biotechnology corporations with cash and smaller companies with promising science.
On Monday, Amgen Inc., the largest biotech company, is scheduled to announce an alliance with Sugen Inc. to develop drugs using Sugen's work with drug-discovery techniques involving so-called receptors on human cells.
As part of the four-year collaboration, Amgen has purchased a 10 percent stake in Sugen, which is privately held.
Sources close to the deal said the price was about $10 million.


49ers Scrape Off Mud, And Put Up Their Feet
Candlestick Park needed sun and wind to dry out, and it got both this morning.
The good news is that George Toma, a premier lawn specialist, is on his way here, but the bad news is that a sun shower blew in this afternoon.
On Saturday, one of the only dry 49ers as San Francisco prevailed in its National Football Conference playoff game here against the Washington Redskins was offensive coordinator Mike Shanahan, who happened to spend the afternoon in the press box, communicating to the sideline.
"My shoes are the only ones not ruined," he said.


Review/Pop; A Rock-and-Roll Language Reflects Urban Dissonance
"Scissor, paper, rock . . . pajamas!" Todd Colby played a childhood game onstage at CBGB on Wednesday night, fluttering his hands in the old mimetic motions of folk metaphors.
But as usual Mr.
Colby twisted the game to suit his own ambitions.
As a poet, a singer and the main lyricist for the Lower East Side-based band Drunken Boat, Mr.
Colby makes serious sport of language, showing its basis in the body's impulses and its mutable meanings.
Drunken Boat's music echoes Mr.
Colby's word journeys, dipping into dissonance and resurfacing with lyrical streams of dreamy pop.
In "Necktie," Hadley Kahn pounded out a low, thick drumbeat in unison with Glenn Petry's bass, while the guitarists, Steve Gross and Todd Serbosek, discharged a few quarrelsome chords.
Above the din, Mr.
Colby shouted percussive, nearly nonsensical lyrics, the sonic equivalent of the exclamations in comic strip balloons.


Parade Permit Is Questioned By Cardinal
John Cardinal O'Connor sharply questioned yesterday New York City's decision to give the permit for the St.
Patrick's Day parade to a group that will allow a gay and lesbian group to march, suggesting that the move violated the constitutional separation of church and state.
Noting that the new sponsor said it would make the parade a more open political forum, the Cardinal, speaking during Mass at St.
Patrick's Cathedral, asked: "Do the Mayor and Police Commissioner agree to this arbitrary transformation from the religious to the political? Will other religiously related activities become equally vulnerable to arbitrary politicization in this land which boasts of its tradition of separation of church and state?"


Review/Opera; Smetana's Long-Absent 'Bride' Is Back in Town
Smetana's "Bartered Bride" comes from that curious no man's land in the operatic library where one finds scores that are too famous to be regarded as rarities, yet too infrequently heard to be truly considered standards.
Most seasons it is staged somewhere in the world, and the Met has a production stashed away somewhere.
But it has been many seasons since Smetana's marriage of folksiness and sophistication was last seen in New York.
That made it a logical choice for the Bronx Opera Company, an adventurous, inventive troupe that has been balancing standard repertory, just-off-center oddities and real rarities since 1967.
The company opened its 25th season on Saturday evening with a new production of "The Bartered Bride," using the English translation by Tony Harrison, at Lehman College in Bedford Park, the Bronx, and is to repeat it, with alternating casts, this Friday and Saturday at John Jay College, 899 10th Avenue, at 59th Street, in Manhattan.


Harvard Business Review Making Its Waves In-House
Most magazine publishers would rather make waves for what is between their covers than for the clumsy machinations of their editorial and business staff.
Yet the Harvard Business Review can't seem to help itself.
The revolving door at the review swung noisily again last week, ushering in one new editor and ushering out another barely four months after he had arrived and drawing attention to what has become a lightning rod for criticism on the Harvard University campus.


Devils Ooh and Aah as Brooks Juggles
Despite drastic changes in their line combinations in their last three games, the New Jersey Devils have had their most productive three games of the 1992-93 season, scoring 17 goals.
The Devils haven't been confused by such changes as the breaking up their most productive line -- Aleksandr Semak, Valery Zelepukin and Bobby Holik -- or the use of Stephane Richer at center rather than right wing and Dave Barr at right wing rather than center.


Market Place; A Vintage Case Of Manipulation
IN the land of securities cops and robbers, the cops operate at a big disadvantage.
It can take years to prove that an illegal act was committed, and in some cases the violators can thumb their noses at the entire procedure.
That was shown last week when the National Association of Securities Dealers proudly said it had taken action against a group of brokers it found responsible for manipulating a single Nasdaq stock in the spring of 1990.


Bosnia Talks Resume
Leaders of the three main warring factions in Bosnia and Herzegovina resumed peace talks in Geveva, after the Serb whose forces have seized more than two-thirds of the republic apologized for the assassination of a Bosnian Deputy Prime Minister on Friday.
Article, page A3.


Dance in Review
Jim Self St. Mark's Church


Might as Well Book Mojo Nixon
Comes now word that the future leader of the free world has reunited Fleetwood Mac to play at his inauguration.
There are many things, including some countries, that have split up and need to be put back together.
But the band formed by Mick Fleetwood, John McVie, Christine McVie, Lindsey Buckingham and Stevie Nicks isn't one of them.
They were the perpetrators of "Don't Stop (Thinking About Tomorrow)," the 1977 hit that President-elect Clinton adopted as his campaign theme.
Hearing it played endlessly at the 1992 Democratic Convention was a good reminder that Fleetwood Mac epitomized the least vibrant period of American rock.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Bear Stearns Cos. is offering $150 million of 5 7/8 percent notes due in 1996 at 100 through Bear, Stearns as sole manager.
The noncallable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's.
*
Bell Telephone Co. of Pennsylvania, a unit of Bell Atlantic Corp., is offering $100 million of 7.7 percent debentures due in 2023 at 98.767 to yield 7.807 percent through Merrill Lynch as sole manager.
Noncallable for 10 years, the debentures are rated Aa-1 by Moody's, AA by S.&amp; P., and AA+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The New Congress; 3 CONGRESSMEN SAY DEFICIT MAY DELAY CLINTON'S TAX CUT
Three Democratic Congressional leaders said today that a tax cut for the middle class, one of President-elect Bill Clinton's major campaign promises, might have to be put off because of the soaring Federal budget deficit.
The leaders, House Speaker Thomas S. Foley, George J. Mitchell of Maine, the Senate majority leader, and Representative Vic Fazio of California, chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, all made similar comments in nationally televised interviews.


Iraq, as Threatened, Prevents U.N. Inspectors From Flying In on Own Plane
In a challenge to United Nations authority, Iraq made good on its threat tonight and banned about 70 weapons inspectors from flying into the country from Bahrain on a non-Iraqi charter plane.
The move came two days after the Government of President Saddam Hussein stepped back from a confrontation with the West over Iraqi missiles threatening allied planes patrolling its southern region.


Emmitt Smith's Single Message
Dallas Coach Jimmy Johnson will tell you as often as you can stand to listen: Emmitt Smith is a great back.
Smith has led the league in rushing for two consecutive years but he still trails running backs Barry Sanders and Thurman Thomas in most polls and discussions of which player is best at the position.


Feeling at Home, Republicans Plan for Exile by the Potomac
They descended on Washington in January 1981, snarling at the inside-the-Beltway crowd of fixers, bureaucrats and opinion-makers and pledging to return power to the "real America" beyond the banks of the Potomac.
That was before Republicans discovered that their captured citadel could also be an exciting and exceedingly comfortable place to live and work.
So, when a dozen years of Republican hegemony ends next week, the Bush Administration's conservative elite will, by and large, wander but a few blocks into political exile.


Anchorage Journal; Again, Readers Can Hear Voice of Native Alaska
Inside a glass cage on the second floor of the Anchorage Museum of History and Art is a Royal Standard typewriter that once belonged to Howard Rock, a legendary Eskimo journalist who died in 1976.
On the keys of that old machine Mr.
Rock pounded out exposes, editorials and everything in between for the pages of The Tundra Times.
One year ago, the paper Mr.
Rock helped found seemed headed for museum status, next to his typewriter.
The Tundra Times, which has long called itself Alaska's oldest statewide newspaper and is the only journalistic voice for this state's 80,000 aboriginal people, ceased publication in December 1991, a victim of heavy debt.


KISSINGER PROTEST CHANGES A REPORT
A Senate committee investigating the handling of missing American servicemen in Southeast Asia toned down its criticism of former President Richard M. Nixon and his Secretary of State, Henry A. Kissinger, after protests from both men.
In an interview today, Mr.
Kissinger's lawyer, Lloyd N. Cutler, said that he and Mr.
Kissinger read portions of the draft report on Dec. 28 and succeeded in having some of the document's conclusions changed.
The report is scheduled to be made public on Wednesday.


Tributes to Neighborliness Aid Neediest
Amid all the heated debates over race and religion in New York City, Lila Soll would like to get a word in edgewise.
If she could have a few moments to speak, she could describe a heartening experience she had on Thanksgiving that seemed, for her at least, to symbolize the real state of relations in the city.
Ms.
Soll had to stop her car on the rain-slicked Long Island Expressway in Queens because of a flat tire.
One after another, two black men and one Hispanic man came by and helped make the repairs, she wrote in a letter to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund that she included with a check on behalf of her family.


Review/Music; The Very Model of a Guest Performer
Friday's performance of "H.M.S. Pinafore" by the New York Gilbert and Sullivan Players at Symphony Space limped aimlessly in its opening moments, apparently awaiting the appearance of John Astin as the First Lord of the Admiralty.
Importing a name performer to enliven a production and stir box-office response can be a two-edged tactic, as witnessed by John Rubinstein's rather overinflated star turn last season in the troupe's "Princess Ida." Mr.
Astin, however, sticks to his "script," and managed both to wake up a wavering audience and to energize his fellow players for the rest of the evening.
Mr.
Astin, known to television viewers as Gomez in the "The Addams Family," sings hoarsely and tiptoes around upper notes by means of little shouts, but he bestows a deftly manic approach on his famous opening sequence and has the verbal agility to keep Gilbert's fast-moving patter under control.
Mr.
Astin is less of a factor later on, mainly because the part gives him less to do.
But by this time the rest of the cast had pulled itself together.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Dec. 26, about a 101-year-old horse-racing fan, included a quotation that misstated the year Secretariat won the Preakness.
It was 1973.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday
None


Nets Reached the Apex Of the Laugher Curve
During the fourth quarter of the Nets' commanding victory over the Washington Bullets on Saturday night, Rafael Addison and Rumeal Robinson were in their customary positions, sitting next to each other at the end of the bench.
It was not an unusual sight -- they have been bench regulars because they play the same position as New Jersey's leading scorer, Drazen Petrovic (23.2 points per game).
But on Saturday, there was a difference: Addison and Robinson were sitting on the bench after having been given significant playing time and having made significant contributions as the Nets won, 124-79, setting a franchise record for margin of victory.


Going to Court to Stay on the Basketball Court
KEVIN SIMMONS'S friends talked him into switching from baseball to basketball in the ninth grade because, already tall for his age, he was still growing.
That was three years ago.
Today, he is 6 feet 8 inches tall and a hot college prospect.
But his growth as a high school basketball player has been stunted by the Board of Education.
When he applied for admission to Samuel J. Tilden High School in Brooklyn last September, the guidance department gave him a questionnaire to complete.
The 17-year-old answered four of the questions about extracurricular activities and career goals after graduation with a single word: basketball.


Aviva Lichter, Saul S. Gitlin
Aviva Lichter, the daughter of Hymie and Zelda Lichter of Johannesburg, was married there yesterday to Saul Szalita Gitlin, a son of Robert and Roslyn Gitlin of Bayside, Queens.
Rabbi Norman Bernhard performed the ceremony at the home of Dulcie Braude, a friend of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Gitlin, 29, graduated from the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg and is a doctoral candidate in clinical psychology at Yeshiva University in New York.
Her father is a salesman at L. Wechsler &amp; Company, a home furnishings store in Johannesburg.


Lanier's Number Is Up
When the Detroit Pistons retired BOB LANIER's jersey on Saturday night in Auburn Hills, Mich., it was a move that was long overdue.
But the ceremony was held up for years because Lanier, who was inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame last year, didn't like Pistons center BILL LAIMBEER.


Bridge
The gods of the game are fickle, and virtue is not always rewarded.
That is the moral of the diagramed deal, played a week ago in the one-day Swiss Team Championship at the conclusion of the New York Winter Regional.
Sitting North-South were Rick Zucker of North Tarrytown, N.Y., and Rose Johnson of Ossining, N.Y., who with two rounds remaining were leading the event teamed with Laura Brill and Rick Goldstein, both of White Plains.
In the style used by many tournament players, the three-no-trump response to one spade showed a pre-emptive raise to four spades with some defensive strength.
When North later admitted to possession of the heart ace, South took a reasonable shot at six spades.
She judged that the slam would depend at worst on the club finesse and might be better.


2 Officials Leave Time Warner Unit
Financial Desk Two marketing executives will leave Time Warner City Cable Advertising as the company says it wants to shift emphasis after it introduced New York 1 News, the 24-hour local news cable television channel, in September.
Larry J. Fischer, president of Time Warner City Cable Advertising in New York, said that with New York 1 News under way, marketing and research programs to help establish the channel's identity would give way to sales promotion efforts like matching advertisers with sponsorships similar to Budweiser's agreement to sponsor the New York 1 News nightly sportscast.


LEGISLATOR FAULTS U.N. OVER SOMALIA
The chairman of a Congressional delegation visiting American troops in Somalia sharply criticized the United Nations today, charging that it was delaying preparations for the transition from the United States-led military force here to a United Nations peace-keeping operation.
Representative John P. Murtha, a Pennsylvania Democrat, repeatedly criticized the world organization at a news conference at the gutted American Embassy compound.


Palestinian Expulsions Won't Stop Peace Talks; Desert Into Gardens
To the Editor:
The Rev.
Theodore Hesburgh, when president of the University of Notre Dame, suggested that many square miles of arid land outside areas Israel occupies could be made livable for Palestinians as follows:


Walter Gahagan, 82; Headed Dredging Firm
Walter Hamer Gahagan, whose dredging company helped in the creation of the launching pad for the Apollo space missions and in the construction of Kennedy and Newark International Airports, died last Monday at the Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center in Lebanon, N.H., near his summer home in Fairlee, Vt.
He was 82 and lived in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Mr.
Gahagan, who had been hospitalized since Dec. 13, died of pneumonia and other complications from lymphoma, said his daughter, Lillian Gay Gahagan.


New York State Must Free Appropriated Funds
To the Editor:
As Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York continues to pit motorist against straphanger in the battle for transportation dollars, there are $1.7 billion in state funds sitting on the desks of state officials that should be put to work repairing roads, bridges, mass transit and other public works infrastructure.


The Operative Word Is Wait
Dave Wannstedt, the Dallas Cowboys' defensive coordinator, might well become the next head coach of the Giants.
But not yet, perhaps not until after Super Bowl XXVII, three weeks from today, if the Cowboys get that far.
After the Cowboys' 34-10 playoff victory over the Philadelphia Eagles today, Wannstedt was asked if he had heard from the Giants.
He shook his head.


TV Hoopla for Inauguration
There will be more coverage of Bill Clinton's inauguration than of any other, and two cable entertainment networks have paid for the right to join in.
Television, page D1.


These Bills Have Stopped the Discord
Last year during the Super Bowl, the Buffalo Bills showed signs of a team on the verge of being fractured from within.
Defensive end Bruce Smith talked of leaving Buffalo, because he had received hate mail tinged with racial slurs, after trying to play his way back from knee surgery.


Serb Apologizes In Assassination Of Bosnian Aide
The three main warring factions in Bosnia and Herzegovina resumed peace talks here today after the Serb whose forces have seized more than two-thirds of the republic apologized for the assassination of a Bosnian official on Friday.
The discussions, which focus on a proposal to divide the country into 10 semiautonomous provinces dominated by various ethnic groups, got off to a late and shaky start in the afternoon, in part because Bosnia demanded the formal apology.


Healthy, Gay, Guilt-Stricken: AIDS' Toll on the Virus-Free
At age 40, Jaffe Cohen says he feels "older than everybody else." After stalking his circle of friends for more than a decade, AIDS has snatched and killed dozens of his contemporaries and left him with such a backlog of grief that sometimes when he is listening to music or relaxing under a hot shower he startles himself by letting out a sob.
"Half my friends are dead," said Mr.
Cohen, a gay man in New York City who has not been infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
"For a gay man friends are everything; it's not like we have kids and families."


Cowboys are Quicker on the Draw
Dallas's third touchdown, which gave them a 24-3 lead and put the game all but out of reach, came on a 23-yard run by Emmitt Smith in the third quarter.
It came on a draw play that is one of the Cowboys' favorites; that also means they often execute it better than other plays because they enjoy running it.
They have used it all season long and in both previous games against Eagles.
No doubt Philadelphia had prepared for the play, so the fact that the Cowboys scored on it indicates how well it was executed.
Basically, it's a cutback draw.
The Eagles knew this draw would be run but did not recognize it from this formation, which was a formation Dallas had been using in this game but not running the draw play on.
Dallas also says that this is Smith's best play and he makes things happen on it.


Abroad at Home; Two Cents Plain
In the final days of his Presidency, George Bush is conducting an all-out war.
The enemy is the Board of Governors of the U.S.
Postal Service.
The issue is whether the board can contest in the courts, without Justice Department approval, a proposed 2-cent cut in the postal rate for certain bulk mail.
Trivial?
Amazingly so.
That is what makes Mr.
Bush's obsession with it so interesting, and so revealing.


From Here to Infiniti: Love Holds Off Kite
Getting off to the kind of start that could spark a monster year, Davis Love 3d held off a charging Tom Kite today to win the season-opening Infiniti Tournament of Champions by one stroke.
While Kite was firing a course record-tying 64 ahead of him, Love posted a 69 for a total of 16-under par 272 over rain-drenched La Costa Resort and Spa.
Paul Azinger, who started the day one stroke behind Love, finished tied for third with Mark O'Meara at 275.


Essay; Now: Bet While You Booze
A pernicious philosophy of something-for-nothing is sweepstaking the country.
Politicians push state-sponsored gambling to bilk the poor while publishers back lotteries to deceive the public.
Here in the Democratic-dominated state of Maryland, Gov.
William ("Bet While You Booze") Schaefer has been visiting restaurants with bars to tout his solution to budget-balancing: keno, a numbers game under state auspices that entices patrons to stare at a television screen above the bar and to try their luck.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Enzon Inc., South Plainfield, N.J., 1 million shares of convertible preferred.
Prudential.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 11: MONDAY
Indiana Energy


INSIDE
A New Challenge From Iraq
Iraq forced 70 U.N. weapons inspectors to abandon a flight to Baghdad because the Government said they could carry out their missions only if they arrived on Iraqi planes.
Page A6.
Report on M.I.A.'s Changed
A Senate committee toned down its criticism of Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger over their handling of missing servicemen in Southeast Asia after both men protested.
Page B7. 2d Baboon-Liver Transplant
A 62-year-old man dying of hepatitis became the second recipient of a baboon liver at the University of Pittsburgh.
Page A12.
More Beach Damage on L.I.
Strong winds and heavy waves further damaged Long Island's badly eroded sand dunes and washed more homes into the Atlantic.
Page B1.


Dance in Review
Sally Silvers Performance Space 122


Review/Dance; Folk Forms and More From Siberia
A performance by the Krasnoyarsk Siberian Dance Company in Brooklyn on Saturday night was one of the most fascinating and provocative programs of national dances to come through New York City in recent years.
Founded in 1960 by Mikhail Godenko, who choreographed the 14 dances on the program at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College, Krasnoyarsk does not purport to offer unvarnished folk-dancing.
Those interested in specific cultural and dance forms might deduce that Siberian dancing requires an ability to glide, move quickly in small, low-kicking steps and fling oneself through the air in dizzying spins, jumps and no-handed cartwheels and somersaults, to mostly effervescent, "Hold That Tiger" orchestral scores.
The dances tend to unfold in shifting straight lines and in circles.


Ticking Into an Uncertain Future
He is a practitioner of an ancient craft, a watchmaker who for years has repaired old timepieces, salvaged heirlooms and struggled with more than a few stubborn hairsprings along the way.
But at the age of 59, after three decades of working and teaching, Frank Shank realizes time is catching up with him, and he is thinking about retiring before long.
Time, and technology, have also caught up with his trade; its veterans are reaching retirement without nearly enough people to replace them.
And while the watchmaking school where he works in Queens has managed to survive, it has survived despite a fear of obsolescence that kept many from the trade.


Leon Will Play the Part of Sparring Partner or Gate-Crasher to McGirt
On one side of the podium was the champion, who arrived 45 minutes late to his own news conference and was dressed as only a champion could: a black jumpsuit beneath a full-length fox coat, a leather cap turned fashionably backward, military-style boots and a cellular phone in his lap.
On the other side was the challenger, who wore faded jeans and a sweatshirt, who needed an interpreter to convey his emotions and who smiled amiably, as if he understood everyone's thoughts.


An Academic Issue Keeps New Jersey High School Star on the Sideline
Despite a recent suspension linked to a dispute over his status as a foreign athlete, Bob Keino of Ridgewood, N.J., the prince of one of running's royal families, might soon be back on the track in his quest to become the top high school runner in the United States.
Keino, a 17-year-old junior at Ridgewood High School who competes on the school's track and cross-country teams, is a son of two-time Olympic gold medalist Kip Keino of Kenya.
His victory in the state cross-country championships last November triggered an inquiry by the New Jersey State Interscholastic Athletic Association, which then found Keino and the school to be in violation of state rules.


Cliburn Competition To Videotape Entrants
The ninth Van Cliburn International Piano Competition is to hold screening auditions throughout the month of January.
The 188 pianists expected to audition (chosen from 251 applications submitted in October) will each be allowed a 50-minute recital, and will be videotaped under similar conditions by professional audio-video teams.
The applicants will then choose a 20-minute segment to be submitted to the jury in Fort Worth.
Thirty-five competitors will be invited to travel to Fort Worth for the main part of the competition, which is to take place from May 22 through June 6.


Registry for Gay Couples Holds Benefits and Risks
Denied the option of marriage and the legal protections it instantly confers, Barry Skovgaard and his companion of more than 13 years cobbled those protections together for themselves piece by piece.
They mingled their bank accounts, jointly bought property and signed statements assigning each other responsibility for making medical decisions, if necessary.
So when he got the news last week that Mayor David N. Dinkins had moved to give homosexual and unmarried heterosexual couples some of the rights enjoyed by married couples, Mr.
Skovgaard, a lawyer, had one reaction: "For me," he said, "it doesn't do a lot."


World-Class Research, for a Song
As the collapsing Russian economy began to threaten the republic's most respected research institutions last year, several American companies recognized a grand opportunity.
They began to hire Russian scientists on the cheap, for the equivalent of a few dollars per month per scientist.
The companies, including the likes of Sun Microsystems and Corning, did it to provide a research roof over the heads of some of the world's most eminent scientists and also to help solve problems that have long baffled American researchers.
Now, for example, from Russia to A.T.&amp; T. Bell Laboratories comes the smiling, jeans-clad husband-and-wife team of Aleksei N. Pilipetski and Yekaterina A. Golovchenko.
Young, Gifted and Russian
Both Ms.
Golovchenko and Mr.
Pilipetski are 30 years old, but look much younger, and both are scions of distinguished scientific families.
His grandfather, Yakov Zeldovich, was a colleague of Andrei Sakharov, the physicist, and an expert on black holes and neutron stars.
Ms.
Golovchenko's grandfather, Sergei Mardashev, was a prominent biochemist whose research helped to preserve the bodies of Lenin and Stalin.


Dehere Gives Seton Hall a Major Boost in Confidence
A brilliant first half by Seton Hall, paced by what arguably was Terry Dehere's best stretch of basketball, will be a carrier of confidence when Pirates meet Syracuse in a Big East game at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight.
In that first half on Saturday night at Providence, Seton Hall routed the Friars, a team that boasted the Big East's best defensive statistics.
The Pirates had a 54-29 lead at intermission.


Two Arrested As Fake Police In Thefts on West Side Road
A tip from a previous robbery victim led Saturday to the arrest of two heavily armed men who were posing as law-enforcement officials and pulling over a motorist on the Henry Hudson Parkway in upper Manhattan, the police said.
The police said the suspects, one of whom was identified by a law-enforcement official as a security guard for the city's Board of Education, may have been involved in several similar robberies along the West Side roadway, but they could not pinpoint the number.


'Crazy Eddie' Is Extradited to the United States


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The C.I.A; Campus Activist to Insider: Journey of the C.I.A. Nominee
Friends of Jim Woolsey, President-elect Bill Clinton's choice as Director of Central Intelligence, like to talk about the time after the 1968 election when he found himself in an argument with the Deputy Secretary of Defense about the Vietnam War.
Like many in his generation, the 27-year-old Army lieutenant, though fulfilling his R.O.T.C. service requirement at the Pentagon, strongly opposed the war.
But the deputy, Paul H. Nitze, had backed Mr.
Woolsey into a corner of the exclusive F Street Club, insisting that Eugene J. McCarthy's Presidential campaign had hurt the peace talks.
Refusing to Back Down
Mr. Woolsey, a founding member of the Yale Citizens for McCarthy, refused to yield.


Leslie Coopersmith, M. D. Greenberg
Leslie Sue Coopersmith, the owner of LSC International Inc., a confectionery importer and marketer in Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Michael David Greenberg, a founding partner of Corwin &amp; Greenberg, a New York law firm.
Rabbi Howard A. Strecker performed the ceremony at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.
Ms.
Coopersmith, who is 43, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the State University at Oneonta, N.Y.
She is a daughter of Jack and Anita Coopersmith of Boca Raton, Fla.
The bride's father, who is retired, was a senior vice president of Glenwood Management Corporation, real-estate managers in New Hyde Park, L.I.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Pollution-Weary Minorities Try Civil Rights Tack
In separate but strikingly similar grass-roots protests, hundreds of black, Hispanic, Asian and American Indian groups are battling pollution hazards by arguing that their neighborhoods have become America's industrial dumping grounds because they are poor and powerless.
Under the banner of environmental justice, these local groups have developed into a powerful new social movement that is applying the language and strategies of the civil rights movement to counter health threats as varied as toxic dumping and lead poisoning.


Less Costly Conferencing
The Picturetel Corporation, a top maker of videoconferencing systems, plans to introduce today a new and less expensive system aimed at a wider market of small and medium-size businesses.
Most makers of these picture telephone systems aim at large corporations with annual revenue of $1 billion or so.
The market is growing rapidly, but it is limited, offering the prospect of thousands of units sold annually, rather than the hundreds of thousands that might be sold to medium-size companies.


Editorial Notebook; An Oasis in Brooklyn
The first thing a visitor notices is the architecture: an oasis of inviting space in a forbidding desert of prison-like housing projects.
The new development, known as Genesis, promises a social oasis as well -- the chance for vibrant community life in a sick neighborhood.
Genesis merits attention in Washington, where national housing policy badly needs fresh ideas.
Andrew Cuomo, the New York Governor's son who has devoted himself to housing for the homeless, used $20 million in state and city grants to build Genesis in the East New York section of Brooklyn.
The project, which opened last summer, begins with a sensible plan: a low-density, low-rise apartment complex arranged around a central courtyard that creates a feeling of safety.


The Invisible Ms. Sabol
Q: Do you distrust the press?
A: Yes. Next question.
With those three little words spoken in an interview a year ago, Barbara Sabol, Commissioner of New York City's vast social services agency, left no doubt whatsoever that the less she saw of the press, the better.


Despite Growth Predictions, Times Are Turbulent at Fox
In a restaurant decorated to look like a scene from "Key West," a series starting next week on Fox, television critics, drinks in hand, mingled with network executives dressed in studiedly faded jeans.
Off to the side, assorted stars and starlets greeted one another with what seemed like over-rehearsed elan.
After a long day spent trying to sell Fox's new midseason lineup to the press, Sandy Grushow, the recently named president of the Fox Entertainment Group, surveyed the scene with tired satisfaction.
Fox, he said for the fourth or fifth time that day, was entering a new season of "growth and expansion."


Honoring Alwin Nikolais
Alwin Nikolais is to be honored for his 45 years as a choreographer and teacher on Wednesday at 8 P.M. at the Marymount Manhattan Theater, 221 East 71st Street.
The evening, which is to include performances and reminiscences by members of the dance world, is a benefit for the Nikolais and Louis Dance Lab, which Mr.
Nikolais founded with Murray Louis in 1948.
Tickets are $50.
Information: (212) 226-7700.


Big D Has New Meaning: Defense
It seems fashionable in pro football to talk about the Philadelphia Eagles' defense -- big, intimidating, always ready for the kill.
The Dallas Cowboys' defense?
Statistically, it ranked first in the N.F.L. this season, but the players were often dismissed as comparatively small, relatively experienced and prone to error.
But no one was dismissing the Cowboys' defense today, not after the way it manhandled the Eagles' potent offense in a 34-10 victory that propelled the Cowboys into the National Conference championship game next Sunday against the 49ers in San Francisco.


Review/Television; The Epic Of Oil, Catalyst Of Conflict
Admirers of "The Prize," Daniel Yergin's rich history of oil, take note.
The television version that occupies much of prime time on PBS this week is a gusher.
It is eight hours' worth of big deals and big dealers, high risks and low machinations, tough competition and imperialist adventures, technological achievements and social transformations, played out across the world.
A lucid narration, delivered by Donald Sutherland, is enhanced by the observations of Mr.
Yergin, a continuing presence through the series.
He is joined by historians, biographers and people who knew or worked with the industry's creators, to produce an absorbing account of what is justifiably billed as "The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money and Power."


Homes Lost as Tides Continue to Batter Beaches
Strong winds, heavy waves and the highest tides since last month's devastating storm caused further damage to Long Island's badly eroded sand dunes today, washing more homes into the Atlantic Ocean and widening breakthroughs in narrow barrier beaches.
Local officials said the new damage is an indication of what coastal areas in the region can expect from even minor storms in the wake of December's storm, which undermined both natural and artificial defenses against erosion.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  TEXAS RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with Jeff Huson, infielder, on a one-year contract, and Terry Bross and Robb Nen, pitchers, and Dan Peltier, outfielder, on minor-league contracts.
National League  COLORADO ROCKIES -- Announced that Dean Peeler, vice president-public affairs, has resigned and his position has been eliminated.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Agreed to terms with Chris James, outfielder, on a one-year contract, and with Ken Patterson, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
Invited Patterson to spring training.
Basketball National Basketball Association  MILWAUKEE BUCKS -- Signed Alan Ogg, center.
Continental Basketball Association  OKLAHOMA CITY CAVALRY -- Named Chico Averbuck assistant coach and director of player personnel.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Inaugural Is an Entertaining Proposition
Only an Olympics would get more television time in seven days than the festivities surrounding President-elect Bill Clinton's inauguration week, starting Sunday.
And no Olympics has ever been on this many channels.
Three broadcast networks and three cable channels will each carry some part of the celebration.
And for the first time, cable channels have paid the inaugural committee for exclusive rights to show such events.
After a campaign in which candidates became television stars by repeatedly going on talk shows, the inaugural week is shaping up as another instance of politics as entertainment.


CHRONICLE
FRANK SINATRA is this year's recipient of the Palm Springs International Film Festival's Golden Palm Award, which he received at a dinner attended by many of the entertainer's show business friends.
"Whoever put this all together -- it's absolutely thrilling," Mr.
Sinatra, who was visibly moved, said as he accepted the award Saturday night.
"I loved every minute of my life in show business. Every minute."


Hispanic Journalist Group Joins Colorado Boycott
Honoring a boycott of Colorado by gay-rights groups and others, the National Association of Hispanic Journalists voted over the weekend not to hold its annual convention in Denver.
The National Lesbian and Gay Journalists Association had lobbied the Hispanic group to move its convention after Colorado voters passed a referendum on Nov. 3 prohibiting the state's cities and Legislature from approving anti-discrimination protections for homosexuals.
The referendum also voided existing ordinances extending such protection in Aspen, Boulder and Denver. 'Difficult' Decision
The Hispanic organization's vote, on Saturday in Miami Beach, came as an increasing number of Hispanic journalists said they would not attend the convention if it was held in Colorado.
Many news organizations had been caught over what to do.
They are vigorously seeking to hire more Hispanic reporters and editors and usually send representatives to minority-journalist conventions.
Yet many are also trying to combat discrimination against gay journalists.


Corrections
An article in Styles of the Times yesterday about types of jeans described Mike Medavoy, a movie executive pictured in Entertainment Weekly, incorrectly.
He remains the chairman of TriStar Pictures; he has not been relieved of his duties.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  WHERE SURVIVORS ARE ALSO VICTIMS
The gay men who have been spared AIDS have nevertheless had their lives transformed by the disease and are suffering their own symptoms, mental health experts say.
Many are experiencing clinical depression, hypochondria and other serious psychological problems wrought by 12 years of unrelenting personal loss.
Some call it a mental health crisis that could have a serious impact on efforts to control the disease.
They say some gay men are relapsing into unsafe sexual practices and other self-destructive behavior because they do not want to survive, or do not think they will.
A1.


Washington Talk; Live on Inaugural Stage, Symphony of Diversity
Kenny Rogers, Harry Belafonte, Diana Ross and many other performers who will appear in the "Call for Reunion" concert next Sunday last came together for "We Are the World," the gathering of recording artists that brought attention and money to famine-stricken Ethiopia in 1985.
The cellist Yo-Yo Ma was not there, nor was the rapper L. L. Cool J. But both will be on hand on Sunday, stretching the limits of musical togetherness on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial for the concert that will kick off a week of activities for Bill Clinton's inauguration.


Cowbows are Quicker on the Draw
Dallas's third touchdown, which gave them a 24-3 lead and put the game all but out of reach, came on a 23-yard run by Emmitt Smith in the third quarter.
It came on a draw play that is one of the Cowboys' favorites; that also means they often execute it better than other plays because they enjoy running it.
They have used it all season long and in both previous games against Eagles.
No doubt Philadelphia had prepared for the play, so the fact that the Cowboys scored on it indicates how well it was executed.
Basically, it's a cutback draw.
The Eagles knew this draw would be run but did not recognize it from this formation, which was a formation Dallas had been using in this game but not running the draw play on.
Dallas also says that this is Smith's best play and he makes things happen on it.


Winter Bird Feeders Fatten the Parasites
To the Editor:
"Bird-Watching Biologists See Evolution on the Wing" (Science Times, Dec. 22) states that what influences birds in Europe and the United States is similar.
You say the blackcap warbler normally spends winters in the Mediterranean and its breeding season in Germany.
Birdseed placed in feeders in England has encouraged natural selection of a gene that directs some blackcaps to fly to England, rather than the Mediterranean.
You say Americans who feed winter birds also influence migratory paths.


A Cluttered Treasure-Trove Closes
A customer might wander into Alexander's Hardware, peruse its marvels for a wondrous lunch hour, then pick up a couple nuts and bolts from one of thousands of bins.
"No charge," Arthur Alexander would say. "I'll get you next time."


Stars Flock to Be in HBO Film About the Early Years of AIDS
The interior of a Moorish villa high in Beverly Hills has been redone to resemble a San Francisco town house.
Lily Tomlin is standing in front of cameras, portraying a public health official named Selma Dritz, who played an early role in trying to curb the AIDS epidemic.
She pleads with a wealthy San Franciscan, played by Steve Martin, who cannot admit that his brother is gay and has just died from AIDS.
"If you can help us," she begs, "it will be completely confidential. Names are never used. Only coded numbers."


Maxwell Hears Rumors
Houston Rockets guard VERNON MAXWELL said yesterday that he had been told San Antonio was trying to trade for him.
"I don't know if it's true, he told KTRH Radio in Houston, "but if I'm on the trading block, I'd like to have some input on where I go."


Corrections
An article on Thursday about community groups' role in the revitalization of the Bronx referred incorrectly to the financing of a program to help the groups plan.
The Surdna Foundation did the initial work in developing the program -- the Comprehensive Community Revitalization Program -- but nine other foundations and corporations contributed money.


Tokyo Stocks Drop
Stocks continued their slide today.
At the close of trading, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 45.14 points, or 0.27 percent, to 16,589.55.
On Friday the Nikkei fell 146.29 points.


Sunbeam Dismisses Chairman
The Sunbeam-Oster Company, a consumer-products concern whose turnaround had become a case study at the Harvard Business School, said yesterday that it had dismissed Paul B. Kazarian, its chairman, chief executive and president.
The boardroom ouster left Wall Street analysts and Mr.
Kazarian himself slack-jawed.
"It's absolutely shocking," Andrew Shore, an analyst at Paine Webber, said.
"He's been driving that business since September 1990, and the results speak for themselves."


Review/Opera; Making Fun of the Frailties of Gods and Mortals
At Merkin Concert Hall on Saturday night, the Chief Priest wore a giant fish hat and held out his hand for a tip after making the requisite hocus-pocus gestures.
Every time Jupiter emerged from a cartoon cloud that opened like an elevator, a bell rang as if the deity were arriving at the ladies' foundations area of a department store.
Sometimes the costumes made it seem that way as well: the nymph Pasithea appeared in an outfit that might have been from Frederick's of Hollywood, a bright red garter belt and stocking outfit with a white feather boa and a pair of handcuffs.
Jupiter jumped into a bubble bath, apparently in his birthday suit.
Even the musicians did not keep their minds on the score.
This was a production of "Semele" but hardly the "Semele" that Handel's operatic setting gives us with its pastoral scenes and hints of high tragedy.
This opera is based on the very same libretto (written by the Restoration dramatist William Congreve) and was completed by the English composer John Eccles in late 1706.
It takes the same story from Ovid, of the young girl (Semele) in love with a god (Jupiter); she is tricked by the god's jealous wife (Juno) into demanding to see him in divine form; she dies from the exposure.
The composer -- Purcell's heir in the English theater -- never heard the work.
It is influenced by Italian opera, with declaimed recitatives and da capo arias, but by the time "Semele" was ready for performance, the fashion in London demanded authenticity: operas in Italian from Italy.


Palestinian Expulsions Won't Stop Peace Talks; Safety of Citizens First
To the Editor:
In "Don't Orphan the Peace Process" (editorial, Dec. 18), you shamefully suggest that Israel's attempt to insure the safety of its population and the brutality of Hamas have equal negative impacts on the peace talks.


Dr. Luther H. Gulick, 100, Dies; Adviser to Roosevelt and Mayors
Dr.
Luther H. Gulick, a former New York City official who advised President Franklin D. Roosevelt and several other leaders on the intricacies of public management, died yesterday at a nursing home near Greensboro, Vt.
He was 100.
Dr.
Gulick, who until recently had lived with his son, Luther Jr., in Potsdam, N.Y., died after a recent struggle with the flu, said Dr.
Lyle Fitch, a family friend and former colleague.


Patents; Increasing Production Of a Virus
IN what could be a big step forward for gene therapy, a small company in California has patented a way to produce large quantities of a virus that can be used to "infect" patients with the genes they need to fight illnesses like cystic fibrosis.
Viruses are central to gene therapy, the still-nascent science of inserting bits of DNA into a person to correct genetic defects that lead to particular disorders.
Human tests are already well along on a gene therapy for cystic fibrosis, and researchers hope it can eventually be used to treat sickle cell anemia and many other illnesses.


Accounts
*
Hannaford Bros., Scarborough, Me., to Houston Effler &amp; Partners Inc., Boston, to handle supermarket chains like Shop 'n Save and Sun Foods, previously at Wolkcas Advertising Inc., Albany.
Billings were not disclosed.
To take Hannaford's account, Houston Effler resigned the account of Purity Supermarkets Inc., Billerica, Mass., which a Purity spokesman said would now be handled in-house.
Billings were not disclosed. *
New York City Off-Track Betting Corp., New York, to Bozell New York, to handle its account, previously at Grey Entertainment &amp; Media, New York.
Bozell was awarded the account in a review that also included the incumbent and several other undisclosed New York agencies.
Billings were not disclosed.


A Fashion Neophyte Steps in at British Vogue
She has written for Tina Brown, been employed by Anna Wintour's stepmother and succeeded Elizabeth Tilberis as the editor of British Vogue.
Can the top of an American masthead be far behind?
Alexandra Schulman got the job even though she has no fashion background.
She was previously editor of British GQ, having gone there from Vogue where she was Ms.
Tilberis's features editor.
Now that she's back, British Vogue, which celebrated its 75th anniversary last year, seems to be thriving.


Eagles Tell What Went Wrong, Then Ask, Is This Goodbye?
After their 34-10 drubbing by the Dallas Cowboys today, the Philadelphia Eagles trudged off the field.
In the first row of the stands, above the tunnel to their locker room, a young fan held a rubber chicken dangling from a string.
The chicken wore a green jersey with No. 12, the number of the Eagles' quarterback, Randall Cunningham.


Iraq, as Threatened, Prevents U.N. Inspectors From Flying In on Own Plane; Iraqis Cross Into Kuwait
About 200 Iraqis crossed the border with Kuwait today and seized missiles and other weapons before returning to Iraq, the Kuwaiti press agency said.
The report from the Persian Gulf region quoted Abdel-Latif Kabbaj, chief of a United Nations observation mission, as saying that his observers had tried to block the Iraqis with their cars during the 90-minute incident.
He said an Iraqi vehicle hit one of the cars, but that no one was hurt.


Sports of The Times; Wannstedt Adds to Giants' Resume
NOW that Dave Wannstedt is believed to be the Giants' current choice as their next coach, the cover page of his resume was in lights yesterday on the Texas Stadium scoreboard: 34-10.
As the Dallas Cowboys' defensive coordinator, Wannstedt had devised the strategy that hogtied the Philadelphia Eagles' offense with only 178 net yards.
Randall Cunningham was sacked 5 times and scrambled for only 22 yards while completing 17 of 30 passes for 160 yards.
Herschel Walker rushed for only 29 yards, Heath Sherman for only 12 yards.


James J. Mallen, Parks Official, 87
James J. Mallen, who served as a borough director of parks in Brooklyn, Queens and Staten Island, died on Wednesday at his home in Paris.
He was 87 years old and had lived in France since his retirement from the Parks Department more than 30 years ago.
Mr.
Mallen died after being stricken several weeks ago with acute leukemia, said his daughter, Pam DeFilippi of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.


San Francisco Notes 10,000th AIDS Death
Mayor Frank Jordan ordered flags on municipal buildings flown at half-staff on Friday and called for five minutes of silence at 9 A.M. to note this city's 10,000th recorded death from AIDS.
Officials of the city's Department of Public Health said the latest victim died Wednesday morning at San Francisco General Hospital.
He was identified only as "a gay Latino male in his 30's."


Clinton Says Goodbye to His Home Congregation


CHRONICLE
OPRAH WINFREY will talk with MICHAEL JACKSON in a 90-minute special next month in what ABC officials say will be the pop star's first live interview.
It is to be broadcast worldwide, The Associated Press reported.
Mr.
Jackson will talk with Miss Winfrey at his ranch in the Santa Ynez Valley north of Los Angeles, the president of ABC Entertainment President, TED HARBERT said on Sunday.
The interview will be seen worldwide through a distribution agreement, Mr.
Harbert said.
He said Mr.
Jackson's manager approached Miss Winfrey with the idea.


An Old-Style Licking, With No Mercy Asked
The San Diego Chargers didn't want to hear any of a multitude of excuses they could embrace.
Not about a glaring lack of playoff experience costing them.
Not about the incessant rain at Joe Robbie Stadium today.
Nor even about the fact that 16 of the last 17 American Conference playoff games have now been won by the home team.
Nor did the Chargers feel a 31-0 loss, to the Miami Dolphins, is what inevitably happens when you build a 12-5 record by playing a relatively weak schedule after a fifth-place finish the year before.


F.D.A. Drug Reviews in '92 Fall Short of a Record Pace
In authorizing 26 important new drugs in 1992, the Food and Drug Administration failed to match the record high of 30 approvals in 1985 and 1991.
But under prodding from the pharmaceutical industry and Congress, the agency hopes to slash last year's average review period of more than 22 months for promising new treatments.
Already, the F.D.A. has proved its ability to accelerate the review process for chemical compounds that were perceived as priorities.
The agency said that in 1992 it had approved four high-profile products in less than eight months: Hoffmann-La Roche's DDC for treatment of advanced cases of AIDS; Burroughs Wellcome's Mepron for AIDS-related pneumocystis carinii pneumonia; Bristol-Myers Squibb's Taxol for ovarian cancer, and SmithKline Beecham's Halfan, an anti-malaria drug.


CHRONICLE
In terms of seniority on the club scene, HOWARD STEIN, who owns Au Bar, considers himself and his establishment on East 58th Street positively ancient.
That is why he is planning a big party for Au Bar's fifth anniversary next Monday.
"Nightclubs don't usually last that long -- success is about a year and a half -- so in my mind, Au Bar will be 35 and I will be 350 years old," Mr.
Stein, who is 50, said the other day.


Hospital Criticized in Veterans' Suicides
Janice DiRaffaele believes her husband, Christopher, would be alive today if officials of the Veterans Affairs hospital here had heeded her warnings about his erratic behavior and suicidal tendencies.
"I begged the doctor and the nurses to put him in a locked ward," she said.
"I was frightened for him, for me, for my kids. I'd never seen him the way he was acting. Before I left I was assured he would be O.K., that he was locked in. He was gone within an hour."


Will the Islanders Miss Something Down the Road?
Like men left to ponder the exhaust fumes of a bus they've just missed, so the forlorn Islanders are starting to worry that the playoffs are about to pull out of sight.
Three straight losses, all of them by a single goal and all of them in games they had led, have marooned the team seven points in back of the Devils and the Rangers, who are tied in third place in the Patrick Division.


Review/Pop; A Melancholy Wise Guy With an Knack for the Truth
Loudon Wainwright 3d is infuriating.
He's a WASP with attitude, a proselytizer for cynicism.
When he's not irritating, Mr.
Wainwright is irritated: at people spelling his name wrong, at the Christmas buying frenzy or at folk singers constantly reinventing that old saw "Kumbaya." But Mr.
Wainright's most maddening trait is his cold eye, which allows him to utter common truths that most folk singers would find too unpleasant for acoustic accompaniment.
Mr.
Wainright is also very funny, and his wise-guy charm has made him a favorite with folk audiences over the past quarter-century.
As a young "new Bob Dylan," he was frantic, bedraggled, the closest thing on the coffeehouse circuit to punk rock.
Now in middle age, Mr.
Wainwright shows his pensive side more often; his bitterness has turned to melancholy.
On his 13th album, "History" (on Virgin Records), he details family battles and personal disappointments, but also offers a small, potent shot of renewed faith.


Some Rates Feel a New Push Higher
Longer-term interest rates are coming under upward pressure again as investors and traders seem to be focusing on the uncertainity over the coming change in Administrations and the Democrats' taking control of both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue.
But shorter-term interest rates could hold steady for now if the news in Friday's employment data -- that economic growth is still very slow -- continues.


Ukraine: Barrier to Nuclear Peace
Last weekend's treaty pledging dramatic reductions in nuclear arms could dispel fears of a devastating first strike forever.
That puts America and Russia "at the threshold of a new world of hope," in President Bush's well-chosen words.
Whether they cross that threshold, however, depends on Ukraine and other former republics that claimed title to nuclear weapons on their soil after the breakup of the Soviet Union.
Russia is not obliged to begin dismantling its arms until Ukraine ratifies the 1991 Start I treaty.
And Moscow says it won't disarm until Ukraine also confirms its intention to become nuclear-free by signing the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.


Schwarzkopf's Strategy Wins in Bookstores, Too
General H. Norman Schwarzkopf's autobiography is called "It Doesn't Take a Hero." But that is apparently exactly what it took to make this book an overwhelming success and to overcome the skepticism of a broad range of people in the publishing industry who doubted that it could sell enough copies to earn back the author's multimillion-dollar advance.
When Bantam Books beat out several other publishers in June 1991 and signed General Schwarzkopf to a $5 million world rights deal for his life story, many people openly questioned whether a year to 18 months after the Persian Gulf war, the American public would turn its notoriously fleeting attention span back to the victorious general. 'People Are Looking for Heroes'
After all, remainder tables are strewn with the failed memoirs of celebrities and politicians who fell out of the public eye or favor after securing lucrative publishing contracts.
Add a recession to the picture and a $25 price tag to the book, and booksellers, other publishers and even some people within Bantam wondered whether the book could earn back the advance even if it became a best seller.


Amy D. Klein and Bruce R. Bender
Amy Diane Klein, a financial analyst with the finance committee of the New York City Council, was married yesterday to Bruce Richard Bender, the chief of staff to Councilman Herbert E. Berman of Brooklyn, the finance committee's chairman.
Rabbi Chaim Stern performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Bender, 26, graduated from Kenyon College.
She is a daughter of Franklin Klein of New York and Wendy Klein of Mount Kisco, N.Y.
The bride's father is the president and chief executive of Mr.
Witt Inc., a shirt manufacturer in New York.
Her mother is a personnel counselor at a Career Blazers employment agency in Stamford, Conn..


World Economies


Jacqueline Merl, Richard Altman
Jacqueline Ruth Merl, a daughter of Murray and Harriet Merl of Fairfield, Conn., was married yesterday to Dr.
Richard Eliot Altman, the son of Irving and Patricia Altman of Glendale, Queens.
Rabbi Stephen Pearce performed the ceremony at the Inn at Longshore in Westport, Conn.
Mrs.
Altman, 28, is a defense policy analyst in McLean, Va., for Science Applications International Corporation, a research and development company in San Diego.
She graduated from Syracuse University and received a master's degree in international affairs from George Washington University.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  WEAPONS BUILDUP IN CHINA
Buoyed by a strong economy, China is making far-reaching improvements in its armed forces, leaving many Asian countries feeling increasingly vulnerable.
Some say the equipment China is acquiring could in time be seen as threatening the balance of power in Asia.
A1  CUBA STRUGGLES, MOSTLY ALONE
With Cuba ever more an island, President Fidel Castro tries to stand fast against the winds that have blown away most of the Communist world, along with its subsidies for Cuba and its markets for Cuban goods.
A1


Castro's People Try to Absorb 'Terrible Blows'
His island ever more an island, his scraggly beard gone gray, President Fidel Castro stands fast against the winds that have blown away most of the Communist world, along with its subsidies for Cuba and its markets for Cuban goods.
"Only socialism, only the revolution could absorb the terrible blows that we have received," the 66-year-old leader says.


Sports of The Times; Jacksonian Democracy: Free Agents Pay Off
SHUDDERS of terror passed through the National Football League owners yesterday.
They have seen the future, and it scores touchdowns, but it costs money, lots of money.
Keith Jackson, who plays the most dreaded position of all -- free agent -- scored two touchdowns as the Dolphins hydroplaned over the Chargers, 31-0, to advance to the American Conference championship game next Sunday.


17 Bosnians Brought In From the Cold
When Natalija Dragoljevic was carried out of the home for the elderly in an embattled western suburb today and taken by armored vehicle to a French military clinic at the airport, the first thing the 92-year-old woman noticed was the heating.
"Nice and warm, nice and warm," she said, over and over, after two French marines carried her into a warehouse at the Sarajevo airport that serves as a clinic.
"Thank you, a very big thank you to you all."


A Last Hurdle for Shoppers: The Checkout-Counter Pitch
SUPERMARKETS are beginning to resemble obstacle courses as wary shoppers dodge a plethora of in-store advertising and promotional gimmicks sponsored by marketers who seek to expose consumers to sales pitches just one more time before they buy.
Maybe some shoppers do manage to snub the salesmen dressed as Ben and Jerry, offering samples of new Elvis Praline ice cream; to ignore the tiny billboards affixed to shelves, and to hum loud enough to drown out the commercials droning over the loudspeakers.
But unless the consumer is intent on shoplifting rather than shopping, there remains one last danger zone that cannot be avoided: the checkout counter.


A Dominant Dallas Rings Philadelphia's Bell
A year ago, the Dallas Cowboys strode into the playoffs and won in the first round at Chicago against the Bears.
They returned home giddy over the prospect of a repeat performance the following week in the Pontiac Silverdome against the Lions.
They were thoroughly thumped by Detroit, 38-6.


France Jails Woman for Daughters' Circumcisions
Condemning a widely practiced African custom as a crime, a French court has sent a Gambian woman to jail for mutilating the genitals of two baby daughters by having them circumcized.
The court's ruling, made on Friday, is considered a landmark because never before has an African parent here been sent to prison for this age-old Muslim ritual, even though health workers and women's groups have warned immigrants for nearly 10 years that the practice is illegal.


Treasury to Sell Bills and Notes This Week
Treasury financings this week include today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills, which will be followed by an auction of a seven-year note on Wednesday.
Traders said that by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the three-month bill outstanding was at 3.04 percent and on a six-month bill, 3.19 percent.
And in when-issued trading, the seven-year note was being offered at a price to yield 7.46 percent.


Palestinian Expulsions Won't Stop Peace Talks
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis maintains in "How Terror Wins" (column, Dec. 21) that Israel's expulsion of 415 Islamic fundamentalists of the Palestinian Hamas movement enabled Hamas to derail Arab-Israeli peace talks.
The opposite, however, may be true.


Palestinian Expulsions Won't Stop Peace Talks; Israel Exploited Rift
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal fails to mention in "As You Sow" (column Dec. 22) that during the first year of the Hamas movement, the actions of the Israeli defense force initially resulted in an encouragement, rather than a crushing of the movement.
A growing ideological division between Palestinians was viewed by the army as favorable to a politically unified community in the occupied territories.


Former I.B.M. Executive To Run Venture in Israel
Sanford Kane, the former I.B.M. executive who led an unsuccessful effort to build a United States computer memory company called U.S.
Memories, has been named to head an Israel-based joint venture between the National Semiconductor Corporation and Defense Software and Systems Inc., of New Jersey.
Mr.
Kane, who has been named a vice president of Defense Software, was former vice president of industry operations for I.B.M.'s General Technology Division.
The new company will take over National Semiconductor's chip-making operations at Migdal Haemek, Israel.
Mr.
Kane will be chairman and chief executive of the joint venture, which does not yet have a name.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali's visit to Ethiopia referred to the President of El Salvador incorrectly in some editions.
He is Alfredo Cristiani.


Fighting the Battles of Somalia Locally, Over Tea
There is not much glamour to the Buff Buff Buff social club near the Sugar Hill section of Harlem.
It is a spare, smoky room with a few round tables, a refrigerator, a television.
But a loyal band of patrons is drawn there nightly to sit glued to CNN and debate the future of Somalia.
The Buff Buff Buff is a Somali-only club, a gentlemen-only club, at least informally, where Somali immigrants have gathered every evening for the last eight years to discuss the state of statelessness in their homeland while sipping tea and sodas and chewing khat, a plant stimulant popular in the East African country.


Dinkins Addresses Jewish Community Council in Upper Manhattan


Results Plus
N.H.L.
Injured Lindros Absent As Flyers Beat Oilers Rookie Tommy Soderstrom stopped 29 shots for his first National Hockey League shutout as the improving Philadelphia Flyers beat the Edmonton Oilers, 4-0, last night.
Kevin Dineen and Mark Recchi scored two goals each as Philadelphia won its third straight game and improved to 5-1-2 in its last eight.
The Flyers beat the Oilers without rookie center Eric Lindros, who reinjured his left knee in Saturday's 4-3 victory over the Rangers.
Lindros had fluid drained from the knee yesterday and is listed as day to day. (AP)


Inspirations on Martin Luther King Jr.


Here Come Knicks, But There Goes Game
A terrific rally by the Knicks fell short last night.
They could not overcome a 23-point third-quarter deficit.
They could not overcome three quarters of inept offensive basketball.
But did they ever come close.
John Starks missed a 25-foot 3-point jumper with 2 seconds to play, and the Boston Celtics (17-17) held on for a 100-97 victory at Madison Square Garden.


Too Quick Off the Gun
BEN JOHNSON was disqualified from a Mobil Grand Prix race in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, on Saturday after he was charged with two false starts in the 60-meter dash.
He said he was too fast for the race officials: "I react so fast to the gun, they can't believe I'm not jumping the gun."


Dance in Review
Javier De Frutos Dia Center for the Arts


Man Dying From Hepatitis Is Given a Baboon's Liver
A 62-year-old man became the world's second recipient of a baboon liver yesterday in a transplant at the University of Pittsburgh that was part of an effort to overcome the species barrier and alleviate the growing shortage organs from human donors.
The patient was dying from hepatitis B, a virus that destroyed his liver, building up bile in his blood and giving his skin a deep yellow hue.
But his chronic active hepatitis B infection would most probably infect a donated human liver, making him ineligible to receive a donated human organ at most transplant centers, including the University of Pittsburgh, which is the largest one in the country, officials said.
Baboon livers are believed to be resistant to hepatitis B.


Rabin, Meeting U.N. Aide, Hints At Possible 'Solutions' on Exiles
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin told a United Nations official today that Israel stood by its decision to deport more than 400 Palestinians, but he said that "with good will there could be solutions to the problem."
Mr.
Rabin did not say if he had a specific idea to end a crisis that began last month, when his Government expelled the Palestinians to southern Lebanon and brought on itself worldwide condemnation, including a Security Council resolution demanding the exiles' return.


Tax-Exempt Issue By Texas Agency
A $153.8 million issue of tax-exempt refunding bonds by the Sam Rayburn Municipal Power Agency in Texas, was tentatively priced yesterday to yield a maximum of 7.015 percent for a bond due in 2015.
Underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc. said other long maturities include a bond due in 2017 that was priced to yield about 7 percent, and one due in 2008 priced to yield about 6.80 percent.


British Air Tells Virgin Air It's Sorry and Pays $945,000
After two years of intense feuding with Richard Branson's Virgin Atlantic Airways, British Airways admitted today that it had made improper attempts to undermine its upstart rival.
British Airways agreed to settle the case by apologizing to Mr.
Branson and paying him and his company $945,000 in damages.
It also agreed to pay all court costs stemming from a suit brought by Mr.
Branson, estimated at $3 million.


Review/Theater; A Musical That Pokes Fun At 30's Songs and Films
Had Tennessee Williams and Cole Porter collaborated on a musical with Charles Ludlam, the result might have resembled Tom Judson's show "White Cotton Sheets" in tone if not in quality.
The musical, presented by the Under One Roof Company at the One Dream Theater in TriBeCa, is one of the more eccentric exercises in genre scrambling to be seen on a New York stage recently.
A folk musical, a Southern melodrama and a campy nostalgic spoof rolled into one, it suggests a cracker-barrel "Grand Hotel" played largely for laughs.
In a Southern hotel on a hot August night in 1931, a bunch of Depression-era movie stereotypes collide, with predictable Sturm und Drang.
They include Ruby Pearl (Dori Kiplock), a tough-talking torch singer who dreams of a bigtime nightclub career; Clarence (David Pittu), the babbling hotel bellboy who is smitten with her; Elmer (Mr. Judson), Ruby's hard-drinking pianist, and Mr.
LaBarge (Stephen Pell), the fussbudget hotel manager.


Justices Shun 2 Cases Involving Free-Press Claims
The Supreme Court sidestepped two potentially important First Amendment cases today, declining to hear appeals from a newspaper reporter sentenced to jail in Florida for refusing to identify a confidential source, and from a magazine facing a $4.3 million damage award for a contract murder that resulted from a classified advertisement placed by a man seeking work as a "gun for hire."
The Court made no comment in turning down the two cases.
The Justices' lack of interest in the Florida reporter's case was somewhat surprising because last summer Justice Anthony M. Kennedy ordered the state to delay enforcing the 30-day sentence until the Supreme Court could decide whether to hear the appeal.
Justices usually reserve such orders for cases they deem most likely to garner the four votes needed to win a review on the merits.


Computer Data Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Young Dials, Wannstedt Answers
General Manager George Young of the Giants made his first contact today with Dave Wannstedt, the Dallas Cowboys' defensive coordinator.
But although Wannstedt seemed to be Young's leading candidate to become the Giants' new head coach, Young and Wannstedt both said that no job offer was made.
"I think we talked for 10 or 15 minutes," Wannstedt said of the telephone conversation.
"It went good. Basically, we talked about generalities, and there was some small talk about the Eagles' game yesterday.


Atom Plant Aid Offered
The Department of Energy and 16 utilities announced yesterday that they would provide $150 million to help pay for detailed engineering work on two new nuclear power designs.
The two designs are a significant part of the nuclear industry's effort to revive itself after 15 years without any plants being ordered.
One is a 1,300-megawatt General Electric model, two copies of which are now under construction in Japan, and the other is a 600-megawatt "advanced passive" design proposed by the Westinghouse Electric Corporation.
Westinghouse said yesterday that it expected to get the larger share of the $150 million because its reactor was more of a departure from past designs than the General Electric model.


Prep School Teacher Faces Sentencing


Forstmann &amp; Co. reports earnings for 13wks to Nov 1


Collective Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


How to Go a Long Way Toward Being Safe, Not Sorry, With Data
THERE are few things sadder, or more annoying, than a computer gone bad.
Take my computer, please.
Save file.


Royal Palm Beach Colony L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Seeq Technology Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Q&amp;A
The Slingshot Effect
Q.
When the Galileo spacecraft swung by Earth to get a "gravity assist" on its way to Jupiter, where did the energy come from?


BRIEFS
Debt  *
American General Finance Corp., a unit of the American General Corp., is offering $150 million of 6 7/8 percent notes due in 2000 and priced at 99.619 to yield 6.945 percent through J. P. Morgan Securities.
The noncallable notes are rated A-1 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P.


Nickelodeon in British Deal
Nickelodeon and British Sky Broadcasting Ltd. said yesterday that they would introduce the American children's television channel in Britain.
The companies hope to offer the channel 12 hours a day beginning in October to the three million homes that receive British Sky's satellite television service.


Lennar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


First Chattanooga Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Filling Top Jobs; Diversity Pledge Slows Clinton on Appointments
With the inauguration little more than a week away, President-elect Bill Clinton has still not filled most of the top jobs below Cabinet level, largely because he is trying to draw in "more than the usual white boys who run Washington," as a transition official put it.
Mr.
Clinton is well on his way to meeting his pledge to fill the top 100 jobs in his Administration by Inauguration Day, transition officials say, but the process is slower than usual because the President-elect is demanding the same mix of women, minorities and white males that he brought into the Cabinet.


The Road to Louisville Goes Through Florida
The Eastern road to the Kentucky Derby opens formally this afternoon in Florida when Gulfstream Park sounds the bugles for its 68-day season.
And it should come as no surprise to students of hard-knock history that the first Derby preview for the new class of 3-year-old colts has already produced one fallen favorite and one 41-1 long-shot winner.
The preview was the Tropical Park Derby, which was run Saturday at the Calder track near Miami.
Ten colts ran a mile and an eighth for $100,000 and a kind of head-start on the road to the 119th Kentucky Derby, which will be run on May 1 at Churchill Downs.


Carrington Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Sailors Find End of Cold War Halts Their Flight From Russia
Raised on tales of Soviet defectors embraced by the United States, Aleksei Bazhenov and four other Russian seamen expected a warm welcome when they jumped ship in Puerto Rico during the July Fourth tall-ships regatta.
But not long after they proudly requested political asylum at police stations in San Juan, they began to realize that times have changed.
The five young sailors were sent to a maximum-security prison in Maryland, where it gradually occurred to them that asylum seekers from the former Soviet republics might be losing the special status they had during the cold war.
And indeed, on Dec. 16, immigration authorities tried to deport them.


People
*
Jayne Young, associate publisher at The Atlantic, New York, was promoted to president and publisher, succeeding Ira Ellenthal, who will assume a senior position, responsible for directing advertising sales, at The Daily News in New York, which Mortimer Zuckerman, who owns The Atlantic, purchased last week.


Lacey Fosburgh, 50, Reporter and Writer of Fact and Fiction
Lacey Fosburgh, a writer whose books chronicled murder, family passions and mystery in India, died last night at California Pacific Hospital in San Francisco.
She was 50 years old and lived in Mill Valley, Calif.
Ms.
Fosburgh, who began her writing career as a reporter for The New York Times, died of complications of breast cancer, said a friend of the family.


Home Savings (Fla.) reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
New York Viola Society Tobi Apel, Soloist Mannes College of Music


Merry Land &amp; Investment Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Interwest Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lemelin Puts Away Mask
Veteran goalie REGGIE LEMELIN retired yesterday from the Boston Bruins, a few days after the slumping team waived him in an effort to shake up its defense.
Lemelin, at 38 the oldest goalie in the National Hockey League, chose retirement instead of a demotion to the Bruins' minor league affiliate at Providence, R.I..


Total Systems Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reporter's Notebook; New TV Shows: Sure Hits Replacing Sure Hits (Not!)
Like most things having to do with television, it involves no real movement nor even a change of scenery.
It is called the winter press tour, and it is perhaps the world's only "tour" that takes place all in one room.
Each January, the nation's television critics and reporters gather in a West Coast hotel ballroom to listen to the networks explain why their mid-season replacement shows are destined to be hits.
It's a sequel to what is called the summer press tour, when the networks explain why the shows they are putting on for the fall season will be hits.


False W.H.O. Charges
To the Editor:
"U.S. Moves to Replace Japanese Head of W.H.O." (front page, Dec. 20) reports a reference by a senior United States official to a State Department document alleging Japanese intimidation to secure re-election of Dr.
Hiroshi Nakajima as director general of the World Health Organization.


Logibec Groupe Informatique reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief article on Saturday about the trial of Nexhmije Hoxha, widow of the Albanian leader Enver Hoxha, referred to him incorrectly in some editions.
He died in 1985; it was the Stalinist Government that was ousted in 1991.


Techknits Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Review/Fashion; Adolfo Aims to Please -- and Does
Sheer skirts, full pants, even bell-bottoms -- the hallmarks of the new fashion season -- were paraded at Adolfo's show in New York last week, but in moderation.
These were eminently wearable versions of fashion's newest shapes.
The audience responded by applauding for the least extreme interpretations.
Adolfo knows his customer.
"She has seen the pictures of the exotic, wonderful new clothes and she wants to wear them, but not in a weird way," Adolfo said after his show at the Plaza.


New York Shuts Warehouse With History Of Looting
The Dinkins administration, ending a highly visible example of petty corruption in government, yesterday shut down a giant city warehouse in Brooklyn where workers had for years systematically stolen cribs, clothing and other supplies meant for New York's poorest families.
City officials said the wide-open looting was brought under control more than a year and a half ago, and they portrayed the decision to close the warehouse, on Ryerson Street in the Williamsburg section, as a major cost-cutting measure.


Rag Shops Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


We the People Need a Franking Privilege
To the Editor:
I am pleased that President-elect Clinton plans to establish an 800 toll-free number for citizens to call the White House.
It's my hope that Congress will also consider a special 1-cent stamp for Congressional and White House correspondence only.


Iraqi Aide Defends Removal of Equipment in Border Zone
Iraq's Foreign Minister said here today that 250 Iraqis who crossed into a demilitarized zone between Kuwait and Iraq on Sunday had gone there to retrieve equipment and machinery that belonged to Baghdad, as did 250 others who did so today.
On Friday, the zone, which is being administered by the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission, will become Kuwaiti territory under a ruling made by the mission last year.


What Kind of Peace for Bosnia?
The murder of Bosnia's Deputy Prime Minister last Friday symbolized the inadequacy of present international efforts to counter Serbian-sponsored violence.
Serbian gunmen simply bullied aside a United Nations escort and pumped bullets into their defenseless victim, Hakija Turajlic.
It now seems that the Geneva peace talks conducted by the U.N. mediator Cyrus Vance and his European Community partner, David Owen, will survive this latest provocation.
But the talks are unlikely to result in an acceptable peace without more effective international efforts to equalize the military balance.
Right now, Bosnia's legitimate Government is as outgunned and inadequately protected as Mr.
Turajlic was on Friday afternoon.


States Lose Credit-Card Fee Battle
Rejecting an appeal by Massachusetts and 37 other states, the Supreme Court let stand today a ruling forbidding states to place limits on fees that state-chartered banks charge their credit-card holders.
Without comment, the Court declined to review a Federal appeals court ruling that state regulation of bank credit-card fees was pre-empted by a 1980 Federal law.


El Salvador Army Purge Violates Peace Accords, U.N. Chief Says
The United Nations Secretary General has said President Alfredo Cristiani's plan for purging the army does not fully comply with the requirements of the peace accords.
But Mr.
Cristiani said today that he did not intend to respond with "major" changes.
Specifically, the Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, said in a letter to the Security Council made public today that Mr.
Cristiani's plans to send seven senior officers to diplomatic posts instead of purging them and to retain eight others did not comply with understandings governing the purge.


Classical Music in Review
Music of Afghanistan Queens College Concert Hall


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Social Scene; A Highly Sensitive Post Is Filled by the Clintons
After weeks of discussion and deliberation and the selection of a Secretary of State and Attorney General, the Clintons have done something really important to Washington's high and mighty: They picked a White House social secretary.
Ann Stock, the vice president of public relations for Bloomingdale's, who divides her time between Washington and the New York department store, is Hillary Clinton's choice for a job that to some is as important as the White House chief of staff and, in its own way, wields almost as much power.
Nicki Hedrick, director of media relations at Bloomingdale's, confirmed today that Mrs.
Stock had resigned to take the White House job, where she will hold sway over who gets invited to Presidential functions.
Mrs.
Clinton's office refused to comment on the appointment.
"If you care about going to the White House it's a very powerful job," said Carolyn Peachey, president of Campbell, Peachey &amp; Associates, a public relations firm.
Intense Competition
After 12 years in a city where the most sought-after invitation is to a White House dinner, there are a lot of Democrats clamoring to get on the list.
Competition for the social secretary's position was intense.
"It always has been," said Sheila Tate, who was press secretary to Nancy Reagan and is now president of Powell Tate, a public relations firm.
"The job has great cachet."
Mrs.
Stock, a former deputy press secretary to Vice President Walter F.  Mondale, was chosen from a list that included Ms.
Peachey, who did not want to be considered; Susan O'Neill, daughter of the former House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr.; Liz Stevens, wife of the film director George Stevens, and Alma Viator, a vice president of the National Theater.
A number of people prominent in Georgetown's social circle were surprised by the choice, and telephone calls today soliciting their responses often began with comments like the one from Polly Kraft, wife of the lawyer and former White House counsel Lloyd Cutler: "Do I know her?" She Knows Washington
Mrs.
Stock may not be a household name to the Georgetown crowd, but she has long experience in the capital.
"It's good that no Georgetown ladies know her," said Ms.
Tate.
"She's fresh and unspoiled. She's a hard worker and she certainly knows Washington."
Everyone agrees that the White House social secretary should know Washington so as to navigate the treacherous political waters and the rocky protocol shores.
"It's very important," said Muffie Brandon, now director of corporate programming for the Ford Motor Company and social secretary to Nancy Reagan from 1980 to 1983.
"The intricacies of this city, the nuances of political life and of protocol are not things you can learn on the job."
Mrs.
Stock is not new to politics or to Washington.
Besides working for Mr.
Mondale, she volunteered for the Capital Children's Museum and helped raise the money to open it.
Other Qualifications
Those who know Mrs.
Stock describe her as energetic, enthusiastic and creative, highly organized and very professional, qualities that are important in such a sensitive job.
"There are toes that don't need to be stepped on," said Ms.
Tate.
"You need to genuflect to certain people. It's important that she knows the traps and avoids needlessly offending people, just in terms of the Hill and the traditions and all the protocol."
Mrs.
Stock, who is 46 and lives in nearby Alexandria, Va., graduated from Purdue University, where she majored in elementary education.
She has been married to Stuart Stock, a partner at Covington &amp; Burling, for 22 years.
They have a 13-year-old son, Chase, who is a student at the Potomac School in McLean, Va.
She is a member of the Overseas Economic Fund's Women in Business Committee and founded the Washington Woman Roundtable, a group of 1,000 female executives who meet every three months to network.
She was founder of Washington's "Race for the Cure" against breast cancer, and helped to organize the same event in New York City.
Mrs.
Stock could not be reached for comment.
She was on her way back to New York from Little Rock, Ark.


Evans Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Ragen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


State-O-Maine reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Bridge
In American bridge terms, the most important import from China in 1992 occurred at Christmas: The leading Chinese tournament director became a permanent resident of Flushing, Queens.
His Chinese name is Zhou Qi, but in the Western world he is known as George Chow.
He is a talented player as well as organizer, as the diagramed deal, played a decade ago, demonstrates.
As South, he arrived in five diamonds doubled after his opponents had bid to four spades.


Review/Theater; Nightmares Punctuated By Violence
In his book "Dime-Store Alchemy," Charles Simic speaks of Joseph Cornell's boxes as "reliquaries of days when imagination reigned." That description could also be applied to the theatrical work of Richard Foreman.
In scores of plays written over 25 years, he has taken seemingly ordinary objects and his own night thoughts and given them totemic significance.
The plays are curio cabinets animated into what Mr.
Foreman calls reverberation chambers.
Plays like "Samuel's Major Problems" (at Ontological at St. Mark's Theater) can be as disorienting to the audience as they are to the characters.
In this eerie hermetic world, people are subjected to physical and emotional stress.
At several points in the current work, the characters are suddenly thrown off their feet as if the ship of stage were sinking.
Those of us who have been fascinated by Mr.
Foreman's plays and by his continuing investigation of the unconscious regard him as a masterly manipulator of his art form.
There is no one else in the theater operating on this elliptical frequency.


The Environment; Microbes' Odd Tricks Disrupt Reproduction In Some Insect Species
IN an obscure field of study, a few biologists have slowly been piecing together the bizarre story of a group of microorganisms that live as stowaways inside insect cells and specialize in turning the lives of their hosts upside down.
Scientists say these peculiar microorganisms have become expert in disrupting sexual reproduction, an intriguing ability that may have implications for pest control.
The effects range from turning sexually reproducing species into asexual, clonally reproducing species, to preventing the production of any offspring between an insect male and female.
Until recently, however, researchers had viewed these bacteria and protozoa as quaint biological curiosities, a handful of unrelated creatures that performed their strange tricks in a few insect species.


British Report Urges Press Curbs; Unsurprisingly, the Press Protests
Still recoiling from the animated press coverage of the royal family's marital woes and other scandals, the Government is considering stringent curbs on British newspapers that would include fines for violators and mandated apologies.
The proposals have not been made public.
But details were leaked this weekend to major newspapers, which promptly and roundly denounced them.


Southern Comfort Adopts Moderation as Its Byword
PRODUCT advertising for alcoholic beverages with an implied message of moderation is about as scarce as a cowboy ordering sarsaparilla in a Wild West saloon.
Yet a prominent spirits marketer will soon take that tack in a campaign for one of its leading brands.
Print advertisements scheduled for later this month for Southern Comfort, the bourbon liqueur from the Brown-Forman Beverage Company, will carry the theme "Take it easy." The campaign, the first since Altschiller Reitzfeld in New York was named the agency for the estimated $10 million account for Brown-Forman brands, incorporates the moderation message in an overall appeal for drinkers to remember, as one ad puts it: "Life is not work. It can't be. It better not be."


Western Digital reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Boggs Is Confident the Yankee Pinstripes Will Fit Him Just Fine
The sight of Wade Boggs wearing a Yankee cap and holding a Yankee jersey was strange.
The cap rested on his head awkwardly and the pinstriped jersey sported an unfamiliar No. 12.
The ghosts of Yankee Stadium must have been puzzled.
Why was Boggs swiping reserve catcher Jim Leyritz's jersey?
He was not.
No. 12 is now his.
Boggs, long vilified by Yankee fans because he was a splendid hitter for the hated Boston Red Sox, yesterday made his first appearance in New York after signing a three-year, $11 million contract last month.
But it will take more than four weeks to become comfortable with seeing "Boggs, N.Y." on a stat sheet.


The Waltz Of the Screen Savers
MACINTOSH owners used to have all the fun.
But Windows has brought a sense of play to sober-sided I.B.M. compatibles, and software developers have been quick to seize on the fact.
According to several accounts, screen savers are the fastest-growing programs in the entertainment category.
Screen savers did not start off as entertaining.
They merely, and dully, blanked the screen of a monitor if the computer had not been used for a specified number of minutes, to prevent an unchanging image from being burned in as a permanent artifact. (Whether a computer should ever be turned off or, indeed, whether there is any real danger of burn-in, are controversies that this writer stands firmly on both sides of.)


MUNICIPAL UNIONS AND NEW YORK CITY REACH PAY ACCORD
After months of stalled talks, the Dinkins administration reached a tentative three-year labor settlement yesterday with the largest municipal unions.
It gives workers modest wage and benefit increases totaling about 8.25 percent but does not include the productivity concessions City Hall had sought.
The settlement, which is subject to ratification by the unions' rank and file, covers about 180,000 workers in 19 unions, the largest being Local 237 of the teamsters and District Council 37 of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees.
The contracts would be retroactive to January 1992 and for most of the unions would run to March 1995.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  IRAQ DEFIES BUSH ON MISSILES


Surf's Up, Even When the Temperature's Down


Critic's Notebook; Hall of Fame Defers Defining Rock
The Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame will shake up its routines when it holds its eighth annual induction ceremony here on Tuesday night, and for one more year it will stave off an identity crisis about just what constitutes real rock-and-roll.
Ruth Brown, Cream, Creedence Clearwater Revival, the Doors, Etta James, Frankie Lymon and the Teen-agers, Van Morrison and Sly and the Family Stone are the hall's new members, along with Dinah Washington from the pre-rock era and, on the business side, the producer Milt Gabler (Bill Haley, Louis Jordan) and the "American Bandstand" mogul Dick Clark.
By moving the ceremony from New York to Los Angeles for the first time, it will reshuffle the attendance list and change the house band, incidentally making the hall seem less like a pet project by a handful of New York-based music-business executives.
Some things won't change; once again, as in years past, a ground-breaking for the actual Hall of Fame museum and theater in Cleveland is to be announced for the coming spring, as yet another deal is worked out to finance the project, now estimated to cost $80 million to $100 million.


Richard Hanson, 87, A Methodist Minister
The Rev.
Richard Ewing Hanson, a Methodist minister who had been pastor of four New York-area churches, died on Friday at a nursing home in Rutland, Vt.
He was 87 and had lived in East Poultney, Vt., since 1970.
He died of pneumonia, said a son, Richard Ewing Hanson Jr. of Woodmere, L.I., the head of Lawrence Country Day School-Woodmere Academy.


Mysterious Woodworker Carefully Carves Smiles
THERE'S something funny going on down in the basement over at 94 Clapboard Hill Road.
Every few weeks, alert neighbors spot an elderly man unloading a large amount of lumber from his car.
The wood disappears into the basement -- mostly two-by-fours, by appearances.
But for all that wood, the house doesn't get larger.
And no one sees anything emerge, except now and then the man carries away several shopping bags that look heavy.


Subpoena for Armour?
TOMMY ARMOUR 3d, a member of the PGA Tour, is among 12 people who have been ordered to appear and testify before a Las Vegas, Nev., grand jury that will hear drug allegations involving two lawyers, The Las Vegas Sun reported yesterday.
The newspaper reported that Chief Deputy District Attorney ULRICH SMITH planned to present a case to the Clark County grand jury on Jan. 21 that involves the lawyers MICHAEL and RHONDA MUSHKIN, and HARVEY SACKIN, a convicted drug dealer.
The Sun said the case will focus on allegations of narcotics distribution.


Unitrin Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Northwest Cuts Fares to Help Spur Leisure Travel
Northwest Airlines yesterday announced fare cuts of up to 40 percent for travelers who bring someone along when they fly.
The cuts in the 14-day advance purchase fares, which are not refundable and require a Saturday night stay, are an effort to stimulate leisure travel.
The airline also said the new fares would help reduce attempts by business travelers to circumvent restrictions on current discount fares.


Valley Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Two Pucks for the Rangers, but Just One Point
The contest was part calamity, part comedy of errors and part performance theater, and when it turned tense, an overwrought fan turned it into an audience-participation event by tossing an extra puck onto the Madison Square Garden ice and into the Vancouver goal.
For a moment, it appeared the Rangers had come away with a 4-3 victory over the Canucks with just 22 seconds left in overtime last night.
But when the confusion subsided, and the goal was disallowed, the Rangers were at least able to console themselves with a 3-3 tie achieved with a trio of mini-comebacks.


Immucor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Classical Music in Review
American Chamber Players The Frick Collection


Japanese Stocks Rise
Stock prices were higher today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed up 91.5 points, or 0.55 percent, to 16,681.05.
On Monday, the Nikkei fell 45.14 points, or 0.27 percent.


CrownAmerica Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 1


Commission Says Racism Contributes to AIDS Spread
AIDS disproportionately afflicts ethnic minorities, and the disease has to be considered as a racial issue because discrimination contributes to its spread, the National Commission on AIDS said today.
In a report to the White House, the advisory commission said that black and Hispanic-Americans now account for 46 percent of the nation's AIDS cases and that steps to deal with the epidemic are being hampered by discrimination, poverty and the lack of health services.


Signs of a Staff Mutiny in Sunbeam Turmoil
Rarely has so successful a chairman been so summarily sacked by his board of directors.
But why?
Was it a mutiny of disgruntled managers that prodded the directors of the Sunbeam-Oster Company to tell Paul B. Kazarian late Saturday night that he was being "terminated," as the company's statement says?
The company isn't forthcoming, and Mr.
Kazarian says he doesn't know.
But speculation about the unusual and sudden ouster set Wall Street buzzing yesterday as investors rushed to decipher the move by Sunbeam-Oster, which is seen by many as a sparkling example of how swift and savvy management can profit handsomely by turning around a company in bankruptcy-law proceedings.


Young &amp; Rubicam Wins Revlon Work
Revlon Inc. said yesterday that it had named Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York to provide creative, media and marketing support for all its brands outside the United States and Canada.
Billings were estimated at $60 million to $70 million.
Paul J. Block, president of the Revlon International subsidiary in New York, said the company had been pursuing global marketing "to strengthen the Revlon name."


AGENCY CHECKING SEX HARASSMENT
The top internal investigator of the Treasury Department today began an inquiry into accusations by female agents of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms that they have been sexually harassed and later punished for complaining.
The investigation by the Treasury Department's inspector general, Donald E. Kirkendall, was disclosed by Stephen E. Higgins, the bureau's director, after a report on the CBS program "60 Minutes" on Sunday that he and other senior officials had been insensitive to sexual-harassment cases.


Cherry Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Northwest and KLM Air Link Approved
The Transportation Department today gave final approval for Northwest Airlines and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines to integrate their services and operate as a single carrier.
An open skies agreement in September between the United States and the Netherlands gave the carriers of both countries unlimited access to the other's international market.


Arbor National Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.07
2.935
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.07
3.04
3.83
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.19
3.19
3.87
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.33
6.40
6.66
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.44
7.46
7.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.48
8.48
8.72
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.40
6.67
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


SouthTrust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


It's Also the Playoffs For N.F.L. Rumors
What a wild week (or two or three) of speculation lies before us in pro football: Where will Mike Ditka coach in 1993?
Dave Wannstedt?
Bill Parcells?
Dan Reeves?
Ray Handley?
Amos Alonzo Stagg?
Rely on this: ESPN, NBC, CBS, WFAN, et al., will be the electronic circuit for rumors massaged and mongered.
Who knows what some of these stories really are.
Real stories.
Conjecture or rumors.
Gossip or informed speculation.
Non-story stories or stories that could become true if (a), (b) and (c) happen.
Fantasies piped through willing reporters.
Fact and semi-fact stirred into a brew called, what?
Entertainment?


Just Point Don Shula In the Bills' Direction And Hold Small Talk
"This," Don Shula said today, barely 21 hours after his Dolphins dominated the San Diego Chargers in a playoff game here, "is the last time we speak of yesterday."
And so the subject quickly shifted to next Sunday, when Miami will meet the Buffalo Bills in the American Football Conference championship game.


Trial Begins For Man Once Linked To '91 Death
A 29-year-old black man whom prosecutors once linked to the killing of a Hasidic scholar in the 1991 Crown Heights racial disturbances went on trial yesterday on charges of helping to incite the violence, but he is no longer linked to the slaying.
The Brooklyn District Attorney's office now says that the man, Raymond Wesley, is simply one of 128 people who have been prosecuted for various crimes related to the four days of disturbances but who were not involved in the fatal stabbing of the scholar, Yankel Rosenbaum.


Consolidated HCI reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chess
There are always excuses for bloodless draws in a tournament.
You will hear: I wanted to protect my standing; I had Black against a strong opponent and was satisfied with a half-point; the burden is on White to crack my solid, careful defense; I could not develop pressure against the opponent's conservative play; I didn't need anything higher than fifth place to qualify for the Interzonal Tournament for world championship hopefuls.
And so on.
In the 15-round United States championship Dec. 1 to 20 in Durango, Colo., one player made 11 draws and another 10.
Yet the rest of the players hacked one another down like heroic knights of old.


Medical Science


Small's Oilfield Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Frisch's Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 13


Notes Are Priced By Sallie Mae
The Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, yesterday priced for sale to the public $600 million of floating-rate notes due on July 8, 1993, through various securities dealers.
Sallie Mae, which generally issues short-term floating-rate notes on a monthly basis to raise funds to buy student loans from financial institutions, priced the issue at par to yield a variable rate equal to 3 basis points more than the bond-equivalent yield of the 91-day Treasury bill auction rate.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Evolution of Tabby Cat Mapped in Brain Study
BY comparing the brains of Spanish wildcats and American domestic tabby cats, a researcher in Tennessee has discovered a biological mechanism that may explain how members of a species may adapt their brains to undergo rapid evolutionary change.
The finding is that wildcats and domestic cats develop the same number of brain cells as fetuses, but in each species different sets of neurons are killed off just before birth.
The result is presumably that each cat's brain is better adapted to fit its environment.


Surge In Chips
Among investors, chip makers have a reputation as spotless as their clean rooms.
They are besting the Japanese and stand to prosper even more as the recovery accelerates.
Yesterday, Texas Instruments added 1 7/8, Motorola 3 1/4, and Intel 3 5/8, to a new record.
Far from merely rising with the tide, Intel has soared 44 percent since Thanksgiving.


Clifford's Effort to Avoid New York Trial Rejected
A judge rejected yesterday Clark M. Clifford's bid to have state charges against him in the Bank of Credit and Commerce International scandal dismissed on the basis of his poor health.
Mr.
Clifford, a former Secretary of Defense and adviser to several Presidents, and his law partner and protege, Robert A. Altman, are scheduled to go on trial on Feb. 15 in State Supreme Court in Manhattan on charges of accepting a bribe and helping to conceal B.C.C.I.'s ownership of American banks from regulators.
But few people expect Mr.
Clifford, who is 86, to stand trial any time soon because of heart disease and other ailments.


Cuba's Economy, Cast Adrift, Grasps at Capitalist Solutions
The Karl Marx Cement Factory beckons from a road outside this provincial city with a cheery sign on which a likeness of the plant stands proudly above a rolling green landscape.
What rises beyond the entrance, however, is a great gray-brown hulk that, like much of Cuban industry, has been all but paralyzed by shortages of oil, electricity and spare parts.
On a Saturday afternoon, its only sound is that of wind whistling through some scaffolding, where another sign, large and black, vows, "Socialism or Death."


Show and Tell


Felix James Grucci Sr., 87, Dies; Staged Fireworks Extravaganzas
Felix James Grucci Sr., the patriarch of America's first family of fireworks, died on Saturday at Brookhaven Memorial Hospital on Long Island.
He was 87.
He died of Alzheimer's disease, his family said.
Mr.
Grucci had ended his active role in the family business about four years ago.


Russians to Test Space Mirror As Giant Night Light for Earth
RUSSIAN scientists are planning soon to unfurl a glistening sheet of plastic in space as a first step toward testing an intriguing notion about turning night into day -- or at least twilight.
Tucked aboard a Progress cargo spacecraft attached to the Mir space station is an experiment called Znamya, or Banner, that will test the idea of using a mirror in space to reflect sunlight down to Earth.


Norman Bennett, 75, Publishing Executive
Norman E. Bennett, a retired publishing executive, died last Tuesday at his home in Moultonborough, N.H.
He was 75.
Mr. Bennett died after a long illness, his family said.


Yes, Cheeks Is a Classic; Must He Stay in Garage?
When the Nets coaxed former all-star guard Maurice (Mo) Cheeks out of retirement last week, Coach Chuck Daly knew exactly what he was getting.
Trouble is, Cheeks hasn't got into a game yet.
Not the 102-88 loss in Boston last Friday.
Not the 124-79 romp over Washington on Saturday.
"Maurice is a classic point guard, not in great shape, but a classic point guard," Daly said today about the veteran of 14 years, who has played with four National Basketball Association teams.


Big Leap by Kodak Helps Dow Regain 11.08
Eastman Kodak and a crew of other unloved stocks of last year led a partial recovery yesterday from the round of selling that has beset the stock market in the new year.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 11.08 points, or 0.34 percent, to close at 3,262.75, on moderately strong volume of 217.9 million shares.


Alpha Microsystems reports earnings for 13wks to Nov 29


With Care, Nursing Home Bridges Racial Gulf
The tension surfaces only rarely in one fuss or another at the Hebrew Home for the Aged at Riverdale.
In one case, a woman in her 90's would repeatedly use the word "girl" to address Olive Williams-Brown, a black nurse from Jamaica.
In another case some years ago, nurses could not grasp why a Jewish man panicked before every shower.
They later learned that he had been in a concentration camp, and among the indignities, he was regularly treated for lice.
"It took us a long time to understand," said Monica McGibbon, 41 years old, a nursing coordinator who is black.
"He associated the shower with the chemicals they used to spray on him."


Review/Music; At the Kitchen, Sounds of the Future
Friday was the night of the riff at the Kitchen, when three avant-rock bands -- Dr.
Nerve, Blast and the Slash Orchestra -- opened a series called "Gruppen: Chamber Music for the 21st Century." The series, which continues through Saturday, presents "composer-led ensembles," which are more often found in rock, jazz and downtown new music than in classical chamber music.
Through the concert, riffs were socked out, broken into shards, strung together, layered, tossed away or obstinately repeated.
Generally, the compositions used discrete blocks of sound, every pattern soon to be broken.
Development meant textural thickening rather than melodic or harmonic evolution; each change, as planned, was a jolt.


Man Killed After Chase In School Van
A man with an extensive criminal record led the state police on a wild chase through rural central Connecticut today, stealing a new Mustang from a dealer, shooting a car salesman, crashing the car and then hijacking a school van with two children aboard before he was killed in a fierce shootout with the police.
A 13-year-old student in the van was also shot, but a state police spokesman, Sgt.
Scott O'Mara, was uncertain whether the child, who was listed in critical but stable condition with a chest wound, had been shot by the gunman or wounded in the gunfight.


HONECKER SOUGHT DRIVE INTO POLAND
Secret documents made public from the archives of the East German Communist Party show that in 1980, as the Solidarity labor union was gaining strength in Poland, the East German Communist leader, Erich Honecker, urged his Warsaw Pact allies to invade Poland.
"According to information that we are receiving through various channels, counterrevolutionary forces are on a constant offensive in Poland," Mr.
Honecker wrote in an appeal to the Soviet leader, Leonid I. Brezhnev, on Nov. 26, 1980.
"Any hesitation will mean death -- the death of socialist Poland.


Sunair Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Joyce V. Nadelman, Diplomatic Aide, 75
Joyce V. Nadelman, a former Foreign Service aide who was also active in Riverdale, the Bronx, died on Saturday at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 75.
She died of heart failure, her husband said.


Market Place; Why Alco Moves In Strange Ways
SPEND a minute to take this market-knowledge quiz:
A financially struggling company receives a takeover offer of an undisclosed amount for 80 percent of its stock.
What are the shares likely to do?


Classical Music in Review
New Renaissance Chamber Portraits Greenwich House 27 Barrow Street Greenwich Village


Lone Star Steakhouse reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 29


Women, Children and Work
Many older Americans can remember when pregnant schoolteachers were expected to leave their classrooms before they "showed." In those days, a pregnant woman behind a desk or a counter was something of a novelty, and one behind the wheel of a bus something of a sensation.
Today, however, 58 percent of all American women over 16 are in the work force, and each year two million of them have babies.
In fact, the vast majority of working women are likely to become pregnant during their careers.


St. Patrick's Parade: It Gets Worse
The Dinkins administration is trying yet another tactic in its battle over who can march in the St.
Patrick's Day parade.
Frustrated by its failure to persuade the parade's traditional sponsors to let gay groups march under their own banner, the city changed sponsors.
Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly granted a parade permit to a different group, one that will allow gay men and lesbians to participate openly in the March 17 parade.
The administration's instincts are admirable.
The stubborn refusal of the old-line sponsors -- the Ancient Order of Hibernians -- to admit homosexuals insults all fair-minded New Yorkers.
But the administration's solution plays havoc with the Constitution.


Ohio Resources reports earnings for Year to July 31


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page yesterday about changes at British Vogue magazine under its new editor identified her incorrectly.
She is Alexandra Shulman.


Pharmacist With H.I.V. Awarded Job
In a settlement called a landmark legal victory for health care workers infected with H.I.V., the Westchester County Medical Center agreed yesterday to hire a pharmacist infected with H.I.V. without restricting the work he can do.
After a six-year legal battle, a lawyer for the pharmacist, identified in court papers as John Doe, said the settlement "sends a very clear message, based on overwhelming expert evidence, that health care workers pose almost no risk to patients and that discriminating against them is irrational, contrary to the public health and illegal."


U.N. Chief Asks Bonn for Troops, Underlining Constitutional Issue
Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel warned today that Germany would "lose its international credibility" unless it quickly ended the ban that forbids its troops to take part in international peacekeeping.
Mr.
Kinkel's warning was seconded by the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who asked both the Foreign Minister and Chancellor Helmut Kohl to make it possible for German troops to take part in peacekeeping missions.


CHRONICLE
JEAN S. HARRIS, who was granted clemency by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York two weeks ago on the day she underwent quadruple bypass surgery, left the hospital yesterday and returned to the Bedford Hills Correctional Facility in Westchester County.
"She tolerated the surgery very well and will rest in prison," said MICHAEL KENNEDY, her lawyer.


U.N. to Ask NATO to Airdrop Supplies for Bosnians
Citing reports of hundreds of deaths from cold and hunger, the United Nations official who oversees relief operations in this embattled republic said today that he had urged NATO to consider dropping food and medicines by air.
The proposal, by Jose-Maria Mendiluce of Spain, who directs relief operations for 1.6 million Bosnians, came amid signs that the United Nations effort to save lives is foundering.
Mr.
Mendiluce said he had received "very alarming reports of deaths from cold and starvation" from wide areas, particularly eastern Bosnia.


Where to Get Advice
To the Editor:
In "Let's Scrap the Council on Economic Advisers" (letter, Jan. 2), Prof.
Arvin Ghosh stands logic on its head when he tries to refute the plea by James Tobin and Robert Solow (Op-Ed, Dec. 10) to keep President-elect Clinton's new National Economic Council from further diminishing the Council of Economic Advisers.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: State Department; 60's-Era Memo May Ripple Christopher's Senate Sailing
Suddenly, Warren M. Christopher, President-elect Bill Clinton's most swooned-over Cabinet nominee, is facing some embarrassing questions on Capitol Hill, where there is a renewed concern about an old accusation that he knew about Army surveillance of anti-Vietnam War protesters.
It is not that the 25-year-old incident is serious enough to jeopardize Mr.
Christopher's confirmation as Secretary of State.
Rather, it is that his confirmation hearings before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which start on Wednesday, may not turn out to be the love-fest the Clinton team expected.


Sports of The Times; Should It Be Reich Or Kelly?
IT seems more than reasonable that you must give Frank Reich a chance to fail.
Now, the biggest question in America is not whether Clinton can cut the deficit in half in four years, or whether Amy Fisher will get a half-hour sitcom of her own next fall.
The biggest question in America is whether a healthy Jim Kelly will replace a robust Reich at quarterback for the Buffalo Bills in the American Football Conference championship game on Sunday afternoon in Miami, one step from the Super Bowl.


Hibernians Supported By Vallone
City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone weighed in yesterday against Mayor David N. Dinkins in the St.
Patrick's Day Parade controversy, saying that the New York City event should have been left in the hands of its traditional sponsors, despite their refusal to permit a gay group to march.
Mr.
Vallone said he disagreed with the exclusion of the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization, but believed that the Ancient Order of Hibernians should be permitted to continue to sponsor the parade under its rules.
"I don't understand this tremendous yearning to interfere with a parade that's been a tremendous success for years," he said.


Special Devices Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Nominee for Academy A Newcomer to Politics
WHEN a representative of a nominating committee for the National Academy of Sciences, the country's foremost scientific organization, called Dr.
Bruce M. Alberts last August and told him he had been nominated to be the academy's next president, he spent the next 90 minutes saying the panel's members were out of their minds.
He argued that he was an academic researcher, an innocent biochemist at the University of California in San Francisco who had little experience in Washington, where the academy is based.
He knew almost nothing about negotiating with politicians, he easily grew bored at cocktail parties and four-fork luncheons and he preferred the scientist's anarchic dress code of well-worn slacks and a faintly wrinkled shirt over the administrator's buttoned-up Brooks Brothers.


2 in Lehman Are Promoted To Shearson Co-Presidents
Shearson Lehman Brothers Holdings yesterday announced a reorganization of the firm and its management that elevated the co-heads of its Lehman Brothers investment banking and trading division to be co-presidents and co-chief operating officers of the company.
J.
Tomilson Hill 3d, a well-known investment banker who was co-head of Lehman for a little more than two years, and Richard S. Fuld Jr., a trader who shared the title, will also both be moved up to the newly created office of the chairman.
In the new jobs, they will work with Howard L. Clark Jr., the chairman and chief executive, in overseeing the entire firm, including its brokerage and asset management division.


Hinsdale Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Making Peace Before the Election
By reaching a contract that provides modest raises for most of New York City's union workers before his re-election campaign begins in earnest, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday went a long way toward solving a big political headache and making peace with a crucial constituency.
But he did so by breaking his longstanding pledge to grant raises only in exchange for increased productivity by workers, and with that Mr.
Dinkins may have also bought himself endless fiscal headaches in the coming months and years, even if he wins a second term.


Iraq Is Said to Shift Missiles Into Excluded Zone in North
In the latest in a string of incidents apparently intended to taunt President Bush in his final days in office, President Saddam Hussein has moved surface-to-air missiles into the air-exclusion zone in the northern part of his country, Administration officials said today.
The action took place two days after the White House announced that Baghdad had backed down and moved its anti-aircraft missiles in southern Iraq.
But it also follows a string of provocative actions by President Hussein, including incursions by hundreds of armed Iraqis into territory that the United Nations has awarded to Kuwait.
Iraq said it entered the territory on Sunday and today to retrieve weapons, ammunition and equipment that belonged to Baghdad.
"Hussein Is Trying to Cheat'
Iraq said the dispute over its incursions had been caused by a misunderstanding of conditions from the United Nations Security Council.
Tonight the Council condemned the action and warned of "serious consequences" for Iraq's defiance.  [ Page A2. ]


Campbell Delays Plans On Biotech Tomatoes
The Campbell Soup Company announced yesterday that it had no immediate plans to market a genetically engineered food product.
The announcement came after Jeremy Rifkin, a longtime opponent of the biotech industry and head of the Pure Food Campaign, organized a boycott of Campbell.
A Campbell spokesman, Neil Stalter, denied, however, that the company was responding to boycott threats.
"Consumer campaigns have no effect on our planning process in this regard," he said.


Neediest Cases Helps a Survivor Who Helps Others
For 20 years, Jean Montoya flew with Pan Am airlines, as a flight attendant and then as a manager.
She and her son Justin, 11, have spent school vacations all over the world.
She saved up enough money to buy a co-op apartment on West 72d Street.
But several years ago, when Pan Am began asking its employees to take pay cuts to save the company, Mrs.
Montoya's savings dwindled.
Then when Pan Am went out of business last year, Mrs.
Montoya, who was 47 years old, was left with no job, no money and few prospects.


Books of The Times; Very Japanese, Very American and Very Popular
Kitchen By Banana Yoshimoto Translated by Megan Backus. 152 pages. Grove Press. $14.95.


G.M. Says Review Confirms That Plans Are 'On Target'
The General Motors Corporation said today that a review of the auto maker's financial management by J. P. Morgan &amp; Company "confirmed that our financial and operating plans" in North America "are on target."
The results of the study, which was disclosed first in The Detroit News during the weekend and had been conducted over the last month or so, were reported to G.M. directors during their regular monthly meeting today.
The company's stock closed up yesterday 87.5 cents a share, to $34.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.  'Enthusiastically Received'
"The report was enthusiastically received," William E. Hoglund, a G.M. executive vice president, said in a prepared statement.


Home Aide Killed; Patient Is Wounded
A domestic dispute in a quiet neighborhood in Queens left a home care worker dead and her patient seriously wounded, the police said yesterday.
The patient, Alviena Marchon, 88, of 211-08 46th Road in Bayside, was in stable condition last night at Booth Memorial Hospital, suffering from a stab wound in her back.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Confirmation Hearings; Budget Nominee Testifies Clinton May Set Aside Tax-Cut Pledge
WASHINGTON, Jan. 11 -- President-elect Bill Clinton's choice as budget director, Leon E. Panetta, told Congress today that Mr.
Clinton's campaign promise to cut the taxes of the middle class was a lower priority than cutting the deficit and increasing spending for new projects the Democrats favor.
In Little Rock, Ark., as part of what may have been a coordinated effort by the Clinton team to back away from this central campaign pledge, two top transition advisers also suggested today that the tax-cut promise was being reconsidered.


Empire Gets Money To Lessen Increases
Without a dissenting vote, the New York State Legislature passed a bill today granting Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the state's largest health insurer, an infusion of cash intended to blunt the effects of the company's big Jan. 1 rate increase.
The legislation, which was signed into law by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, provides immediate financial relief to the ailing company and immediate political relief to the Legislature, whose constituents have been demanding that they do something to lower the rates imposed by Empire.


Dreco Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Northstar Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Business Digest
The Economy  A plea agreement for the central figure in the Salomon Treasury scandal appeared to fall apart.
Government lawyers said they would seek to indict him.  [ D1. ]


Review/Music; La Monte Young Band Explores Sonic Space
During La Monte Young's performance of his genre of blues, accompanied by the Forever Bad Blues Band at the Kitchen on Sunday night, an enormous haze of sound rose from the electronic instruments and drums.
The playing seemed to create an auditory space with its own dimension and depth, within which the music took place.
As in Mr.
Young's other works, the listener was always discovering something about that sound, the way it shimmered around the edges or seemed to change color.
Sharply emerging were drum beats, and here and there muscular electric guitar licks, variations on simple patterns that resembled traditional blues but that had a very different effect.
When the playing stopped, after two hours of continuous projection at high volume, a high-pitched ringing continued despite the silence.
It was a sign of trauma to the ear, but its pitch was eerily precise, as if it were a high internal overtone created and reinforced by an evening of sounds all in the same musical mode, produced by instruments all tuned using La Monte Young's signature method.


CHRONICLE
The actress RUBY DEE feels that the words and ideas of writers are too often lost when their books are transposed onto a stage or film, and she means to do something about it.
Today, she opens a monthlong production of her own adaptation of "The Disappearance," a mystery novel by Rosa Guy (Dell, 1979).
Although it will be performed onstage at the Crossroads Theater in Livingston, N.J., Miss Dee does not call it a play; she said yesterday that it is to be the first in a series of "books with legs."


Yet Recession Persists
To the Editor:
So, the National Bureau of Economic Research, in its infinite wisdom, proclaims the recession ended 21 months ago (Business Day, Dec. 23).


Week of Rioting Leaves Streets of Bombay Empty
Smoke from scores of fires set by arsonists continued to rise today over India's normally bustling commercial capital as its streets were emptied by fear after a week of violence.
Thousands of people crowded into railroad stations, fleeing to home villages to escape Hindu-Muslim clashes.


A Fresh Look From Belgium
"They're picking up where the Japanese left off," said Barbara Weiser, an owner of the Charivari fashion shops in Manhattan.
She was speaking of several young Belgian designers, whom she described as "the new modernists."
"We've done more business with Belgian designers than with Italians," Miss Weiser said.
"They're our new avant-garde."


In New York Area, First Snowstorm of 1993 Is a Light One


Ending New York's Malpractice Levy Will Cut Health Costs
To the Editor:
You report Dec. 26 that New York State's medical malpractice insurance fund has been looked on as a source of aid for Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield.
The fund, created six years ago to deal with what was called a crisis in malpractice lawsuits, seems to have become nothing more than a $700 million slush fund to be used at the discretion of the Governor and the State Legislature for unrelated budgetary shortfalls.


Coin-Tossing Computers Found to Show Subtle Bias
WHEN scientists use computers to try to predict complex trends and events, they often apply a type of calculation that requires long series of random numbers.
But instructing a computer to produce acceptably random strings of digits is proving maddeningly difficult.
In deciding which team kicks off a football game, the toss of a real coin is random enough to satisfy all concerned.
But the cost of even a slightly nonrandom string of electronic coin tosses can be devastating to both practical problem-solving and pure theory, and a new investigation has revealed that nonrandom computer tosses are much more common than many scientists had assumed.


Teledyne Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Observer; The Latest Duke
At these times Washington is like an old courtesan taking a new lover.
Necessity counts for more than passion in these affairs, and what appears at first to be love quickly proves to be cold calculation.
One must accommodate, after all, in a world where new conquerors arrive with such regularity.
After Napoleon was defeated, Paris -- official Paris, that is -- shrugged and gave herself with a smile to the new crowd behind the Duke of Wellington.


Lillian Vernon reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


2 Get Ready to Lock Horns at The Daily News
One is an editor and former police reporter who has worked on every tabloid in town, spinning slasher tales and municipal scandals into front-page scoops.
The other is a tough labor organizer who has dragged corporate giants to the bargaining table with campaigns of innovative, often harsh, pressure tactics.
Tomorrow the two men, who have never met, take on new jobs and become foes of a sort in a titanic fight over The Daily News -- the editor, Richard Esposito, helping to rebuild it for a new owner; the labor organizer, Ray Rogers, trying to undermine it, at least temporarily, with a reader-and-advertiser boycott for a newspaper union that wants to win back some of the 170 jobs cut last week in an economy move.


Pirates Get Used To Beating Orange
The last time Seton Hall had defeated Syracuse, a victory last year that ended an 11-year losing streak to the Orangemen, the basketball floor at Byrne Meadowlands Arena became an epicenter for a Pirate party, no matter how much Coach P. J. Carlesimo tried to say it was just a nice victory.
When it happened again tonight, an 80-73 victory that extended the Pirates' perfect Big East record and dropped the Orangemen one uncharacteristic step closer to the bottom of the conference, no one raced on the floor.


Inotek Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


McGirt Weighs In Easily But Leon Has Difficulty
JAMES (BUDDY) McGIRT of Brentwood, L.I., weighed in at 147 pounds yesterday in preparation for the defense of his World Boxing Council welterweight title against GENARO LEON of Mexico tonight at the Paramount.
Leon weighed 148 pounds, one too many, before getting down to 147 two hours later.
McGirt (58-2-1) will be making the second defense of the title he won on a one-sided decision over SIMON BROWN Nov. 29, 1991.
His next defense is scheduled against PERNELL WHITAKER March 6 in the main Madison Square Garden arena.


No Headline
Just because a person looks a certain way doesn't mean that they are exactly the same as another person.
A lot of the time residents don't understand a person's speech and don't understand why they have certain ways of doing things. -- MYRA BRYCE-RICHARDSON, who is promoting tolerance at a home for the aged in New York City.  [ B2:1. ]


Jackson Threatens Action
The Rev.
JESSE JACKSON called on major league baseball owners yesterday to establish an affirmative action hiring program and threatened selective boycotts if plans are not in place by opening day on April 5.
Jackson, told last month that the owners were too busy to hear him during their winter meetings at Louisville, Ky., will address them today.
His speech, which follows racial and anti-Semitic remarks attributed to Cincinnati Reds owner MARGE SCHOTT, will be the primary item on the agenda during a special major league meeting at Grapevine, Tex.


Delchamps Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Officer Not Charged In Drug Robberies
Prosecutors, citing a "lack of evidence," have decided not to bring charges against a New York City police officer who was arrested last week for his suspected role in a string of robberies of drug dealers.
The decision by the Manhattan District Attorney's office not to prosecute the officer, Fabian Lorenzo of the Ninth Precinct in the East Village, was made, investigators familiar with the case said, because the arrest was made "prematurely."


By Design; Crochet for Spring
It's not too soon to indulge in the crochet craze.
Come spring, all manner of clothes will be fashioned out of crocheted yarn, a manifestation of the see-through style that will sweep through next season's fashions.
Some designers showed their crocheted creations over nothing, or mere bits of scanty underwear, a look better left on the runway.
What is more fun -- and far more acceptable -- is something crocheted worn over something in a solid contrasting color or a striped pattern.
Pieces are now arriving in New York stores.
At Barneys New York, a skullcap crocheted in black and white bands is already a big seller.
It costs $32, and no one seems to mind that the winter wind will whistle through the open areas.


Maxtor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Colorado Medtech reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kansas Wins With Second-Half Spurt
Kansas 96, Oklahoma 85
NORMAN, Okla., Jan. 11 (AP) -- Adonis Jordan and Richard Scott led a 26-7 run in the opening minutes of the second half that carried No. 4 Kansas to a 96-85 victory over No. 10 Oklahoma in a Big Eight game tonight.
Jordan and Scott scored 8 points apiece during the run, which saw the Jayhawks (12-1 overall, 2-0 Big Eight) turn a 9-point halftime deficit into a 65-55 lead.
They led by as many as 13 in beating Oklahoma for the fifth straight time.


At Last, U.S. Team Has Home Of Its Own
The United States national soccer team gathered yesterday for the first time at its new $2.3 million training facility in Mission Viejo, Calif.
Although wet grounds prevented a serious practice, the lush grass field and spacious clubhouse allowed for some World Cup dreaming.
"The last four years, we've been gypsies," said Tony Meola, the goalkeeper from Kearny, N.J., and captain of the national team.
"We've stayed in every hotel around the world. Today, that ends. These fields are as good as any we played in during the 1990 World Cup in Italy."


Weprin Picks Leadership Of Committees
Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin filled two powerful chairmanships today, appointing Assemblyman Albert Vann to head the Corporations, Authorities and Commissions Committee and Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky to be chairman of the Environmental Protection Committee.
Senator Ralph J. Marino, the Senate majority leader, was expected to name Senator Ronald B. Stafford, a Republican from Plattsburgh who is the current deputy majority leader, to be chairman of the Finance Committee, Senate officials said.


Mellon Bank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Biocircuits Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Genetics Institute Inc. reports earnings for Year to Nov 30


Israel, in Shift, Backs 'Free' Industrial Zone
Finance Minister Avraham Shohat today announced approval in principle of Israel's first "free export processing zone," an industrial area where manufacturers are liberated from normal taxes and bureaucratic regulations.
A Government committee had rejected the idea, asserting that it would create a dual-tracked economy.
But with unemployment running at 11.1 percent and American investors behind the project predicting 20,000 new jobs within the first year, Mr.
Shohat reversed the decision.


Corporate Issues Slow a Little
Activity in the corporate market slowed a little yesterday from the feverish pitch of last week.
But based on the reception for a Canadian issue to be sold today, the demand continued.
This was clear when the Province of Ontario began marketing $2.5 billion of 10-year global notes and quickly increased the offering to $3 billion.


Beeba's Creations reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


First Empire State reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Storm Brings Record Snow to Utah, Halting Government


Baboon-Liver Patient Is in Stable Condition
THE world's second recipient of a baboon liver was in critical but stable condition last night after a transplant operation completed at 12:35 yesterday morning, University of Pittsburgh officials said.
The operation lasted 13 hours and 20 minutes, and the 62-year-old man tolerated it well, Dr.
John J. Fung, the head of the surgical team, said at a news conference.


Executive Changes
AUDITS AND SURVEYS, New York, named Paul J. Donato senior vice president and director of media research.
EMI RECORDS GROUP NORTH AMERICA, New York, a unit of Thorn EMI, appointed Charles Koppelman chairman and chief executive.


Softimage reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Mitsubishi Drops Mainframe Computers
The Mitsubishi Electric Company said today that it had ended development of mainframe computers, a decision that reflects the movement by computer users away from such large machines.
Mitsubishi's decision also stems from the stiff recession here that is forcing many Japanese companies, despite their long-term perspective, to shed marginal businesses that are unprofitable.
Last month, for example, Isuzu Motors gave up development of passenger cars to concentrate on trucks and recreational vehicles.


Not Afraid of a Giant Role
Days before it was announced that Ray Handley was fired as coach of the New York Giants, he met with George Young, the general manager and the man responsible for correcting the course of one of professional football's most valued franchises.
They met in Giants Stadium, in the scouting conference room, what many teams on draft day call their "war room." Young sat on one side of a rectangular table, Handley on the other.
There was maybe 4 feet of space between them.
"He was sitting right there," Young said, pointing to the chair Handley was in when Young told him that he was no longer coach of the Giants.
"We came in here to talk. I looked at him -- he knew. He knew. He knew it was over. I told him that considering the whole season we have to make a change. And the thing that was important was for that coach to know that I did everything I could to help him succeed. A Big Hole
"There was a hole there, and sometimes when the hole gets too big you can't get out of it. In terms of the players, they must have confidence in the leader. The players don't dictate that, but there's a line. I think he could project himself into my position. The hole was just too big for him to get out of."


Chrysler to Offer 40 Million Shares
The Chrysler Corporation, eager to capitalize on the positive reception for its new models, said today that it would try to raise about $1.4 billion by selling 40 million new shares of common stock.
Immediately after the announcement, Standard &amp; Poor's upgraded the ratings on the auto maker's debt securities two notches and said it would raise the ratings another notch if the equity offering is successful.


Company News
COMERICA INC., Detroit, has signed a definitive agreement to acquire First of Michigan Capital Corp. for about $45 million in Comerica common stock.
GENERAL MILLS INC., Minneapolis, said it had raised prices of most of its cereal brands by an average of 3.5 percent, citing increases in operating costs.
IMAGEAMERICA, Nashville, said it had acquired Medical Diagnostics, Warwick, R.I., for a combination of cash and assumption of certain liabilities.
The dollar amount was not disclosed.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the week's Treasury auctions and other bond offerings misstated the yield on the new seven-year Treasury note, which was traded Friday on a "when issued" basis.
It was 6.46 percent.


Plea Deal For Trader Unravels
A plea agreement between the United States Government and Paul W. Mozer, the central figure in the 1991 Treasury securities scandal at Salomon Brothers, appeared to fall apart yesterday, and Government lawyers said they would now seek to indict him.
They did not specify the charges.
But criminal lawyers not involved in the case said Mr.
Mozer now ran the risk that the Government could bring more serious charges against him, including wire fraud and insider trading.


On My Mind; Lessons of Casablanca
Fifty Januarys ago, in a villa in this North African city, Franklin D. Roosevelt used two words that decisively and precisely set the Allied goals of World War II, determined the shape of the peace -- and have affected the lives of most of the world's people to this day.
"Unconditional surrender," Roosevelt said -- those were the only terms on which the Axis nations, all still strong then, would get peace from the Allies.
And he made it totally clear that meant not only military surrender but the end of the political systems of conquest and subjugation that bound the Axis together.


Mediators Report Progress Toward Bosnian Serbs' Acceptance of Peace Plan
The spokesman for the United Nations-European Community team trying to forge a Balkan peace agreement said today that "progress has been made" toward persuading the leaders of the Bosnian Serbs to accept a 10-point proposal.
But the spokesman, Fred Eckhard, cautioned that "differences remain" between the Bosnian Serbs headed by Dr.
Radovan Karadzic and the negotiators, who are led by Cyrus R. Vance for the United Nations and Lord Owen for the European Community.


Exel Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


TROOPS IN SOMALIA RAID BIG ARSENAL
Nearly 1,000 American soldiers and marines, backed by helicopters and with orders to return fire if attacked, swept through Somalia's biggest arms market today and seized a major cache of weapons and ammunition.
Reducing the arms trade at the Bakara market, in the heart of central Mogadishu, is a crucial part of the American military's goal of curtailing the threat of clan-based violence here.


Reactor Test in Orbit Is Opposed
THE governing council of the American Astronomical Society has joined in the protests by some scientists against current American military plans to test a Russian Topaz 2 nuclear reactor in orbit.
By a unanimous vote at its meeting in Phoenix last week, the council adopted a resolution expressing its concern because, the resolution said, previous experience with similar Russian reactors showed that they emit radiations that "can significantly disrupt X-ray and gamma-ray astronomical observations." The council requested that the test be conducted at considerably higher and presumably safer orbits than now planned.


Synovus Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Let Those Economic Winds of Change Blow
To the Editor:
In his "Economic Scene" column of Dec. 17, Peter Passell questions Laura D'Andrea Tyson's appointment to head the Council of Economic Advisers, concluding she is not among the "wisest economic heads" of this generation.
Does the same discomfort come to the surface in your Nov. 21 Business Day article on Robert Reich, which stigmatizes President-elect Clinton's choice for Secretary of Labor for insights lacking in rigor and precision, relative to mathematical economists?


Microlog Corp. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Flu Flattens Fernandez
Upsets and ailments plagued seeded players as the New South Wales tournament began yesterday in Sydney, Australia.
Mary Joe Fernandez, the No. 3-seeded woman, was the biggest to fall, without even taking the court.
A weeklong bout with the flu forced her to withdraw from singles in this $575,000 warmup for next week's Australian Open.
Sixth-seeded Helena Sukova was forced to retire against Barbara Rittner of Germany.
After fighting back from a set down, Sukova fell and injured a leg at 5-5 in the third set.
Meanwhile, sixth-seeded Sergi Bruguera of Spain was upset.Michael Tebbutt, a qualifier ranked 870th in the world, scored his biggest-ever victory by overcoming Bruguera, 6-7 (0-7), 7-6 (7-4), 6-4. (AP) BASKETBALL  Mavericks' Slide Hits 12
Larry Johnson, a native of Dallas, scored 24 points in front of 250 friends and family members as Charlotte dealt the Mavericks their 12th consecutive defeat, 132-113.
Kendall Gill finished with 20 points and Alonzo Mourning had 20 points and 10 rebounds for Charlotte, which won for the third time in its last four starts.
Dallas, which has lost by an average of 21 points during the losing streak, had another 12-game losing streak earlier this season.
Only Denver has lost more consecutive games this season (14). (AP)


Indian Women Played Key Tribal Role
To the Editor:
You report that Long Island's Shinnecock tribe is considering giving women the vote for tribal leaders (news article, Dec. 26).
The trustee form of government with male-only voting was imposed on the Shinnecocks by the New York State Legislature and is in no way traditional.


Executive Takes News Job
Ira Ellenthal, the president and publisher of The Atlantic Monthly, has assumed a senior management position at The Daily News, the newspaper said yesterday.
Both publications are owned by Mortimer B. Zuckerman.
A spokesman for The News, John G. Campi, said no details of Mr.
Ellenthal's responsibilities would be announced immediately, though at the magazine he played a larger role in business than in editorial operations.
At The Atlantic Mr.
Ellenthal is being replaced by Jayne Young, who has been associate publisher for six years.


Protecting Ozone Shield Called a Warming Risk
SOME chemicals suggested as replacements for gases that destroy the Earth's protective ozone shield could instead add to the danger of global warming for tens of thousands of years to come, scientists calculate.
The chemicals, called fluorocarbons, have no effect on the stratospheric ozone layer that shields living things from skin cancer and other biological harm caused by the sun's ultraviolet rays.
But like a number of other waste industrial gases, chiefly carbon dioxide, the fluorocarbons do trap the sun's heat.
A continuing buildup of these heat-trapping atmospheric gases could cause a disruptive and even catastrophic warming of the earth's climate.


Anse a Galets Journal; Haitians' Hope for Jan. 20: A Fair Wind for Florida
At the simple concrete wharf that is the only port of La Gonave, a desolate, rock-ribbed island off Haiti, two soldiers shadowed by a clutch of onlookers converged on a visitor to ask if he, like most of the foreigners who infrequently venture here, had come in search of boat people.
Even before the visitor could reply, a man shouted from the crowd, "We are all leaving, and that much is certain!" His words drew approving cheers, and a kind of answer to a question that has been hanging in the air since President-elect Bill Clinton promised to end the Bush Administration's practice of summarily returning Haitians intercepted at sea.


Kohl Issues Rebuke To Coalition Partner Amid New Scandal
As new charges of scandal swirled around Germany's shaky coalition Government, Chancellor Helmut Kohl delivered an unusually stiff rebuke to his junior coalition partner today for the way it had presumed to dictate his acceptance of a new Economics Minister last week.
The nominee, Gunter Rexrodt of the Free Democratic Party, said Friday after his party leadership had voted to nominate him that Mr.
Kohl had no choice but to accept him.
Later Mr.
Rexrodt, who succeeded Jurgen W. Mollemann after he quit in a scandal over letters he had signed to help a cousin's business, described his own remarks as "stupid."


Perot Re-enters the Limelight As a Watchdog
Ross Perot resurfaced today with a new "800" number, a fresh set of charts, another series of television commercials and an earful of familiar sounding criticism of another President.
As if determined to restake his claim to be the chief tribune of the ordinary American, Mr.
Perot also announced that he would stage "electronic town meetings" around the country.


Random Access Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Olympia's Plan Clears a Hurdle
Olympia &amp; York's debt restructuring plan won approval from several creditor groups yesterday, but it still requires the backing of the Canadian developer's unsecured creditors in a vote later this week.
Creditors for two properties in Toronto and one in Ottawa, with debts of about $49 million, approved the complex plan in voting at the offices of Olympia's lawyers in Toronto, a company spokesman said.


Henley International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS REACHES MUNICIPAL LABOR DEAL
The Dinkins administration reached a tentative three-year labor settlement with the largest municipal unions.
The settlement, which is subject to ratification by the rank and file, gives workers modest wage increases but does not include the productivity concessions that City Hall had sought.
It covers 180,000 city workers in 19 unions and runs from January 1992 to March 1995.
A1.
SOLVING A POLITICAL PROBLEM
By reaching a contract that provides modest raises for city workers before his re-election campaign begins in earnest, Mayor Dinkins went a long way toward solving a big political headache and making peace with a crucial constituency.
News analysis, B2.


Medical Science: THE DOCTOR'S WORLD; When Important Drug Is Scarce
NITROGLYCERIN is one of the oldest drugs in medicine, and despite the development of many newer heart drugs it still serves a vital need.
Put under the tongue, nitroglycerin pills are the fastest way to relieve the crushing chest pains of angina that strike hundreds of thousands of heart patients.
Last week a shortage of nitroglycerin pills developed in some cities around the nation after the drug's only maker, Parke-Davis, a division of Warner-Lambert of Morris Plains, N.J., ran into problems with the machinery used to make the pills.


Edmund Martin, 90, A Former Chairman of Bethlehem Steel
Edmund F. Martin, a former chairman of the Bethlehem Steel Company, died Sunday at his home in Bethlehem, Pa.
He was 90.
Mr.
Martin died of arteriosclerosis, said Wallace M. Long, director of the Long Funeral Home in Bethlehem.


All-Pro Farmboy Named Pierce
Pierce Holt's evening ritual is to sit mesmerized in front of the television and watch "Jeopardy." He and his wife, Deana, want absolute solitude to hear host Alex Trebek's obscure answers, so first they send their three children upstairs for 30-minute baths and then they shout out responses as if Trebek could hear them.
Loser does the dishes.


Fine to Oakley Is Questioned
The Knicks' president, Dave Checketts, according to a person in the league office, met yesterday with David Stern, the National Basketball Association's commissioner, regarding the $10,000 fine levied at Charles Oakley for blindsiding Indiana's Reggie Miller two weeks ago.
The fine, according to the league person, has not been appealed, as Oakley would have to file through the N.B.A.
Players Association.
Checketts's meeting with Thorn was to express concern about what Checketts and Knick Coach Pat Riley believe to be excessive scrutiny of the Knicks' physical play because of the presence of the league office in New York.


Cryenco Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Goaltending


Vie de France Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 12


While Coaches Scheme, Cowboys Take to Dreams
In their elaborate training complex in the Happy Valley housing development, the Dallas Cowboys' coaches worked behind closed doors today preparing game plans for the National Football Conference championship game next Sunday against the 49ers in San Francisco.
For the Cowboy players, thoughts of the 49ers were put aside for another day.
They seemed serene after their 34-10 rout of the Philadelphia Eagles on Sunday.
They seemed to treat it like another day at the office, another step toward beating the 49ers to qualify for Super Bowl XXVII on Jan. 31.


Assembly Approves Changes in Election Laws
In a symbolic first act aimed at putting pressure on the Republican-led State Senate, the Assembly passed a series of bills today that would allow voter registration on Election Day, impose public financing of state elections and toughen legislative ethics laws.
The Assembly, with a Democratic majority, passed the same bills last year, encouraged by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
But negotiations with the Senate produced a watered-down package criticized by lobbying groups like Common Cause and the New York Public Interest Research Group.


Arch Communications Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


McCormick &amp; Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Blackman Has the Shot, but So Far It's a Supporting Role
The question no one in the Knicks' locker room can or dares to answer is how they can continue to be so bad offensively when Patrick Ewing's supporting cast was supposedly upgraded from coach to business class, if not first class, last summer.
More than a third of the way into the season, the revamped Knicks are merely assuming the identity of last season's Knicks.
They are Ewing and a concept.
A team leading the league in defense, depth and hype is currently one game better off than the San Antonio Spurs.
The Knicks are hard workers with scant creative presence, ponderous and predictable, without a victory in all eight of their games when their opponents manage to score 100 points.


Wiring Into the Future; The High Stakes of Telecommunications
Fearful that the enemy will gain superiority, one side sinks vast amounts of money into building sophisticated weapons.
Its adversary, now frightened that it may be vulnerable, agonizes over whether to match the investment or up the ante.
In this race, the contestants are New Jersey, New York and Connecticut.
The war is over jobs.
The weapons systems are advanced telecommunications networks capable of delivering an array of high-tech services.
And the moves and countermoves all put enormous sums at risk.
Yesterday, a Connecticut regulatory agency gave the Southern New England Telephone Company preliminary approval to increase capital spending on its telecommunications network over the next four years to between $1.2 billion and $1.4 billion.
That would be an increase of 50 percent or more.
The agency, the Department of Public Utility Control, said it hoped to make a final decision on the investment and deregulation plan -- and the service rates needed to pay for it -- in the late spring.


Health Professionals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Television; Nosing Around in Iraq's Vast Arsenal
"Nova" is topical again tonight with a close-up report on the efforts of United Nations inspection teams to track down and do away with Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.
Among the findings on display tonight are vast stocks of lethal chemicals that will take the United Nations two years to destroy; the prototype for a so-called supergun with a range that could threaten Syria, Saudi Arabia, Iran and Israel, along with giant-sized parts waiting to be assembled, and the remnants of Scud missiles and launchers.


IRAN-CONTRA DATA MAY BE RELEASED
Prosecutors have given President Bush a copy of his long-secret videotaped interview on the Iran-contra affair, a step that clears the way for public disclosure of the last known significant documents describing Mr.
Bush's role in a scandal that has nagged him through two Administrations, Government officials said today.
Iran-contra prosecutors also supplied Mr.
Bush's lawyers with a transcript of the videotape in recent days after the President called on Lawrence E. Walsh, the independent prosecutor, to release the January 1988 interview, when Mr.
Bush was the Vice President.


Review/Dance; Youth Is Served in Cast Of a Ballet Masterwork
"Divertimento No. 15" is one of George Balanchine's great ballets, an eloquent counterpart to its Mozart score of the same name.
The warmth of human feeling flows through its formal structures.
It is also a delicate ballet, so intensely dependent upon perfect execution that any blurring of its classical vocabulary makes it fall into the perfunctory.
The unusually lackluster performance by the New York City Ballet on Sunday afternoon at the New York State Theater turned into a textbook example of how this work should never be danced.


Patterns
Chanel by Reservation
Chanel has invaded Anguilla.
On Sunday, the fashion and beauty company flew 10 "estheticians" to the Caribbean island to provide facials, massages and assorted beauty advice for 75 socially prominent New York women who are participating in a five-day fund-raiser for the Boys Club of New York at the luxe Cap Juluca resort.
Chanel, which is donating its services, also imported 35 "passages" (a.k.a. outfits) from Paris and five models from New York for an alfresco show of its spring/summer collection, which won't be arriving in Manhattan stores until next month.


INSIDE
Gunman Hijacks School Van
A man hijacked a school van in Connecticut, and one student was wounded before the gunman was killed in a shootout with the police.
Page B1.
No Deal in Salomon Case
The main figure in the Salomon trading scandal faces indictment after a plea agreement unraveled.
Page D1.
Management Mutiny
The board-room coup at Sunbeam-Oster appears to have its roots in managers' dissatisfaction with the hard-driving chairman.
Page D1.
Court Rejects Press Case
The Supreme Court declined to hear an appeal from a newspaper reporter sentenced to jail for refusing to name a confidential source.
Page A16.
Evolution of a Cat
A scientist says he has found a mechanism that may explain rapid evolution among cats: selective killing of brain cells.
Science Times, page C1.


Kodak Selects Outsider for Finance Chief
The troubled Eastman Kodak Company broke with tradition yesterday and named Christopher J. Steffen, an outsider with a reputation as a turnaround specialist, to be its new chief financial officer.
The giant photography company, based in Rochester, announced in September that Paul L. Smith, a longtime employee, would retire as chief financial officer in February.
Kodak has historically filled top-management jobs from within the company.


Mexican Border's Boom Plan Is Bust
The lands along the United States-Mexico border have always been a place of oversized dreams.
But the newest frontier crossing, scheduled to open today, in Santa Teresa, N.M., just west of El Paso, also contains the stuff of nightmares.
While Federal and state officials have earmarked $50 million to build a highway and permanent border station in Santa Teresa, Mexican officials recently dropped plans to pave a 12-mile road leading to their side of the frontier.
The reason they gave: an international industrial park planned in Santa Teresa looks like a flop.


Wall Street Deli Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Digital Communications Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Temtex Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30





Fuller (H.B.) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Accounts
*
The Connecticut Department of Economic Development's Tourism division, Rocky Hill, Conn., to O'Neal &amp; Prelle Inc., Hartford, as the first agency to handle its advertising account.
Patrice Tanaka &amp; Co., New York, was awarded the public relations account, previously at Lou Hammond &amp; Associates Inc., New York.
Combined billings for the 18-month contract were estimated at $3 million. *
VF International, Wyomissing, Pa., to Bozell New York, as the first agency to handle the marketer of women's intimate apparel like Vanity Fair in Asia, Australia, the Middle East and the Americas.
Billings were not disclosed.


Intermetrics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Explosive Fabricators reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Merck to Spend $1 Billion In Repurchasing of Stock
Merck &amp; Company said yesterday that it would spend $1 billion to buy back common shares, continuing its longstanding stock repurchasing policy.
Analysts said other health-care companies were also likely to authorize buybacks because drug stock prices were relatively low.
Merck shares rose 75 cents yesterday, to $43.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.
At yesterday prices, $1 billion would buy about 23 million shares, or 2 percent of the 1.145 billion Merck shares outstanding.


Storm Batters Wrecked Tanker, Worsening Oil Spill in Shetlands
With the grounded tanker Braer spewing large volumes of oil from broken deck hatches, salvage officials said today that the situation had taken a turn for the worse and expressed fear that a second night of hurricane-force winds could cause the damaged ship to spill its remaining cargo into the sea.
Six days after the tanker lost power and ran aground along this rocky coast more than 100 miles northeast of Scotland, the wreck -- which through the weekend was believed still to contain most of its cargo -- was rolling heavily in a 30-foot surf and hurricane-force winds, grinding the underside of the hull and causing most of its remaining, intact oil tanks to rupture.


Witnesses' Probation Is Glen Ridge Trial Issue
The judge in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial today threatened to impose penalties on several probation officials and prosecutors if he does not receive a full report by Tuesday on two young men originally charged in the case.
The two, Peter J. Quigley and Paul Archer, are enrolled in a special probation program as part of a plea bargain.
Defense lawyers say they need to know their status before deciding whether to call them as witnesses.


L. A. Scheele, 85; Served 2 Presidents As Surgeon General
Dr.
Leonard A. Scheele, Surgeon General of the United States under Presidents Harry S. Truman and Dwight D. Eisenhower, died Friday in Washington.
He was 85 and lived in Washington.
Dr.
Scheele died at the George Washington University Medical Center, where he had been admitted with pneumonia, said a daughter, Alexandra S. Ryan.


RehabCare Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Classical Music in Review
St. Luke's Chamber Ensemble String Quartet Weill Recital Hall


National Community Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


DMI Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Florio Calls for Development of Environmental Technology


Vie de France Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 12


Twin Brothers Shot on Way Home From School
A 16-year-old Brooklyn youth shot twin brothers on a sidewalk two blocks away from Sheepshead Bay High School after an argument, the police said yesterday.
Napoleon and Nicholas Brown, both 16 years old, were walking home from school about 3 P.M. when they encountered Derek Turton, 16, in front of the Sheepshead Bay-Nostrand Avenue Houses, at 2957 Avenue X, said Police Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.
The twins, who live in the housing project, and Mr.
Turton had a continuing dispute.


Allied Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rarity for Republicans: Party Leadership Race
The first contested race in 16 years for the chairmanship of the Republican Party has emerged as not so much a battle for the soul of a battered political party as a contest over who has the practical skills to repair it.
While struggles between moderate Republicans and a growing movement of conservative Christians have grown throughout the country, the competition over party leadership has been remarkably removed from ideological disputes.
There are five candidates, all men and largely conservative -- only one supports a woman's right to choose abortion -- but all agree that the party must be open to people with differing views on social issues like abortion.


Fluke (John) Mfg Co. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Brown &amp; Williamson Picks President to Be Next Chief
The Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation announced yesterday that Thomas E. Sandefur Jr., president and chief operating officer since January 1985, will become chief executive on April 1, succeeding Raymond J. Pritchard, who is retiring.
The appointment was announced after a regularly scheduled meeting in London of the board of B.A.T.
Industries, Brown &amp; Williamson's parent.
Brown &amp; Williamson, based in Louisville, Ky., is the third-largest maker of cigarettes in the United States, with approximately 11 percent of the market, after Philip Morris, with 47 percent, and RJR Nabisco, 32 percent.


Bush's 'Courageous' Economic Error
The President's top economic adviser said today that he had wanted the Bush Administration to take more aggressive steps to spur the economy's recovery from recession, but that Mr.
Bush, despite the electoral risks, made a "courageous" decision to try to ride out the rough period without such measures.
This resulted not only in political defeat, suggested Michael J. Boskin, head of the Council of Economic Advisers, but also in an economy that is still growing too slowly.
The current growth rate is about 3 percent, and the Administration predicts that rate will continue through 1993.


Federal National Mortgage Assn.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
It's no easy matter giving PRESIDENT BUSH an award.
Take the experience of the National Ethnic Coalition of Organizations, which has made more than one attempt to bestow its Ellis Island Congressional Medal of Honor on the President in ceremonies in the Great Hall of Ellis Island.
"The first time was two years ago, and then he went off to South America just before the Persian Gulf war," WILLIAM D. FUGAZY, chairman of the coalition, said yesterday.
"Then it was scheduled again for last month in a private ceremony on Ellis Island -- and off he went to Somalia."


Environmental Tectonics reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Clinton Aides Study Indirect End To Military Ban on Homosexuals
Top aides to President-elect Bill Clinton, who is under intense pressure from the military to back off his commitment to lift the ban on homosexuals in the armed services, have been floating a plan to approach that goal indirectly, without a Presidential order.
Under the proposal, Mr.
Clinton would simply issue written instructions to his choice for Defense Secretary, Les Aspin, directing him to remove the ban and drop any current cases against suspected homosexuals in the military.
Recruits would no longer be asked about their sexual orientation.


Publisher's Stock Cools Off
The stock of Affiliated Publications Inc., owner of the The Boston Globe, eased yesterday after jumping on Monday amid speculation that the company was discussing a sale to a big newspaper company.
Affiliated is controlled by two family trusts that are to expire in 1996.
There has been speculation for years that the company was an attractive takeover possibility.


Boston Acoustics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Ad Agency Group Revamps Awards
The American Association of Advertising Agencies said it had revamped its annual A+ Creative Awards competition, by introducing a two-tier system meant to make it easier for smaller agencies to participate.
Under the restructuring, agencies with billings of $10 million or more enter 10 pieces of advertising for 10 clients, while agencies with billings of less than $10 million enter five pieces for five clients.
The deadline for this year's competition is Feb. 17.
The third annual presentation of the awards is scheduled during the organization's annual meeting in April.


International Yogurt reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


At the Ceiling?
The airline stock flight pattern traced by the top line above might well be steeper than anything allowed in commercial aviation.
Airline stocks have soared ahead of the market on hopes that an accelerating recovery will multiply their earnings, especially since they are cutting their costs.
But fare wars breaking out anew can reverse profits and share prices alike, as UAL fell 2 3/8, AMR 1 5/8, Delta 3/4 and US Air 1/2 yesterday.


Food Notes
Toward Racial Harmony
This is the seventh year that Yvonne (Lola) Belle, the owner of Lolabelle restaurant, is running a contest for New York City schoolchildren to honor the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
In the past, only a small number of schools participated.
This year, any child 9 to 14 in the fourth through ninth grades of public, private or parochial schools in the city can participate.


Jury Declines to Indict Robb in Taping
A Federal grand jury refused today to indict Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia on charges that he tried to embarrass his chief political rival, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder, by conspiring with top aides to release a secretly recorded tape of one of Mr.
Wilder's private phone calls.
But the jury, after an 18-month Justice Department investigation, returned charges of eavesdropping, conspiracy and witness tampering against one of the Democratic legislator's close friends, Bruce L. Thompson


Justices Split On Just What A 'Person' Is
Thirty-four years after Congress provided that a poor person would not have to pay a fee for filing a Federal lawsuit, the Supreme Court had to decide the inevitable question today: what is a person?
While this may not have been the most profound or momentous version of that question to reach the Court, it was daunting enough to split the Justices 5 to 4 in a demonstration of how many uncertainties there are to reading the mind of Congress.


The Lesson of 'Two Thousand and One'; Nadder, Ewt and 'Sup
To the Editor:
"Eighties, Nineties and Oh's" (editorial, Dec. 30) describes as "a silly error in verbal juncture" the rendering of "a naught" as "an ought."


Correction: Potato-Leek Soup
The recipe for potato-leek soup with fish in the 60-Minute Gourmet column last Wednesday omitted a step.
Here is a corrected version.  4 medium leeks  4 large potatoes  2 tablespoons butter  1 cup finely chopped onions  1 tablespoon finely chopped garlic  1 teaspoon curry powder  6 cups water  1 bay leaf  Salt and ground white pepper  1 pound skinless, boneless fillets of a white-flesh fish like cod or monkfish, cut into 1-inch cubes  1/4 cup heavy cream.
1.
Trim leeks and rinse well.
Quarter lengthwise; then, cut into 1 1/4-inch pieces.
There should be 3 1/2 to 4 cups.
Peel potatoes, and cut into 1/3 -inch cubes.
2.
Melt butter in a large saucepan or kettle.
Add onions, leeks and garlic, and cook, stirring, until wilted.
Add curry and cook, stirring, for a minute.
Add potatoes, water, bay leaf, salt and pepper to taste.
Bring to a boil and simmer for 20 minutes.
3.
Add fish, bring to a boil. (If monkfish is used, simmer for 3 minutes. If cod is used, simmer for 1 minute.) Add cream and return to a simmer.
Remove bay leaf.
To serve, arrange croutons on bottom of each soup bowl.
Ladle hot soup over croutons, and serve.
Yield: 4 servings or more.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving:
425 calories, 13 grams fat, 85 milligrams cholesterol, 150 milligrams sodium (before salting), 25 grams protein, 55 grams carbohydrate.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 5 about a prison parole program for terminally ill inmates with AIDS misstated the length of time an infant would have to be monitored for signs of having contracted the virus from an infected parent.
According to the Federal Centers for Disease Control, by the age of about 20 months, if an infant tests negative, it definitely does not carry H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.


METRO DIGEST
HIRING OF CASEWORKERS PROMISED
The Dinkins administration, acknowledging that the city's child-abuse investigators are seriously overworked, said it would move quickly to hire 300 new caseworkers for the city's Child Welfare Administration, increasing the number of child-abuse investigators by 20 percent and reducing their caseloads by about one third.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  FLORISTS MOVING TO THE BRONX


U.S. Students Advance In Math, for a Change
After years of grim news about the academic performance of American elementary and secondary school pupils, a new preliminary report indicates that the nation's students made significant gains in mathematics achievement between 1990 and 1992.
Overall average proficiency among American students rose five points since 1990 in the 4th, 8th and 12th grades, the three grades tested, according to a preliminary report made public today by the National Assessment of Education Progress, a Federal testing organization.


Indiana Is Winner Of Sneak Preview
The only hint that springtime must wait could be found in the repeated warning announcements of the icy roads outside.
Everything that happened tonight on the basketball court at Crisler Arena was about late March, or early April, with two teams often playing at the highest level, a strange circumstance clouding the issue near the end, and one team leaping at the sound of the final buzzer.
Indiana's Hoosiers overcame a swift and emotional Michigan comeback, a potentially decisive lane violation with 14.1 seconds to play, and two final Wolverine shots in a 76-75 victory.


Governor Ties Environment to Economy
In his State of the State speech today, Gov.
Jim Florio outlined a program calculated to turn New Jersey into a world center for environmental technology and position himself as the leader of its economic revival.
Reaching out to opposition Republicans who dominate the Legislature, the Governor -- who faces a long-odds fight for re-election -- repeatedly invoked compromise as the new political order in Trenton.
But he also said there were some issues on which he would not yield, including a stiff ban on semiautomatic weapons.


C. David Finley; Physician, 42
Dr.
C.
David Finley, director of the critical-care units at the Roosevelt Hospital Division of St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan, died Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 42.
He died of complications from lymphoma, said Dr.
Gregory Steinberg, administrator of the Department of Medicine at Roosevelt.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FLUOR CORP., Irvine, Calif., said its Fluor Daniel unit had been awarded a $100 million contract by Enron Power Corp., a subsidiary of Enron Corp., to build a 105-megawatt power plant in the Philippines.
MCCORMICK &amp; CO., Sparks, Md., announced the acquisition of the consumer products business of Golden Dipt Co., a unit of DCA Food Industries Inc. of Garden City, L.I.
The purchase price was not disclosed.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Confirmation Roundup  H.U.D. Choice Wary of Selling Public Housing; Education Choice Backs 'Investment'
Richard W. Riley, President-elect Bill Clinton's choice for Secretary of Education, told a Senate panel today that even in budgetary hard times, "investment" in the country's youth is an essential spending item.
Mr.
Riley, a former Governor of South Carolina, argued that Mr.
Clinton understood that the need for spending in education and other services was critical.
His statements contrasted with those of some other Clinton choices who have cited the deficit as a reason to abandon campaign promises on new programs and tax cuts.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The Justice Department; Parts of Attorney General-Designate's Record Disturb Some Clinton Backers
Zoe Baird, Bill Clinton's choice to be Attorney General, has been involved in several hotly disputed proposals to change the country's legal system.
Interestingly, the proposals have been endorsed by conservative Republicans like Vice President Dan Quayle, and some are at odds with some of the President-elect's campaign statements.


Oneok Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


First Student Testifies in Suit To Integrate Hartford Schools
Milo Sheff, the 13-year-old Hartford student who is the lead plaintiff in a lawsuit seeking to integrate his city's schools with those in 21 suburbs, testified today in Superior Court.
His subject: his first experience at summer camp.
"Did you have trouble at first?" Wesley Horton, a lawyer for the plaintiffs in the suit, known as Sheff v.
O'Neill, asked him.


Seagate Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Dec. 5 about legal and other fees for the bankruptcy of R. H. Macy &amp; Company misstated the position of Macy's general counsel, Herbert Hellman.
He did not concur with the report's comments that the fees of the Blackstone Group were excessive.
He did concur with its assessment of the fees of Berlack, Israels &amp; Liberman, a law firm for Macy's bondholders.
This correction was improperly delayed through an editing lapse.


Tad Danielewski, An Acting Teacher And a Director, 71
Tad Danielewski, a theater, film and television director and acting teacher, died last Wednesday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 71.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Paramount Communications Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Citizens National reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


As Crime Rises, Puerto Ricans Retreat
After three years of unprecedented levels of violent crime in which the murder rate has climbed to more than double that on the American mainland, Puerto Ricans are making sweeping adjustments in their relaxed way of life.
And faced with demands that the government do more to halt the growing lawlessness, the island's new Governor, Dr.
Pedro J. Rossello, is acknowledging that crime has become Puerto Rico's most pressing social problem.
Business at restaurants and nightclubs is suffering because residents, fearful of being robbed by a growing number of crack cocaine addicts, are reluctant to venture out after dark.
Newspapers and magazines are full of advertisements for new planned communities hidden behind concrete barriers and protected by armed guards, in a sharp departure from the Caribbean tradition of gregarious outdoor living.


Herman Odell; Lawyer, 81
Herman Odell, a retired lawyer, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He had suffered from Alzheimer's disease and died of heart failure, his family said.
He was 81.


SENATORS DIVIDED ON M.I.A. SURVIVAL
In a report that will help fuel the continuing argument over the handling of servicemen missing in the Indochina war, the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs has concluded that the possibility remains that some prisoners of war were left behind when American forces withdrew from South Vietnam in 1973.
After more than a year of hearings, investigations of Government documents and trips to Southeast Asia, the committee could not come to a conclusive finding on whether Americans were left prisoner in Vietnam, Cambodia or Laos.


Rudolf Nureyev Eulogized And Buried in Paris Suburb
As a cold winter sun broke through stormy rain clouds, Rudolf Nureyev was buried early this afternoon in the Russian Orthodox cemetery of Ste.-Genevieve-des-Bois in the Essonne district, a suburb south of Paris.
The Russian-born dancer and choreographer died in a suburban Paris hospital on Jan. 6.
Nureyev's oak coffin was lowered into the ground without religious services or spoken remarks.
He was buried some 60 feet from the marble tomb of the choreographer Serge Lifar.
Altogether, more than 3,000 Russians lie in this cemetery.


Charges Dropped Against Rutgers Coach
Drug charges were dropped against ARNOLD JETER, a Rutgers assistant football coach, who was arrested during a November raid.
Assistant Middlesex County Prosecutor ROBERT CORBIN said Monday that the charges had been dropped against Jeter, 53.
Prosecutors said last month , when they announced that they planned to drop the charges, that no drugs or drug paraphernalia were found on Jeter when he and six others were arrested Nov. 4 in the New Brunswick home he was visiting.


Hallwood Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Klecko Pleads Guilty to Perjury Charge
JOE KLECKO, a former Pro Bowl defensive lineman, pleaded guilty to a charge of lying to a Federal grand jury investigating insurance fraud.
Klecko pleaded guilty Monday in United States District Court in Philadelphia after Judge HARVEY BARTLE 3d rejected a defense motion to dismiss the charge of perjury.
His lawyer said Klecko was "lured" into committing perjury.
A Federal indictment accused Klecko, a four-time Pro Bowl choice in his career with the Jets from 1977 to 1987, of lying about a $6,000 insurance claim submitted in July 1988 on his truck.
The indictment said Klecko told a grand jury that his truck had been damaged by chemical particles and debris and that the truck had been repainted, when in fact neither was true.


Pianist Cancels Recital Because of Ailing Hand
The pianist Murray Perahia has canceled his Feb. 25 recital at Carnegie Hall.
He is recovering from a hand condition that has prevented him from playing in recent months.


First Interstate-S. La. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Apertus Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Electro Rent reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Marshall &amp; Ilsley reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corn on the Catfish
BE the first on your block to have Arkansas catfish.
But instead of frying it, saute it in a crust of cornmeal and flour to keep this sweet, tender fish very moist.
The crisp crust is wonderful.


A Missed Opportunity on City Labor
Mayor David Dinkins said that in this round of labor negotiations, he'd see to it that New York City's labor unions agreed to substantive reforms.
Now he has abandoned that promise.
The tentative agreement with several municipal unions is, to the administration's credit, financially responsible.
But it also represents a missed opportunity to begin restructuring the work force.
The pact grants a wage and benefit increase of 8.2 percent over 39 months, more than the city budgeted for, but below inflation.
Yet despite Mr.
Dinkins's long-term pledge to grant increases only if the unions paid for them in better productivity, the agreement does not impose even one reform.
Isn't money saved money saved, whether through reforms or a modest settlement?
No, because real reforms can last generations, not just the length of a contract.
That's why unions fight them so fiercely.


AT DINNER WITH: Suzyn Waldman; She Knows Her Way Around a Ball Park
SUZYN WALDMAN, an uncanny woman in the boys' world of all-sports radio, sits in an East Side sports bar remembering with Nabokovian precision the long-ago on-deck circle at Boston's Fenway Park.
She is especially savoring the memory of the back of Ted Williams's neck as the genius Red Sox hitter waited, kneeling and stalking another endangered baseball pitcher.
"He had black curly hair," says Ms.
Waldman, caught reverentially in a childhood sports memory that is four decades old, "and you could see the ripples on his neck. He was kneeling right in front of me. I was 4 or 5 years old, sitting in the front row with my grandfather, right behind the on-deck circle."


Municipal Labor Accord Is Seen As Budget Hurdle
Fiscal experts and Dinkins administration officials said yesterday that the tentative labor settlement New York City reached on Monday with municipal unions, while reasonable, would make it much harder to close the city's budget gap next year and might force the city to cut services.
The fiscal experts also expressed skepticism that the contract would ever produce a more productive work force.
But city officials said they believe they have built into the accord a powerful mechanism for hammering out productivity agreements between the city and its largest unions.


2 Balks Follow Jackson's Address
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson today called on major league club owners to improve the position of blacks and Hispanics in baseball.
But two of the issues he raised contradicted information he apparently already had.
Jackson, who has formed a Rainbow Commission for Fairness in Athletics, delivered a 14-point speech to the owners at the start of their meeting in this Dallas suburb, then issued the same points at a news conference.


ENDEAVOUR READY TO START MISSION
The space shuttle Endeavour and five astronauts are set to roar aloft on Wednesday morning on a six-day mission whose main goal is to deploy a $200 million data-relay satellite.
The astronauts also plan three tests, including a space walk, to help pave the way for the NASA space station Freedom, a $30 billion orbital outpost scheduled to be built later this decade.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 8
Jan. 1
Jan. 10
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.6
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.2
2.9
Gasoline stocks
220.6
215.2
224.5
Distillate stocks
142.4
141.3
142.1
Crude imports, daily
6.8
5.8
6.7
Product imports, daily
1.8
2.1
1.3
Crude stocks
320.3
321.5
334.8
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.0
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
85.0
86.7
86.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Lorde Memorial
A memorial service for Audre Lorde, the poet and author, is to be held on Monday from 2 to 4 P.M. at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 112th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, Morningside Heights.
Ms.
Lorde died on Nov. 17 at the age of 58.


U.S. Indicts Salomon Ex-Trader
Paul W. Mozer, the former head of the government-bond trading desk at Salomon Brothers, was indicted yesterday on four criminal counts for his role in the 1991 Treasury securities bidding scandal.
The indictment by a Federal grand jury in New York came a day after a plea agreement between Mr.
Mozer and the Government collapsed.


Scientists Now Say They Can't Find A Gene for Manic-Depressive Illness
DEALING a particularly crushing blow to the quest for genetic defects that would explain common mental and behavioral disorders, researchers have reported that their previous detection of a gene for manic-depressive illness was wrong.
They have found that their initial work linking the psychiatric illness to a gene on the X chromosome, published in 1987, does not stand up to a more exhaustive scrutiny of the data.
The new studies subjected the data, on three large families in Israel with many affected members, to new and extremely precise genetic probes.


No Headline
"He's going to walk some day. I believe that." -- ANGELA BYRD, wife of Dennis Byrd, the injured Jet defensive end.  [ B11:1. ]


Apple Names Chief of Unit For Software
Apple Computer Inc. said today that it had named David C. Nagel to lead its Macintosh Software Architecture division, succeeding Roger Heinen, who left last week to join the Microsoft Corporation.
Mr.
Nagel, a former NASA scientist, most recently was Apple's senior vice president for the advanced technology group.


Standard Logic reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Champion Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


First Union Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The Commerce Department; RON BROWN GALA RAISES QUESTIONS
Some of the largest American and Japanese companies have agreed to pay at least $10,000 each for a party to honor the next Commerce Secretary, Ronald H. Brown, at a pre-inaugural gala on Sunday.
The sponsors of the Friends of Ron Brown party, an array of business interests that will probably have issues coming before the Commerce Department, include Anheuser-Busch, J. C. Penney, Pepsico, Textron and Sony Music Entertainment.


Former Envoy Is Charged With Stealing Groceries
Nearly two years ago, Felix S. Bloch and his wife, Lucille, moved into the Governors Club, a private residential and golfing community just south of here, in search of peace and quiet.
The former Foreign Service officer was also in search of relative anonymity after the tumultuous ending to his 32-year career with the State Department.


Review/Pop; If Free Is Good, When Is Jazz Too Free?
The most fascinating aspect of the tenor saxophonist Frank Lowe's show at Washington Square Church on Friday night, part of a series by the World Music Institute, was its commentary, perhaps inadvertent, on jazz practice in the early 1980's.
Mr.
Lowe brought together four saxophonists and a drummer, and used them to merge rhythm and blues, an ostinato or two, a few original melodies and a couple of lines by Ornette Coleman as the structure to hold basically free improvisation.
It didn't work.
Jazz over the last decade or so has become so much more sophisticated, so much more rigorous, and its audience so much more discriminating -- only a handful of people turned up for the show -- that Mr.
Lowe's lack of arrangements, and the endless fruitless improvisations, seemed both dated and primitive.
And given that the music Mr.
Lowe was making references to has always swung, his group's grinding lack of swing was due either to lack of ability or a willfull wasting of a precious and mitigating resource.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Jan. 4 about the advertising account of The Record in Hackensack, N.J., misidentified the newspaper's previous agency.
It was the Justamere Agency of Hopatcong, N.J.


Market Place; When One Hire Inspires Investors
SOMETIMES, one man can make a difference.
That is why the Eastman Kodak Company broke with tradition this week and hired an outsider, Christopher J. Steffen, as its chief financial officer.
Mr.
Steffen has a reputation as a tough asset manager.
Wall Street quickly responded with warm words and a flurry of buy recommendations.
Kodak's long-depressed stock price shot up on heavy volume, gaining $3.25 a share on Monday and an additional $2.625 yesterday to close at $47.625.


A Clear -- and Secure -- View for the Inaugural


Microtek Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Chattem Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Harassment Confronted In Albany
A day after a state Assemblywoman described being sexually harassed by colleagues in the Assembly, the State Capitol today was forced to confront an issue that has been debated in work places throughout the country.
The Assemblywoman, Earlene H. Hill, a Hempstead, L.I., Democrat, said on Monday that she had been harassed on three occasions by other Assembly members.


Prayers and Determination Buoy Jets' Byrd
Moving his arms and right leg, Dennis Byrd, the partly paralyzed New York Jet, said yesterday he was relying on prayers, good physical condition and willpower to take what his doctors said was a surprisingly strong recovery to the point where he might walk again.
Byrd and his wife, Angela, spoke publicly at a news conference for the first time since the devastating injury he suffered when he collided with a teammate while attempting a tackle in a football game against the Kansas City Chiefs on Nov. 29.


Book Notes
Me? Write That? Naw!
Authors often yearn to see a credit line flash across the movie screen, saying "Based on the book by" (naturally, themselves).


The Lesson of 'Two Thousand and One'
To the Editor:
"Eighties, Nineties and Oh's" (editorial, Dec. 30), championing "the Oh's" as the collective name for the next decade, is well informed on the last turn of century.
Unfortunately, you overlook the implications of a classic of Anglo-American culture set near the next turn: "Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey."


International Paper reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Topics of The Times; Happy New Year, Again
New Year's Day is the most celebrated holiday on earth, according to J. P. Morgan &amp; Company's annual guide to holidays (and banking hours) around the globe.
All but 15 Islamic and Buddhist nations -- and Urnaesch -- greet the new year on the first of January.
Urnaesch, a village in the Swiss Alps, greets it today.
The defiant Swiss are just reminding the rest of the world that they weren't altogether happy with the calendar Pope Gregory XIII ordained in 1582.
In promulgating a calendar that coincided with the solar year, the Pope introduced a change in dates that now totals 13 days.
Swiss Protestants, among others, were not pleased.
Indeed, several cantons stood by the old Julian calendar until the late 1700's.


Review/Rock; A Down-to-Earth Supergroup, Fraying and Aging
Five veterans of the alternative-rock-club touring wars crowded the Knitting Factory stage on Friday night.
They looked a little battered: not scruffy in the way they did when they were skinny kids knocking on Dylan's door with water guns, but weary in the usual way.
Some wrinkles showed here, a creeping hairline there.
A wedding ring caught the gleam of the light.
Once brash, the five were now simply determined loyalists of rock.
The band, Gutterball, is an unpretentious version of a supergroup.
Steve Wynn, longtime bard for the Los Angeles "paisley underground" leaders, the Dream Syndicate, sings lead here and writes the songs along with the guitarist Bryan Harvey of the Richmond duo House of Freaks.
The other half of that pair, Johnny Hott, plays drums, while Bob Rupe, formerly of the Silos, plucks the bass and Steve McCarthy, formerly of the Long Ryders, adds more guitar.


Review/Music; Composers Orchestra Paints Sonic Landscapes
Buttressed by no fewer than 40 percussion instruments, the American Composers Orchestra set forth a group of works on Sunday afternoon that favored sounds above form.
Dennis Russell Davies, the orchestra's music director, assembled a program that included two world premieres: Chou Wen-Chung's Cello Concerto and Roger Reynolds's "Dreaming." The emphasis on atmosphere as landscape pointed toward the current revival of Impressionism.
Most impressive of the group was the four-movement "Dreaming," inspired by a sequence of literary images.
Mr.
Reynolds, initially known for fearsomely complex technological experimentation, now favors a free-form fantasizing on poetic extracts.
The opening two episodes, based on fragments of texts by Borges, release disparate and delicately instrumented night visions, both "ecstatic" and "agitated." Solo voices, carrying fragmentary melodic shapes, poke fitfully through a restless, shifting background.


U.S. Finds Serbs Skimming 23% Of Bosnian Aid
An internal report commissioned by the State Department has concluded that the effort to send relief supplies to the Bosnians is largely a failure, with the Serbian forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina skimming nearly one-quarter of all the aid brought in by air.
The report, which is circulating within the Bush Administration, also complains that the United Nations peace force and refugee officials have often yielded to the Serbs, allowing them to determine what aid is provided and who gets it.
Appeasement Is Charged
"Since the start of the humanitarian airlift," the report said, "the U.N. has also sought to appease the Serb militias by providing the Serb 'authorities,' a portion (23 percent) of all relief commodities arriving by airlift, and by according them the right to inspect each cargo delivered by air or road, to approve or disapprove each cargo.".


Banker Hired By Rothschild
Yves-Andre Istel, an investment banker who specializes in trans-Atlantic deal-making, has been hired by the Rothschild Group, a British-French merchant-banking firm.
Mr.
Istel will be a vice chairman of both Rothschild Inc., the New York operation where he will be based, and Rothschild Europe, the group's European corporate finance arm.
Mr.
Istel, 56, had been the chairman of Wasserstein, Perella &amp; Company International since 1988, and before that he had held senior positions at the First Boston Corporation and Lehman Brothers Kuhn Loeb.
At Wasserstein, Perella, Mr.
Istel most recently assisted Compagnie Industriali Riunite S.p.A. in selling a $130 million stake in Ing.
C.
Olivetti &amp; Company to the Digital Equipment Corporation.


Where Have All the Flowers Gone?
In a move that may transfer a $70 million industry along with a dash of color from Manhattan to the Bronx, the four largest flower wholesalers in midtown announced yesterday that they would move to a new site that will be built in the next two years in an abandoned rail yard in the South Bronx.
They said they expected the 14 other wholesalers who remain in midtown to follow them, providing an economic boost to the Bronx while carving the heart out of the Flower District, for more than a century one of the few fragrant sections of Manhattan, where potted trees often crowd the sidewalks and men embracing bundles of roses bustle between storefronts and waiting trucks.
The wholesalers are now concentrated in storefronts along the Avenue of the Americas, between 26th and 28th Streets.


E-Z-EM Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


CHRONICLE
When BLANCHE WIESEN COOK gets up to talk at a memorial service on Monday for Audre Lorde, the poet laureate of New York State who died in November, , her theme will be "Friend of Friends."
"I will talk about my 35 years of friendship with her and about the way that she had such an impact on so many lives," said Ms.
Cook, author of the biography "Eleanor Roosevelt: Volume I, 1884-1933" published last year by Viking.
"She was active in women's rights, civil rights, lesbian and gay rights and in the international arena -- for example she organized the African-German community in Berlin -- and had the most amazing range of people as her friends."
A committee that includes Ms.
Lorde's children, ELIZABETH LORDE-ROLLINS and JONATHAN F. A. ROLLINS, decided to organize the service on Monday, Martin Luther King Jr.
Day, at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
The speakers will also include Angela Davis, the former radical leader who is now professor of the history of consciousness at the University of California at Santa Cruz; Sonia Sanchez and Joy Harjo, poets, and Barbara Smith, who was a co-founder with Ms.
Lorde of the Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press.
"She had such an impact on all our lives because she knew so much about everything," Ms.
Cook said.
"She could talk to musicians about music and historians about history. When you went for a walk on the beach with her, she knew the name of every single shell, rock and stone, out of her own absolute hunger to know things."


Alafirst Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wall Street Cheers Kodak's New Hire


Boxing; McGirt's Victory Is Anything But Routine
If he was hurt last night -- and James (Buddy) McGirt insisted that he was -- the risk was far greater than he realized in the days leading up to the fight.
A bad left shoulder limited him to jabs and straight hands.
The things he hoped he could do against Genaro Leon, he couldn't.
McGirt knew this should have been a dress rehearsal for a bigger bout with Pernell Whitaker in March, but it turned into a long struggle to reach the final bell.
Rather than a routine defense of his World Boxing Council welterweight title, it became a fight to stay on his feet in the 12th round.


Corporate Debt Volume Still Heavy
The heavy volume of new corporate debt continued yesterday, but investor demand remained strong, pushing down the yield of a large new Canadian issue to the low end of expectations.
Activity also picked up in the municipal market with the pricing of a $1.6 billion bond issue by the North Carolina Eastern Municipal Power Agency.
Most of the issue was a refunding of bonds previously sold when interest rates were higher.


Dow's 1.89 Rise Masks Some Investor Shifts
Investors noisily abandoned some of their recent favorites in airlines and technology stocks yesterday for the dull and the depressed, a migration obscured by the broader market's nearly even finish.
The Dow Jones industrial average, down sharply in the early afternoon, rebounded by more than 24 points in the last hour to close at 3,264.64, up 1.89 points for the day.
Buyers reappeared as worried about the bond market and the Iraq confrontation eased, some strategists said.
Big Board trading reached a busy 239.4 million shares.


DINKINS TO STEP UP HIRING TO MONITOR CHILD ABUSE CASES
The Dinkins administration, acknowledging that New York City's child abuse investigators are seriously overworked, said yesterday that it would move swiftly to hire enough workers to reduce by a third the number of families each one monitors.
Deputy Mayor Cesar A. Perales said the city would hire 300 new caseworkers for the city's Child Welfare Administration, increasing the number of child abuse investigators by 20 percent.


Executive Changes
BALLY GAMING INTERNATIONAL INC., Chicago, a unit of Bally Manufacturing Corp., named Richard Gillman chairman and chief executive.
COWEN &amp; CO., New York, a banking and securities firm, appointed Stephen A. Stone president and chief operating officer of the Cowen mutual funds.


Notes From Underground Prove Quite Rewarding
SO you want to write and be published.
Listen, here's some real practical advice from Marissa Piesman, author of the Nina Fischman mysteries, that you will never get from any creative writing course: Move to someplace near the end of a subway line so you can count on getting a seat every morning.
"What I do is I try to get one in the corner by the window," Ms.
Piesman said as she set out from her Washington Heights apartment.
"It gives you stability." Ms.
Piesman demonstrated her technique on the A train, where she has already written three novels: "Unorthodox Practices," "Personal Effects," and the newest one, "Heading Uptown," which Delacorte Press is now shipping to bookstores.


Western Microwave reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Managing the Technological Frontiers
For a hog breeder in Minnesota, it's using new ultrasound equipment to measure exactly how lean a hog is in a few seconds with a minimum of hassle to man and beast.
To a metal processor in Cleveland, it's figuring out how to wield laser light like a blacksmith's hammer to pound extra strength into steel.
To a company that tracks the popularity of radio and television programs, it's a device that automatically records any broadcast someone is listening to or watching, no matter where they are, without their touching a button.
No enterprise is without its technological frontiers.
Command of those frontiers has long been recognized as a key to competitive success, but the globalization of national economies has stepped up pressures on business leaders and policy makers alike to manage the invention and use of new technology more effectively.


American List reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


3 Centers Pressing for Causes Of Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
RESEARCHERS at three medical centers in New Jersey, Massachusetts and Colorado are conducting sophisticated tests on patients with chronic fatigue syndrome and comparing notes in the first consistent, multidisciplinary approach intended to get to the bottom of the disorder.
The syndrome, which begins with flu-like symptoms and can lead to exhaustion lasting for years, remains a profound mystery, said Dr.
Stephen E. Straus, chief of the medical virology center at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in Bethesda, Md., the agency financing the $3 million research program.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  U.S. SAID TO PLAN IRAQ RAID
President Bush has decided to launch an attack on Iraq soon, officials said.
The only question that remains, a Pentagon official said, is "when to pull the trigger." A1  GRIM HARVEST IN SOMALIA
Nurturing a healthy corn crop in famine-stricken Somalia does not guarantee that a farmer will reap any gains in a market thrown out of balance by relief shipments.
A1


Everybody Loves a Winner, And Especially His Coattails
WHATEVER honeymoon Bill Clinton might enjoy after becoming the nation's 42d President, he will be hard pressed to match the outpouring of affection already being displayed along Madison Avenue.
Commercials and advertisements featuring Mr.
Clinton, whether congratulating, celebrating or spoofing him, seemed to have begun appearing almost as soon as the final votes were tallied on Election Night.
The main reason: To an industry that thrives on change, Mr.
Clinton's victory embodies change, whether significant (the baby boomers succeeding the World War II generation in leadership roles) or frivolous (Socks the cat replacing Millie the dog as First Pet).


Boxing; Lewis Learns a Lesson: Champs Are in Demand
While heavyweight champ Riddick Bowe is holed up in the Poconos in preparation for his first title defense next month, the champion by default, Lennox Lewis, has been busy negotiating his own megadeal.
And the winner is. . . .?
It could be Time Warner Sports and HBO, which has already signed Bowe to a six-fight contract that could earn him as much as $100,000 million.
Or it could be Showtime, which has been reluctant to speak publicly about its talks with Lewis's manager, Frank Maloney, and his promoter, Dan Duva.


Shetlands Oil Tanker Breaks Apart
Two consecutive days of hurricane-force winds and towering waves snapped the keel of the grounded tanker Braer early today, breaking the vessel apart and sweeping the rest of its 26 million gallons of oil into the sea.
After a nearly weeklong drama in which the tanker writhed in the stormy winter surf, local residents, conservationists and Government officials began trying to assess the overall toll of the spill, which in volume ranks among the worst tanker accidents in history.


Star Multi Care reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Phyllis Wallace, 69, A Labor Economist In A.T.&amp;T. Lawsuit
Phyllis A. Wallace, a labor economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, died last weekend at her home in Boston.
She was 69.
Officials at M.I.T. said yesterday that she had died of natural causes.


Dreyfus Strategic Municipals reports earnings for Year Nov 30


Lacey Fosburgh, Writer, 50, Dies; Novelist and True-Crime Author
Lacey Fosburgh, a writer whose books chronicled murder, family passions and mystery in India, died on Monday night at California Pacific Hospital in San Francisco.
She was 50 years old and lived in Mill Valley, Calif.
Ms.
Fosburgh, who began her writing career as a reporter for The New York Times, died of complications of breast cancer, said a friend of the family.


Topics of The Times; He Lit Up the Sky
There are fireworks and there are
Grucci
fireworks.
Felix Grucci, who died this week at 87, was America's master of ooh's and ah's.
The offspring of a family that had made fireworks in southern Italy since the mid-1800's, Mr.
Grucci started the U.S. business on the south shore of Long Island in 1929.
If ever there was a family enterprise, this was it -- and still is.
Initially the company did Italian feast days and the Fourth of July in nearby island towns.
But over the years Mr.
Grucci and his family became unofficial pyrotechnicians to the City of New York and, by extension, to the entire world through telecasts of their New York spectaculars.
To name a few, the Gruccis did the Brooklyn Bridge centennial in 1983, the Statue of Liberty's in 1986 and last year's tall-ships Operation Sail -- each one ever more dazzling.


Gtech Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Liberty Science Center Previewed in New Jersey


Personal Health
"TO CATCH A COLD." It might not make an enticing movie title, but it is a scene played out among Americans 500 million times a year.
And despite a plethora of preventive advice and an ever-expanding array of commercial remedies, there is absolutely no indication that colds are becoming less common, less bothersome or more curable.
Colds remain the most common medical reason for lost days from school and from work, and more than a billion dollars a year is spent on over-the-counter nostrums in a usually futile effort to find relief from their annoying, disruptive symptoms.


BUSH SAID TO PLAN AIR STRIKE ON IRAQ OVER ITS DEFIANCE
Angered by President Saddam Hussein's response to American ultimatums and his defiance of the United Nations, President Bush has decided to launch a military strike soon against Iraq, United States and allied officials said today.
Senior United States officials said it was conceivable that Baghdad could stay Mr.
Bush's hand with immediate and broad compliance with United Nations demands.
But they said that the Administration assumed this would not happen and that air attacks would take place at the earliest opportunity.


Review/Film; A Conceptual Artist Who Makes Money. Literally.
J.
S.
G.
Boggs, the subject of Philip Haas's intriguing documentary film "Money Man," is an artistic provocateur whose chosen form of expression is the creation of homemade currency.
His hand-drawn bills, while not strictly counterfeit, look enough like the real thing to have alarmed the authorities in several countries.
In Australia and England he has been arrested for counterfeiting but later acquitted of the charges.
And in 1991, the Secret Service seized 15 of his bills in a hotel room in Cheyenne, Wyo.
The agency, while declining to prosecute, refused to return the bills, which the artist prefers to call "notes."
More than a superb draftsman, Mr.
Boggs is an ingenious Conceptual artist whose finished works, which he calls "transactions," require the participants to re-think basic notions about money, art and value.
He doesn't consider one of his works complete until he has "spent" one of his fake bills and received real currency in exchange.
The bills themselves often have whimsical touches, like his signing of his own name as Secretary of the Treasury, or his initialing the back of a one-faced bill with a thumb print.


Rick A. Ross, Pianist And Voice Coach, 40
Rick Allen Ross, a pianist, organist and voice coach, died on Sunday at his parents' home in Orlando, Fla.
He was 40 and lived in Orlando.
His parents, Thomas James and Bobbie Ross, said he died of pneumonia.


Gretzky Is Added to All-Star Roster
WAYNE GRETZKY of the Los Angeles Kings, after playing only three games this season because of a back problem, was added to the All-Star roster by GIL STEIN, the league president, yesterday.
Gretzky was in danger of missing the first All-Star game of his 14-year career after being passed over in voting by the fans and also by a special committe which selected the reserves.


SHL Systemhouse Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing in Business Day yesterday about the appointment of an interim chief executive at the New York Switch Corporation misidentified the previous chief executive, who died Dec. 17.
He was David A. Huemer.


'Down With Fidel!' Is Heard in Cuba, but There Is No Sign Yet of His Fall
After walking for miles and sometimes crawling a last stretch on their knees, thousands of pilgrims began pouring into the Church of St.
Lazarus as the sun set on Dec. 16.
At midnight, a young priest took the microphone to hail the patron of Cuba's sick and downtrodden.
"Long live the Miraculous St. Lazarus!" he shouted over and over.
"Long live Christ the King!"


Wine Talk
A report on the new vintage should be simple but, like many things about wine, it tends to get complicated.
For example: the reports are now coming in on the 1992 vintage.
And we've already had some wines from that harvest; the Beaujolais nouveau and a number of white wines from the Southern Hemisphere, where the 1992 grapes were harvested last spring.
At the same time, wine makers are just now introducing the 1991's and wines of earlier vintages that take longer to mature: the 1990's and even older vintages.
On Monday, for instance, the 1990 wines from the Domaine de la Romanee-Conti, probably Burgundy's most famous name, were presented to the trade and the wine press in New York.


Premier Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Cabaret; A New Round of Broadway Sendups, Vintage '93
Imitation may be the sincerest form of flattery, as the first song in "Forbidden Broadway 1993" suggests.
But it is parody, not flattery, that is Gerard Alessandrini's forte.
As we are told, his satiric cabaret revue specializes in "sweet revenge and sour grapes." What does the show do when it opens in limbo, before the theater season has hit its stride or has pratfalled to a finish?
The answer is unveiled at Theater East, where the latest installment of this perennial entertainment is playing.
In this case, the pleasures of Mr.
Alessandrini's musical indictment are intermittent.
There are, however, mirthful sketches beginning with Craig Wells's devastating spoof of Michael Crawford.
Remove his mask and he is a singing schizoid, a toe-tapping male ingenue.
Then, with a Jekyll and Hyde swiftness, he sings, "Put on your phony voice," and becomes the sonorous phantasm of Andrew Lloyd Webber's dreams.
Just as quickly he returns to smiling boyishness.


Commerce Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Leader of Bosnia's Serbs, In Shift, Backs an Accord
Hours after he seemed to have torpedoed an international plan for peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the leader of Bosnia's ethnic Serbs reversed himself this evening and said he accepted the proposed accord.
Much work needs to be done before any agreement is completed, and many previous accords have unraveled.
But the mediators viewed the endorsement by the Bosnian Serbs' leader, Dr.
Radovan Karadzic, as critically important.


Dalmys Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Barbara E. Brooks, 39, Editor at 3 Magazines
Barbara E. Brooks, an editor at three major women's magazines, died yesterday at her sister's home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
She was 39 and lived in Manhattan.
She died of lymphoma, said the sister, Suzanne Steinau.


Review/Television: Charlie Rose; A Late-Night Host For PBS, With Smiles And Perpetual Praise
In accord with the famous maxim that if you can make it here, you can make it there, Charlie Rose went national last week.
The late-night talk-show host, having got through his tryout in the 11 P.M. slot on Channel 13, brought his earnest and effusive style to the whole PBS network.
Given the choice of Los Angeles as the venue for most of debut week, it was only natural that show business personalities should figure prominently, but the producers may also have calculated that the new, enlarged audience would be most readily attracted by names like Roseanne Arnold (followed, just like on ABC, by her husband, Tom Arnold), Spike Lee and Jerry Seinfeld.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Chronicle column yesterday about the actress Ruby Dee's adaptation of "The Disappearance," a mystery novel, gave the date of the opening performance incorrectly in some editions.
It will be on Tuesday; it was not yesterday.
The report also misstated the location of the Crossroads Theater.
It is in New Brunswick, N.J., not Livingston.


Bosnian Serb Accepts Accord   The leader of the ethnic Serbs in Bosnia and Herzegovina reversed himself and said he accepted a proposed accord for peace.  Page A6.


How Trade Pact Plays on the Farm
Proving the adage that the devil is in the details, soybean farmers here are finding that their profits hinge on the fine print of a trade agreement.
In the two months since the Bush Administration struck a deal with the European Community on farm trade, it has become ever more apparent that the pact amounted to a victory for the United States on grain subsidies and a victory for Europe on subsidies for soybeans and other oilseeds.
Missing Passion
Yet amid the brown stubble fields and oak and elm tree copses of southwestern Missouri, the soybean farmers seem to be remarkably indifferent.
Their attitudes illustrate how Americans who are the most affected by trade talks are often the least impassioned.


Jackson Is Setting a Focus on Sports
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson's Rainbow Coalition, founded and known primarily as a political organization, has turned an intense and somewhat sudden gaze on race and sports as part of a highly visible campaign to increase minority group hiring in decision-making positions.
Citing the need to capture a larger portion of the multibillion-dollar sports industry, Jackson said today that his newly formed Rainbow Commission on Fairness in Athletics would make sports a top priority this year, applying pressure at both the intercollegiate and professional levels.


The Opportunities of Incumbency
While incumbency surely carries its burdens, it also offers substantial opportunities, as Mayor David N. Dinkins has demonstrated repeatedly in the last two weeks.
In the first 12 days of the new year -- one in which the Mayor plans to run for re-election -- Mr.
Dinkins unleashed a blitz of actions and initiatives intended to court constituencies central to the coalition that put him in office three years ago.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.81
3.06
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.00
3.07
3.80
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.15
3.19
3.86
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.36
6.33
6.76
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.47
7.44
7.53
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.50
8.48
8.71
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.40
6.69
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A Federal grand jury indicted the former head of Salomon's government bond trading for his role in a Treasury securities scandal one day after a plea agreement collapsed.  [ Page D1. ]
The Supreme Court backed the I.R.S. on ruling out tax deductions for home offices used only for administrative purposes.  [ D1. ]
The President's top economic adviser said Mr.
Bush declined to spur to economy, choosing to ride out the rough times instead.  [ D5. ]
The Chicago Board of Trade faces resistance from banks and regulators on interest-rate and currency swaps.  [ D5. ]
The nominee for Treasury Secretary, Lloyd Bentsen, said higher taxes would be part of the effort to cut the deficit.  [ A16. ]
Gov.
Jim Florio wants to turn New Jersey into a world center for environmental technology to help its economic revival.  [ B5. ]  Companies
Trans Union was cited by the F.T.C. for illegally selling mailing lists based on consumers' creditworthiness.  [ D4. ]
Boeing's unionized engineers will call a one-day strike to protest the company's refusal to negotiate a new contract.  [ D4. ]
Digital tapped the management ranks of Zenith for the new head of its personal computer business unit.  [ D4. ]
Apple named its senior vice president for advanced technology to lead its Macintosh software division.  [ D4. ]
Brown &amp; Williamson's president and chief operating officer will become chief executive on April 1.  [ D4. ]
I.B.M.'s unit that handles data processing for other companies will triple revenues this year, its new chief executive said.  [ D4. ]
Tele-Communications will offer a cable package for about $10 a month to meet expected demands of the new cable law.  [ D17. ] International
America's soybean farmers seem indifferent to the U.S. deal with Europe intended to open up markets for their crops.  [ D1. ] Business Technology
The globalization of national economies has stepped up pressures on business leaders and policy makers to manage the invention and use of new technology more effectively.  [ D1. ]
A five-acre array of solar cells of the type normally found in calculators produces power for Pacific Gas and Electric.  [ D2. ] Markets
Investors moved into depressed stocks late in the day, helping the Dow rebound with a gain of 1.89 points, to 3264.64.  [ D6. ]
The heavy volume of new corporate debt continued, but investor demand remained strong.  [ D14. ]
Gold was rocked by a huge sale, but prices rose.
The dollar was mixed.  [ D15. ]  Oil moved lower despite tension in Iraq.  [ D15. ] Today's Columns
Wall Street has responded with warm words to Kodak's hiring of a tough outsider as chief financial officer.  [ D6. ]
Ads featuring President-elect Clinton are proliferating in the afterglow of his election victory.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D17. ] The New Stock Tables
The Times has introduced new stock market tables to improve legibility and provide additional information about trading volume and price changes.
The new tables use some abbreviations that differ from those formerly used.
Readers who need assistance in finding stocks, or in understanding the new tables, may call (212) 556-5899, which will be answered from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. through Friday.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., known as Freddie Mac, is offering $100 million of debentures due in 2003 at 100 to yield 7.12 percent through Bear, Stearns.
The issue is callable in 3 years. *
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is offering $250 million of medium-term noncallable notes due in 1998 at 100 to yield 6.02 percent through Goldman, Sachs.


Memories Spur Gifts To Neediest
She was a teacher who nurtured handicapped students.
He was a husband who often spent much of his paycheck on food for the homeless.


Sonic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Public &amp; Private; The Third Decade
In September someone pushed a syringe around the edge of a door at the building that houses the Northland Family Planning clinic and sprayed the vestibule with acid.
The clinic was one of 14 in Michigan so targeted.
On Christmas Eve, members of a Lutheran church in Omaha received postcards picturing a dismembered fetus.
The mass mailing to 250 homes came after a worship service had been disrupted and scriptural graffiti painted in red on a church wall, all because one church member is a doctor who performs abortions.


From Hill to Hill, San Francisco's Top Restaurants.
IN recent years the nation's culinary weather vane has shifted increasingly to the Far East, a trend that can be seen in restaurants from New York to California.
Lotus root, ginger, wasabi, lemon grass, bok choy, curry powder, mirin -- all have appeared in the pantries of American chefs, many of whom were weaned on the French tenets of Escoffier.
This East-West cooking wave crests in California, especially in San Francisco, a major gateway to Asia.
A recent 10-day, 20-restaurant expedition through the city uncovered abundant examples of colorful cross-cultural cooking -- some fabulous, some fatuous.


Guild Quits Umbrella Group in News Fight
The union fight over The Daily News took a new turn yesterday when the Newspaper Guild of New York said it was withdrawing from the Allied Printing Trades Council, a 140-year-old union umbrella group.
The guild, which hired a labor organizer to set up a boycott of The News after Mortimer B. Zuckerman took over as publisher without reaching a contract for its members, announced that its executive board had voted unanimously to pull out of the council "in the best interests of our members."


Student Loan Marketing Assn.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ithaca Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


College Basketball; Son Tops Father In Coach Matchup
An hour before the first game he would coach against his legendary father, Jan van Breda Kolff was leaning against a wall in Cornell's Alberding Field House when his father, friend and teacher, Butch van Breda Kolff, walked up to him holding a plastic bag with a Nike box inside.
Jan looked his father straight in the eye and asked, "What are these for?"


Designatronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Tad Danielewski, An Acting Teacher And a Director, 71
Tad Danielewski, a theater, film and television director and acting teacher, died last Wednesday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 71.
He died of cancer, his family said.


St. Paul Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Thousands Gather to Hear Praise for Dizzy Gillespie
The huge Cathedral of St.
John the Divine was filled to bursting yesterday afternoon with people paying tribute to Dizzy Gillespie, the jazz trumpeter, band leader and innovator who died last week at the age of 75.
The crowd, which the police estimated at 8,000 to 10,000, was remarkably varied, ranging from a seventh-grade class from Washington Heights to an all-star cast of musicians, many of them trumpet players.
There were blacks and whites and Asian-Americans, a few of them holding tattered copies of Gillespie's autobiography, "To Be or Not to Bop."


Foster to Retire After Outdoor Season
For 16 years, GREG FOSTER hurdled barriers, one at a time, with an eye on the finish line.
Through it all, Foster maintained a sense of dignity, purpose, and business.
The 34-year-old Foster, still competitive after all these years, is retiring at the end of the outdoor season.
The three-time outdoor world champion in the 110-meter hurdles will begin his farewell tour at Madison Square Garden competing in the 60-meter hurdles, at the Millrose Games on Feb. 5 and at the USA/Mobil indoor championships on Feb. 26.


Cogeco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Hillenbrand Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


The Pop Life
Singing Collectors
In the summer of 1990, Eddie Chacon was riding a New York City subway train when he spotted a young man across the aisle with a vinyl copy of Marvin Gaye's "Trouble Man."
"I had a hunch that to have that rare record on him, he most likely had to be a record collector like me," Mr.
Chacon said.
"I started talking to him about collections and we traded phone numbers. Neither of us knew what we were getting into."


SunTrust Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Federal Savings-Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


When the Film Audience Controls the Plot
On screen, the moment of truth has arrived.
In a taut little thriller called "I'm Your Man," the cloddish Jack Beamer has, through a series of mishaps, become the target of a murderous corporate renegade, who has him trapped on the roof of a Manhattan building.
Beamer turns to the audience and asks for advice.
Should he run for an open door, leap to the roof of the next building, or reveal his identity as a special agent?
In the next 10 seconds, with no interruption in the action, the audience at the Loews Theater at 19th Street and Broadway in Manhattan votes on what course the film will take.
Color-coded cues flash on the screen, matched to three buttons (red, orange and green) on a black pistol grip affixed to the right armrest of each seat.
This being New York, the audience screams out in unison "Jump! Jump!" while pressing the buttons.
The votes are electronically tallied, and Jack, after deliberating for a few moments, responds to the will of the people.
The audience whoops with delight.


VSB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CPB Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


I.B.M. Unit Predicts $4 Billion in Sales
The unit of I.B.M. that handles data processing for other companies will at least triple its revenues to more than $4 billion this year, its new chief executive predicted yesterday.
Companies are increasingly farming out their computer operations to outside contractors, making this practice, known as "outsourcing," one of the fastest-growing fields in the information technology industry.


Diana Adams, Leading Ballerina And Dance Educator, Dies at 66
Diana Adams, who was a leading ballerina with both the New York City Ballet and American Ballet Theater and the former dean of students at the School of American Ballet, died on Sunday at Mark Twain-St.
Joseph's Hospital in San Andreas, Calif.
She was 66 and lived in Arnold, Calif.
Miss Adams was one of George Balanchine's favorite dancers and created roles in many of his major ballets of the 1950's.
Among her most complex parts was the almost fiendishly demanding pas de deux she danced with Arthur Mitchell in the Balanchine-Stravinsky "Agon" in 1957.
Mr.
Mitchell later said of the duet and its unusual pivots and balances, "Diana's nervous intensity made the whole pas de deux work because it's not so much the difficulty of the steps or how flexible you are, it's the precariousness."


Arabs to Seek U.N. Pressure On Israel Over Deportations
Resisting a call by the Palestine Liberation Organization to suspend peace talks with Israel, Arab foreign ministers ended a meeting here today instead with a recommendation that the United Nations Security Council impose sanctions on Israel for deporting 415 Palestinians to Lebanon.
The foreign ministers, who met for two days under the auspices of the 21-member Arab League, said they would push for sanctions if Israel refused to allow the Palestinians, who are Muslim fundamentalists, to return to the Israeli-occupied territories.
Israel has rejected all such appeals.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Confirmation Roundup; H.U.D. Choice Wary of Selling Public Housing
Henry G. Cisneros, President-elect Bill Clinton's choice for Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, voiced strong reservations today about one of the Bush Administration's showcase programs, which is meant to sell public housing units to their tenants.
"I don't think we can outright endorse the concept," he said in an interview after a confirmation hearing before the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs.
He said he feared burdening the tenants with expensive or decrepit homes.


Metropolitan Diary
THE place: a street telephone at Fifth Avenue and 43d Street.
A college-age woman is speaking.
Just as she is about to hang up, another woman, same age bracket, passes by.
The two women spot each other and scream with delight.
First young woman:
I can't believe it. I just left you a message on your machine!


Clinton Aide Demurs on White House Staff Cuts and Recovery Plan
Appearing to retreat on more campaign pledges, a top aide to Bill Clinton signaled today that the President-elect might not be able to cut the White House staff by 25 percent or have an economic-recovery plan in place by Jan. 20, Inauguration Day, as promised.
Mr.
Clinton's spokesman, George Stephanopoulos, today described the White House cuts as a "goal," and said no more on the recovery plan than that it would be ready in "the next few weeks." The Clinton campaign had stressed that it would be vital to have a recovery plan in place on "day 1."


Oriental Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Helicopter Crash Kills Traffic Reporting Team


McClain Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Union Plans Brief Strike At Boeing
Unionized engineers at the Boeing Company said today that they would call a one-day strike next Tuesday to protest the company's refusal to negotiate contractual agreements.
On Dec. 14, Boeing began putting into effect its final contract proposal even though that offer had been rejected by the Seattle Professional Engineering Employees' Association, which represents engineers and technical employees at Boeing, based in Seattle.


U.S. Force Suffers First Combat Death in Somalia
A United States marine was shot and killed today in Mogadishu during a gun battle near the airport in Somalia's capital, the Pentagon said.
The marine was the first American combat death in the five-week-old military operation, which is aimed at insuring the delivery of food and relief supplies to thousands of people in the famine-stricken country on the Horn of Africa.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Confirmation Roundup  H.U.D. Choice Wary of Selling Public Housing; Bentsen Promises Focus on Deficit
Senator Lloyd Bentsen, President-elect Bill Clinton's choice for Treasury Secretary, joined a parade of appointees today in declaring that new forecasts of higher budget deficits would make it harder for Mr.
Clinton to cut taxes for the middle class as he promised during the campaign.
Mr.
Bentsen, who Mr.
Clinton says will be his chief spokesman on economic matters, vowed to focus on cutting the budget deficit, saying that to achieve this goal, taxes would have to rise, spending would have to fall and growth would have to accelerate.


60-Minute Gourmet
ONE of the least expensive and most flavorful seafoods available to home cooks is mussels.
French children learn to enjoy mussels from an early age.
When I was growing up my mother would make a quick meal or side dish by steaming them quickly in white wine and shallots.
Sometimes we would have mussels simply steamed in their own briny juices, along with slabs of country bread.
Probably the world's greatest aficionados of mussels are the Belgians, who have developed a whole cuisine around these meaty mollusks.


Judge Allows 2 More Tapes In Glen Ridge Sex-Abuse Trial
The judge in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial today gave prosecutors permission to play for the jury tapes of two more secretly recorded conversations involving the mildly retarded woman at the heart of the case.
The tapes, admitted despite strenuous defense objections, will be the prosecution's final evidence in the case it began presenting in mid-October against four former Glen Ridge football players charged with sexually assaulting the young woman in March 1989.


House Inquiry Finds No Evidence of Deal On Hostages in 1980
A bipartisan House panel has concluded that there is no merit to the persistent accusations that people associated with the 1980 Presidential campaign of Ronald Reagan struck a secret deal with Iran to delay the release of American hostages until after the election.
"There is no credible evidence supporting any attempt or proposal to attempt by the Reagan Presidential campaign, or persons representing or associated with the campaign to delay the release of the American hostages in Iran," the panel concluded in a summary of its report, which is to be made public on Wednesday.
Congressional aides distributed the summary to news organizations today.


Manitowoc Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Somalia Will Need Help When Troops Go
To the Editor:
Governments around the world need to recognize that starvation in Somalia can only be eliminated by a long-term program of environmental rehabilitation of the land.


A Bit of This and That For a Sea of Scoring
A transfusion of minor leaguers who had major league wannabe written all over them.
A couple of rookie defensemen who performed the hockey equivalent of turning from ugly ducklings to swans.
A visiting goaltender with Stanley Cup credentials who yielded five goals on 22 shots before being chased from his net.
It was a bizarre combination, but it produced the desired novelty tonight: the Islanders finally won a hockey game.
With an exuberance, and a couple of players, not often seen in these parts, the Islanders ended a three-game losing streak by crushing the Calgary Flames, 8-2, at Nassau Coliseum.


Hans Loewald, 86; Professor Emeritus In Psychiatry at Yale
Dr.
Hans W. Loewald, clinical professor emeritus in psychiatry at Yale University, died on Saturday at Whitney Manor in Hamden, Conn.
He was 86 and lived in Hamden.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


Carolina First Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Phyllis Wallace, 69, A Labor Economist In A.T.&amp;T. Lawsuit
Phyllis A. Wallace, a labor economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, died last weekend at her home in Boston.
She was 69.
Officials at M.I.T. said yesterday that she had died of natural causes.


Mid-America Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Diana Adams, Leading Ballerina And Dance Educator, Dies at 66
Diana Adams, who was a leading ballerina with both the New York City Ballet and American Ballet Theater and the former dean of students at the School of American Ballet, died on Sunday at Mark Twain-St.
Joseph's Hospital in San Andreas, Calif.
She was 66 and lived in Arnold, Calif.
Miss Adams was one of George Balanchine's favorite dancers and created roles in many of his major ballets of the 1950's.
Among her most complex parts was the almost fiendishly demanding pas de deux she danced with Arthur Mitchell in the Balanchine-Stravinsky "Agon" in 1957.
Mr.
Mitchell later said of the duet and its unusual pivots and balances, "Diana's nervous intensity made the whole pas de deux work because it's not so much the difficulty of the steps or how flexible you are, it's the precariousness."


A New Question in Somalia: When Does Free Food Hurt?
In this country of hunger, Faaduma Abdi Arush is cursed with corn.
She has corn stored in barrels, corn stacked in sacks, corn to be tossed away as chicken feed.
Mrs.
Arush survived Somalia's civil war, and she and the farm hands on her large holding even managed to tend her fields, producing a bountiful harvest of corn four months ago.


Home-Office Tax Breaks Are Curbed
The Supreme Court today supported the Internal Revenue Service's tough approach to tax deductions for home offices, effectively ruling out deductions for the spare rooms that taxpayers use to handle the purely administrative aspects of their businesses.
The court's 8-to-1 decision overturned a 1991 Federal appeals court ruling.
The appeals court had permitted a self-employed anesthesiologist to deduct a portion of his housing costs because he used an extra bedroom for keeping patient records and reading medical journals.


Bank Money Market and C.D. Yields Down
Yields offered by banks on money market accounts and certificates of deposit for the week that begins today are slightly lower than in the week before.
In the metropolitan New York market, the weakness was mostly in money market returns; outside the area, it was in certificates of deposit, according to the latest survey by The Bank Rate Monitor.


Wounded Officer Speaks to New Police Graduates


Todd-AO Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Driver of Van Tells of Police Chase of Hijacker
The driver of a van for handicapped children that was hijacked on Monday by a man with a gun today described a bizarre and harrowing chase through south-central Connecticut.
Her account suggested that a 13-year-old student who was wounded in the incident's denouement -- a shootout with state troopers in the town of Portland -- was hit by a police bullet.
The state police have yet to determine whether the child was shot by the gunman or by troopers.


Amsouth Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hate a Happy Lottery Winner? Don't Read This!; From Poverty on Turnpike to Pleasure Under Palms, a Telephone Installer's Tale
David N. Demarest can spend hours on his deck overlooking the Atlantic, watching surfers and pelicans dance to the tune of the waves.
His worries are on the order of figuring the best way to build a pool or keep the hibiscus flowers from turning brown.
Many days, he can't recall worrying about a thing.
"I love it here," he said, his sun-kissed face creasing into a broad smile as he scanned the palm trees in front of his $550,000 house.
"I can't complain."


Develcon Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Ben Franklin Retail Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Schulman (A.) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Charles Lord, 64, Dies; An Investment Banker
Charles E. Lord, an investment banker and a former vice chairman of the Export-Import Bank of the United States, died Monday in Bridgeport Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 64 and lived in Hobe Sound, Fla.
Mr.
Lord died of pulmonary disease, said his wife, Margaret.
He was in Connecticut to visit relatives.


F&amp;C Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Data Translation reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


INSIDE
No Case Against Senator
A grand jury looking into the release of a secretly recorded tape declined to indict Charles S. Robb.
Page A12.
Ex-Salomon Trader Indicted
The central figure in the 1991 Treasury securities scandal was indicted on four criminal counts.
Page D1.
Cries for Freedom in Cuba
While still rare, protests in Cuba have surfaced as economic hardships have led to desperation.
Page A10.


Hans Loewald, 86; Professor Emeritus In Psychiatry at Yale
Dr.
Hans W. Loewald, clinical professor emeritus in psychiatry at Yale University, died on Saturday at Whitney Manor in Hamden, Conn.
He was 86 and lived in Hamden.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


A Major Cable-TV Operator Aligns Fees With New Law
Tele-Communications Inc. said yesterday that it would offer its cable television subscribers a basic, entry-level package for about $10 a month to meet the expected demands of the new Federal cable reregulation law.
The move will enable Tele-Communications to reduce the likelihood that the price it charges for much of its cable programming will be regulated as a result of the cable bill.
With the change, most cable channels will be available only on a separate tier above Tele-Communications' basic cable service.


Books of The Times; On the New Deal's Effort to Put Youth to Work
The New Deal and American Youth  Ideas and Ideals in a Depression Decade  By Richard A. Reiman  253 pages.
University of Georgia Press. $35.
Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal echoes down to our time because, once again, there's talk of action in the first hundred days after Jan. 20 to spur the economy and provide jobs by Government intervention.
Roosevelt's alphabet agencies -- W.P.A. (Works Progress Administration); C.W.A. (Civil Works Administration); C.C.C. (Civilian Conservation Corps), and a half-dozen others -- were created to overcome the Depression and to lift spirits.


Tad Danielewski, An Acting Teacher And a Director, 71
Tad Danielewski, a theater, film and television director and acting teacher, died last Wednesday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 71.
He died of cancer, his family said.


First Charter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yankees Name Cerone Advance Scout
RICK CERONE, an 18-year veteran who had three stints as a Yankee catcher, was named as the organization's advance scout yesterday.
The 38-year old Cerone replaced RON HASSEY, who left the Yankees to become the first-base coach of the expansion Colorado Rockies.
A lifetime .245 hitter for seven teams, Cerone caught 560 games for the Yankees and hit .252 while playing for them from 1980 to 1984, 1987 and 1990.
He hit .270 in 33 games for the Expos last season before retiring.


Diana Adams, Leading Ballerina And Dance Educator, Dies at 66
Diana Adams, who was a leading ballerina with both the New York City Ballet and American Ballet Theater and the former dean of students at the School of American Ballet, died on Sunday at Mark Twain-St.
Joseph's Hospital in San Andreas, Calif.
She was 66 and lived in Arnold, Calif.
Miss Adams was one of George Balanchine's favorite dancers and created roles in many of his major ballets of the 1950's.
Among her most complex parts was the almost fiendishly demanding pas de deux she danced with Arthur Mitchell in the Balanchine-Stravinsky "Agon" in 1957.
Mr.
Mitchell later said of the duet and its unusual pivots and balances, "Diana's nervous intensity made the whole pas de deux work because it's not so much the difficulty of the steps or how flexible you are, it's the precariousness."


Adobe Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Building Less Expensive Solar Arrays
Taking a new approach to large-scale production of electricity from sunlight, a New Jersey company has built a five-acre array of photovoltaic cells of the type normally found in pocket calculators and wristwatches.
The array, which produces power for Pacific Gas and Electric, was built in Davis, Calif.
It uses a thin film of amorphous silicon sandwiched between two pieces of glass.
Earlier arrays built to supply utilities used silicon crystals, which capture a larger fraction of the sun's energy but are more expensive to build.


Biosensor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Panel to Study Complaint
The Civilian Complaint Review Board in New York City yesterday said it would investigate a charge by rap performers and producers that several police officers in the 23d Precinct in Harlem used excessive force after stopping their car on Monday night.
According to the complaint, several police officers stopped a car containing five men at 8 P.M.
Monday on Second Avenue between 112th and 113th Streets, Sgt.
Nicholas Vreeland said.
A radio call had gone out describing a car used in a robbery in the area, he said.
The police officers were not named.


Grounded Tanker Breaks Apart and Spills the Rest of Its Oil Into the Sea


Chicago Board Set to Enter Swaps Market
The Chicago Board of Trade has decided to try to invade the market for interest-rate and currency swaps with an innovative way of trading the financial products.
But it is likely to faces resistance from the banks and brokerage firms that now dominate the business and could run into regulatory problems as well.


Round-the-Globe Flight Lasts 5 Miles
A $5 million balloon whose American and Russian crew members hoped to be the first aeronauts to circle the globe nonstop crashed on a mountainside today minutes after it left the ground.
The commander of the huge Earthwinds balloon, Larry Newman, and his crew, Maj.
Gen.
Vladimir A. Dzhanibekov, commander of Russian astronaut training, and Don Moses, a Hawaii builder, escaped injury.
But the balloon was wrecked, ending the problem-plagued project until fall.


Corrections
A music review on Monday about the band Drunken Boat at CBGB last Wednesday misidentified the drummer.
She is Rene Valentino, not Hadley Kahn.


Club Med Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Clinton's Aide Defends Choice for Commerce
To the Editor:
I would like to set the record straight on matters raised by you in "Breaking Bill Clinton's Promise" (editorial, Jan. 8), in which you discuss the questioning in the Senate of Ronald H. Brown, the appointee for Secretary of Commerce.


Pro Basketball; Petrovic Will Rejoin Nets for Cavs Tonight
Drazen Petrovic, the durable guard who has led the Nets in scoring for the last two seasons, will return for Wednesday night's game against the Cavaliers after missing two games over the weekend with a sprained right ankle.
"Petro will play," said Coach Chuck Daly, after the team completed practice here today for the home game against Cleveland.
"He will start. He looks fine."
Petrovic, averaging 23.2 points a game, was the only player to start all 82 games for the Nets last season.
His string of 156 games -- 113 starts in a row -- was broken last Wednesday after he stepped awkwardly on the foot of Philadelphia's Charles Shackleford during a game at the Spectrum.


Pro Football; Cowboy With Angry Score to Settle
After Jerry Jones had made another bold move as owner of the Dallas Cowboys, this one the trade that brought defensive end Charles Haley to the Cowboys from the San Francisco 49ers last August, he went to the Dallas airport the night Haley arrived to greet him personally and to offer him a ride.
"I guess the drive back was for about 40 minutes," Jones recalled.
"In that span, we covered a lot of ground. This was my main question. I said, 'Charles, I know you're in Dallas now, but are you leaving your heart in San Francisco?' "


Gunman Killed in Chase Said to Have Violent Past
State police investigators today were trying to piece together what may have set off an Old Lyme man's rampage through rural Connecticut on Monday, and to determine whether the state troopers who cornered the gunman and shot him to death after a multicar chase acted appropriately.
It remained unclear whether a 13-year-old junior high school student who was wounded at the scene was shot by the gunman, Dwight G. Pink Sr., or by the troopers.
The boy was riding in a school van that Mr.
Pink, 42, apparently commandeered in East Haddam after a car he had stolen became disabled.


Results Plus
SKATING  Bonaly Takes Lead


Candlelight. Fine Food. Waiter, the Beer List!
IF wine with food was a preoccupation in the 80's, beer with food -- and not just hot dogs or pizza -- is attracting attention now.
The choices of what to drink with a fine dinner now include pale, amber and dark beers as well as red and white wines, as the interest grows in well-made, flavorful beers from small American regional breweries.
Some lesser-known beers from Belgium, Germany and other countries are also popular.


Northern Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


More Questions for Ron Brown
Wake-up calls come from unexpected sources, and sometimes they can rock the sleep of ages.
Consider the case of Senator Trent Lott, the Mississippi Republican whose somnolent interrogation of Ron Brown last Wednesday took Southern hospitality to new levels of languidity.
Now a few solid questions have entered Mr.
Lott's mind about potential conflicts of interest between Mr.
Brown's work at the law and lobbying firm of Patton, Boggs &amp; Blow and the new duties he wants to assume on Jan. 20 as Secretary of Commerce.
A larger question is whether Mr.
Lott can now wake the slumbering Senate.


Berlin Journal; Germany Ablaze: It's Candlelight, Not Firebombs
The anti-racism movement that has brought huge numbers of Germans into the street in recent weeks to protest rightist violence had its start over steak and Chianti in a Munich living room.
The occasion was a quiet mid-November dinner for four at the home of a young Munich businesswoman.
Even before the main course was served, conversation turned to the wave of neo-Nazi attacks that had broken out across Germany.
All four diners agreed that it was time for the country's "silent majority" to break its silence and show its repudiation of these attacks.


Aluminum Co. of America reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Dennis Byrd Hasn't Lost His Strength
HE is proud that he can push 45 pounds downward with his triceps, considering that he could not push anything six weeks ago.
With the sardonic humor of an athlete, Dennis Byrd added, "But I can't bench-press the Nynex Yellow Pages."
He cannot lift, and he cannot walk, but Dennis Byrd can shoulder the burden of being a quadriplegic, whether temporarily or permanently.
He has turned his affliction into a gift.
He said he was glad he was chosen to suffer a partially disrupted spinal cord, because he would not have wanted it to happen to a teammate.


Charges of Fabrication in Civil Rights Case Are Discounted
To the Editor:
In "Questions for Mr. Molinari" (Topics of The Times, Dec. 25), you ask: "Did Guy Molinari, the Staten Island Borough President, or his staff, fabricate information submitted to Justice Department investigators? The question lingers following the recent release of a letter to Mr. Molinari from Deputy Attorney General George Terwilliger." The case involves Joseph Occhipinti, a Federal immigration agent convicted in a Federal court of having violated the civil rights of Hispanic shopkeepers in Manhattan.


Japan's Health System Worth a Closer Look
To the Editor:
"Japan's Health Care: Cradle, Grave and No Frills" (front page, Dec. 28) is unusual in recognizing that one of the secrets of Japan's industrial might is the ability to provide social services at relatively low cost.
Unfortunately, in a misplaced dedication to arguing that Japan offers few lessons for Americans, you miss two key points:


In the End, Canucks Just Can't Keep Up With Devils
Playing their fourth game in five nights, including two in the last 24 hours, the Vancouver Canucks simply ran out of gas tonight against the Devils.
The Canucks played the Devils on equal terms until 2 minutes 29 seconds remained, when Bill Guerin stepped into the slot and redirected Aleksandr Semak's pass to give the Devils a 3-2 triumph at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Goodfellow Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Geodynamics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Pro Basketball; A Trip Starts With Starks Flying High
John Starks fired early and late for a career-high 33 points tonight, pacing the Knicks to a much-needed 104-93 victory over the Sacramento Kings.
The victory ended a two-game New York losing streak and gave the Knicks an early leg up on a four-game road trip.


Review/Music; Appreciating the Man Who Wrote the Words
When the 92d Street Y inaugurated its popular Lyrics and Lyricists series in December 1970, the first among dozens of songwriters to appear and talk about their work was E. Y. (Yip) Harburg.
One of the more underappreciated lyricists among the great craftsmen of the pre-rock era, Harburg was a brilliant satirist who idolized W. S. Gilbert and brought a more plain-spoken, Americanized version of Gilbert's verbal elegance to American pop.
A delightfully animated performer of his own work, Harburg returned to the stage of the Kaufmann Concert Hall at the Y three times before he died in 1981.
And in the opening program of the series's 23d season, his contribution was again celebrated in a show that had four performances on Sunday and Monday.


General Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Campus Journal; Program of Former Foes Feels a Peacetime Chill
Groups of students from Yale University and Moscow State University first met face to face in 1985 during the "evil empire" period of Soviet-American relations.
The current academic year ushered in the "empty pockets" era and doubt about the exchange's future.
The program normally includes a two-week visit by 12 Yale juniors to Moscow State and St.
Petersburg in March, and a fall visit by Moscow State students to Yale, with side trips to New York and Washington.


IN A BOMBAY SLUM, FIRES AND FLIGHT
A slush-covered lane, beginning at a small mosque, marks the new frontier between Hindus and Muslims in the densely populated neighborhood of Dharavi, which has been swept by religious violence for the last week.
Streets are empty and dozens of fires were set throughout the city, including in middle-class neighborhoods.
Many homes were locked, their owners having fled the fear and hatred in one of the world's largest slums.
More than 600,000 people live in Dharavi, packed into one square mile in unsanitary conditions.


Hans Loewald, 86; Professor Emeritus In Psychiatry at Yale
Dr.
Hans W. Loewald, clinical professor emeritus in psychiatry at Yale University, died on Saturday at Whitney Manor in Hamden, Conn.
He was 86 and lived in Hamden.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


IP Timberlands reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Campuses Are Hurt by Computer Giants' Woes
The nation's two largest computer makers, I.B.M. and Digital Equipment, last year announced huge retrenchments, and the fallout has now reached America's college and university campuses.
Educators nationwide fear that high-technology education will sharply decline because the companies are reducing their financial and material contributions.
In the mid-1980's, when the economy was booming, computing was the hottest major on many campuses, and computer makers, hungry for new markets and eager to have their latest systems adopted by future engineers and managers, were donating computers to universities by the truckload.


Bridge
The first major tournament of 1993 for enthusiasts in the New York metropolitan area begins today at the Rye Town Hilton in Port Chester, N.Y.
It is the Tri-State Regional, and following is the schedule of major events:
Today, Stratified Open Pairs and Women's Pairs 1 P.M. and 7:30 P.M.


Tecsyn International reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


El Paso Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


T.W.A. Selects Backer Spielvogel
Trans World Airlines Inc. said yesterday that as expected it had selected Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide Inc. to handle its worldwide advertising and direct marketing account, previously divided between Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg in New York and Groupe FCA in London.
Billings were estimated to exceed $60 million.


Legislative Posts Filled
Senator Ralph J. Marino, the Senate majority leader, today chose one of his closest and most senior allies to head the influential Senate Finance Committee.
He is Senator Ronald B. Stafford, a Republican who has represented the Plattsburgh area for 28 years.
Senator Jess J. Present, Republican from Bemus Point in Chautauqua County, will replace Mr.
Stafford as deputy majority leader.


Oil Prices Drift Downward Despite Tensions Over Iraq
When the United States pulled its allies together a week ago to threaten Iraq over antiaircraft missiles, a barrel of oil cost $19.37.
Since then, Iraq has responded defiantly, but the oil market responded by drifting down by a dollar a barrel.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange Yesterday, crude oil for February delivery finished 40 cents lower, at $18.38 a barrel; heating oil closed 0.91 cent lower, at 52.63 cents a gallon, and unleaded gasoline closed 1.05 cent lower, at 51.92 cents a gallon, just 0.05 cent shy of its contract low.


Phyllis Wallace, 69, A Labor Economist In A.T.&amp;T. Lawsuit
Phyllis A. Wallace, a labor economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, died last weekend at her home in Boston.
She was 69.
Officials at M.I.T. said yesterday that she had died of natural causes.


Irish Labor Party Joins Premier in a Coalition
After seven weeks of negotiation, Ireland's resurgent Labor Party cast the key votes in Parliament today to let Albert Reynolds keep his job as Prime Minister.
In a general election on Nov. 25, Mr.
Reynolds's Fianna Fail Party lost ground, winning only 68 seats, 15 short of the 83 needed to govern without a coalition partner.


Judge Sets Allen-Farrow Hearing
After months of accusations, evasions and carefully crafted public relations, Woody Allen and Mia Farrow are expected to testify in the coming weeks about their treatment of their children.
The director and his former lover and co-star will take the stand, their lawyers said, at a Jan. 26 hearing that was ordered yesterday on Mr.
Allen's motion for visiting rights while his custody battle with Ms.
Farrow continues.
In setting the hearing, Acting Justice Elliott Wilk virtually assured that they would have to submit, publicly and under oath, to questioning both friendly and hostile, far sooner than they otherwise would have.
A trial in the case, which is being fought in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, is thought to be months away.
When asked outside the courtroom about the prospect that he and Ms.
Farrow would have to testify, Mr.
Allen, who attended yesterday's session, said, "I can't wait for that." Ms.
Farrow was not present.
Ms.
Farrow "would prefer not to have to put the children through it," but will take the stand, her lawyer, Eleanor Alter, said.
The feud between Mr.
Allen and Ms.
Farrow exploded into the public eye in August last year, when he sued for sole custody of their three children, claiming Ms.
Farrow is an unfit mother.
In turn, she has sued to invalidate Mr.
Allen's adoption in December 1991 of 7-year-old Dylan O. Farrow and Moses A. Farrow, 14, whom she had adopted earlier.
She accused him of molesting Dylan at her Connecticut house last summer.
He has denied the charge, and countered that Ms.
Farrow has brainwashed their three children.


Drug Emporium reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


United Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Bank of Granite reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


People
*
Cathy A. Pokorny, vice chairman at Jayme Organization, Cleveland, was promoted to chairman and chief executive, succeeding James K. DeVoe, who resigned.


First National Bancorp-Ga. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Disarm Our Streets Too
To the Editor:
At the age of 18 Wayne Lo, a student at Simon's Rock College in Great Barrington, Mass., who insanely killed two people and wounded several more, was legally too young to buy a beer, but not an assault rifle.
We feel good and proud about taking away guns from Somalis, while wearily watching the daily shootout of our siblings and children at home, where mercy ought to begin.
Perhaps we too need troops to help us drop our firearms.
JOANNA CLARK  Princeton, N.J., Dec. 23, 1992


Letterman Appears Certain To Move to CBS From NBC
David Letterman is all but certain to accept CBS's offer to move his show from NBC, probably starting in late summer, officials at both networks said yesterday.
The end of Mr.
Letterman's negotiations with NBC set off a storm of conflicting reports about how far the network had gone in its effort to keep Mr.
Letterman.
Four executives close to the talks said yesterday that as recently as last weekend NBC had discussed with Mr.
Letterman's representatives the possibility of having him replace Jay Leno as host of "Tonight." They said Mr.
Letterman rejected the idea because NBC was not willing to match the financial arrangements of the CBS offer.


Fritz A. Gross, 82, Raytheon Executive And Radar Designer
Fritz A. Gross, designer and developer of radar systems, died Tuesday at his home in Westwood, Mass.
He was 82 and until recently lived in Weston, Mass.
He died of cancer, said the Raytheon Company in Lexington, Mass., from which he retired as vice president of engineering in 1976.


Foreign Competition for an American Art: Quilting
THEY are pieces of history, hand-stitched cultural documents of the American experience.
Quilts -- scraps of cloth sewed together in humble artistry by generations of American women as family heirlooms -- are as popular today as they were a century ago.
Indeed, quilting, once thought to be a vanishing craft practiced only by Amish women in Pennsylvania or women in the Appalachian Mountains, is experiencing a resurgence in the United States and abroad.
But many quilters see a mixed blessing: while the demand for handmade quilts has increased, American quilt makers haven't necessarily benefited.


Princess-to-Be's Meeting Is Private Perhaps, but No Secret


APL Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Home Entertainment Systems Take On a New Sophistication
Add the following to the lexicon of home design: sub-woofer table, center-channel cabinet and hinged speaker-grille doors.
Each is designed to stylishly conceal the newest components of home-entertainment systems.
These are just some of the new products that furniture manufacturers and electronics companies were showing at the Winter Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, which ended Sunday.
Highlights of the show included a raft of new offerings for the rapidly expanding home-entertainment market.


John Davenport, 62, Television Journalist
John Davenport, an Emmy Award-winning television journalist who originated the show "Washington Week in Review" for PBS and served as its moderator in 1966 and 1967, died on Saturday at his home in Houston.
He was 62.
His son, John Gordon Davenport, said Mr. Davenport had had diabetes.


American Medical Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Who but the Child Is Victim in Custody Battle?; The Rescue Fantasy
To the Editor:
Adoption in our society resembles the classic Hollywood western, where the forces of good (the adoptive parents) battle the force of evil (the birth mother) for the ultimate redemption of the innocent victim (the child).


Teacher Gets 5 Years in Child-Pornography Case
A former teacher at Phillips Exeter Academy who was convicted of possession and distribution of child pornography was sentenced today to five years in prison without parole.
The teacher, Larry Lane Bateman, showed little emotion as Judge Jose A. Fuste of Federal District Court read his sentence.
Mr.
Bateman, 51, had faced up to 25 years in prison on the charges, which included one count of possession and two counts of interstate shipment of child pornography.
After his release he will be on probation for three years.


New Media Agency Signs First Client
Steven J. Farella, a prominent agency media executive, has founded Farella Media That Works in New York, an independent media services company that has signed Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg as its first client.
Farella Media That Works is being backed by Media That Works, a Cincinnati media services firm that handles accounts that carry an estimated $100 million in billings or more.
Media That Works had begun working for New York-based Avrett in November, Mr.
Farella said in a telephone interview yesterday.
In expanding that role, he added, he will serve as Avrett's manager of media resources.


Bonilla's Age of Innocence Finally Ends
The right shoulder, torn up over seasons and reconfigured during nearly an hour of major surgery last September, is fine, stable and strong.
At night, he can even roll over onto it without being bolted awake in pain.
The midsection, swollen last fall, is again under control.
The profile is once more sharp, the upper body imposing instead of merely expanding.


Auto Sales Down in Early January
Sales of domestically built cars and light trucks fell 3.1 percent in early January, compared with the corresponding period last year, the industry said today.
Sales during the first 10 days of January are typically an unreliable indicator of demand, since incentives used by many dealers to meet year-end quotas pull many January sales into December.
"Early January statistics are the least accurate of the year," said Jean-Claude Gruet, an automotive analyst for UBS Securities Inc. in New York.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the awarding of a St.
Patrick's Day parade permit in Manhattan, to a sponsor agreeing to include lesbian and gay marchers, omitted a word in quoting Jack Irwin, a member of the national Hibernian organization.
Mr.
Irwin said his group "had spent" more than $200,000 to defend the Hibernians from challenges to St.
Patrick's Day parades in New York and other cities; he did not say merely that it "had" the money.


Precision Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


A Comic Who Wrote Her Own Film And Then Almost Ran Away With It
In a grand gesture, Rita Rudner has donated the canary-yellow Fred Hayman jogging suit she wears in "Peter's Friends" to the Planet Hollywood film collection.
It may not be the Rosebud sled from "Citizen Kane," but the suit does count as one of the more memorable cinematic encounters between unbridled American vulgarity and British restraint, with Ms.
Rudner playing a willful Hollywood actress forced to spend a weekend at an English country house with her husband, played by Kenneth Branagh, and five of his old classmates from Cambridge.
None of the group, summoned by the Peter of the film's title, know quite what to make of the creature that their old friend has brought into their midst.
She is Britain's nightmare of the ugly American: loud, brassy, obsessed with diet and exercise, virtually illiterate and impervious to nuance.


Radiomutuel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Kohl and Partners in Accord on Peacekeeping
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Government coalition parties agreed today on a draft amendment to the 1949 Constitution that for the first time would let German troops take part in international peacekeeping operations sanctioned by the United Nations and other bodies.
Prodded into action after United Nations Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali called here two days ago for Germany to play a full role on the world stage, the Government parties agreed to try to end the long impasse that has prevented German participation in foreign military missions such as the war in the Persian Gulf two years ago.


Israel Made 16 Errors in Mass Deportations
Israel said tonight that it had made even more mistakes than initially thought in choosing the more than 400 Palestinians who were deported to southern Lebanon last month from the occupied territories.
Sixteen men, the army said -- not 10 as first announced two weeks ago -- were banished erroneously when security forces put about 415 Islamic fundamentalists on buses and whisked them off to the Lebanese border in the dead of night as declared threats to Israeli safety.


DocuGrafix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


College to Replace Mall in Downtown Bridgeport
In another attempt to jump-start the economically depressed city of Bridgeport, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. announced today that a community college on the east side of the city would move to a new $23 million campus in the heart of downtown.
Under the plan, the Hi-Ho Mall will be demolished to make way for the Housatonic Community Technical College.
The two-story mall, with its card shops, dime stores and family restaurants, has almost as many empty storefronts as active ones.


Tests Offer First Hope for Treating Cause of Sickle Cell Disease
Preliminary tests suggest that a potential treatment for sickle cell disease and related blood disorders could attack the underlying cause of the illnesses for the first time, researchers said today.
In a small group of patients, they said, treatment with a naturally occurring chemical stimulated production of a kind of hemoglobin in the blood that is known to benefit people with sickle cell disease or beta thalassemia, which are related inherited anemias.


Square Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


REFUGEES FLEEING TAJIKISTAN STRIFE
Pursued by helicopters, armored vehicles and soldiers of the newly victorious Communist Government in Tajikistan, the eight members of the Khatbheg family, along with thousands of their Muslim compatriots, fled south last week, toward the Amu Darya River, toward Afghanistan, toward refuge.
But the family never reached safe haven.
"They disappeared," recalled Khoshmurat Karimot, his words coming slowly, clumsily, "they went into the water. They were swept away. The soldiers were shooting at us as we went over in the night. They just disappeared."


NBC Names Producer, 27, To News Job
NBC News yesterday appointed Jeff Zucker to be executive producer of the "NBC Nightly News" program.
Mr.
Zucker, who is 27, made headlines, and made many people feel old, a year ago when he was named executive producer of NBC's "Today." He was the youngest person ever named to that post and will be the youngest person ever to run the network's evening news broadcast.


DeKalb Genetics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


TCBY Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Northwest Scales Back Routes for Fare Discount
In a seesaw move in setting air fares, Northwest Airlines pulled back yesterday on the number of routes in which it will offer the discounts it announced Monday.
Northwest's move came after Delta Air Lines said yesterday that in response to Northwest's cuts Monday, it would reduce its 14-day advance purchase fare by 40 percent for travel from Monday to Thursday and 30 percent on travel from Friday to Sunday.
The move was limited to about 1,800 markets in which it competes directly with Northwest.


Girl, Missing for 16 Days, Is Found in Secret Room
The Long Island girl who disappeared two weeks ago was found today in a cramped underground room where the police said she had been held, sometimes chained at the neck.
The discovery of the 10-year-old girl, at the home of the man who had first reported her missing, ended an extensive search by the Suffolk County police that had focused attention on someone who had lived most of her life in a shadowy world of hardship and harm.


Elster and Carreon Are California-Bound
Two players who began their major league careers with the Mets have signed minor league contracts with the Dodgers and the Giants and have been invited to their spring training camps.
Shortstop KEVIN ELSTER has hooked up with Los Angeles.
Elster, 28, played in only six games for the Mets last season because of shoulder surgery.
He has played in parts of seven major league seasons and has a career batting average of .224.


Alfred B. Pasteur, Professor, 65
Prof.
Alfred B. Pasteur, a professor of counseling psychology at Hunter College of the City University of New York, died on Monday at the home of relatives in Miami.
He was 65.
Professor Pasteur died of heart failure, said his brother, Reginald.


Cupertino National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Preparing for a Pre-Inauguration Concert


Clayton Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Vanderbilt Makes Itself At Home
The Vanderbilt Commodores turned the floor at Memorial Gymnasium into the scene of a swirling, roaring celebration tonight with a stunning domination in the final six and a half minutes of a 101-86 victory over No. 1-ranked Kentucky.
A 27-11 Commodore spurt in the final 6 minutes 21 seconds turned a 75-74 Wildcat lead into Kentucky's first defeat of the season.


Expert Indicates How Far Weicker School Plan Goes Toward Desegregation Suit Goal
A week after Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. proposed integrating Connecticut's schools over five years, a desegregation expert's court testimony here today indicated how far the Governor's plan goes toward meeting the goal of plaintiffs suing to link Hartford's schools with those in surrounding districts.
Testifying for the plaintiffs, the expert said any plan to integrate schools in the Hartford region should send suburban children into the city as well as city children to the suburbs; be overseen by a neutral panel, not by the state or local districts, and start immediately.


Intertrans Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Gwinnett Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Excerpts From an Interview With Clinton After the Air Strikes
Following are excerpts from an interview with President-elect Bill Clinton at the Governor's Mansion here by reporters from The New York Times.
Q -- Clearly Saddam Hussein has not got the message on complying with U.N. sanctions.
What people would like to know is: What are you prepared to do -- what are you ready to consider doing beyond what has already been done -- to get this man to comply with U.N. sanctions?


COMPANY BRIEFS
BIOGEN INC., Cambridge, Mass., said that its 1992 earnings should rise to more than $1.10 a share from 15 cents in 1991.
MERCER INTERNATIONAL INC., Vancouver, British Columbia, said it would build a $126 million pulp recycling plant in the former East Germany.


MidConn Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Winners Circle Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Hitting Hussein With a Stick, Keeping a Sledgehammer Ready
Despite repeated threats of broad retaliation by Washington, the air strike against Iraq today was a minimal military action.
It was intended not to produce a decisive outcome but to send the political signal that Washington and its allies were determined to enforce the restrictions imposed on Baghdad at the end of the Persian Gulf war.
The raid was limited to attacks on a handful of surface-to-air missile batteries in southern Iraq and their "associated infrastructure," mostly radars and low-level command bunkers.


Grieving in New Jersey Town For Marine Killed in Somalia
The first United States soldier killed in Somalia had moved here to a bleak low-rise housing project from Puerto Rico as a teen-ager.
Though Pfc.
Domingo Arroyo had spent more time on military bases than on this city's streets, since joining the Marines three years ago, the city today closed ranks around his grieving family.


Telemedia Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


After Van Takeover, Bail Law Questioned
The hijacking of a van carrying handicapped schoolchildren by a man with a long criminal record has set off calls for a close look at Connecticut's bail laws.
State authorities acknowledged that the 42-year-old gunman, Dwight Giles Pink Sr., an East Lyme native with a long criminal history here and on the West Coast, was able to post bail twice to get out of jail despite a California request that he be confined without bond as a dangerous fugitive.
Mr.
Pink died in a shootout with state troopers here on Monday in which a 13-year-old student was wounded.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
DEBORAH PITZRICK still feels upset about an experience with a teacher her daughter, Stacey, had a few years ago in elementary school.
Stacey has a slight hearing impairment.
Ms.
Pitzrick, a marketing consultant in Eden Prairie, Minn., a suburb of Minneapolis, repeatedly tried to get the teacher to take that into account and to make sure her daughter heard the homework assignments.
She met with the teacher, the principal and the school social worker, all to little avail.
The problem disappeared when Stacey was promoted to the next grade and had a new teacher.
"I feel it was a wasted year for my daughter," Ms.
Pitzrick said.
"For the first time, she started having trouble reading aloud and working on group projects. She felt terrible about herself."


Economic Scene; The Spend-Now, Tax-Later Orgy
The disciples of John Maynard Keynes have long been urging President-elect Bill Clinton to adopt a policy of benign neglect toward the Federal deficit.
The national debt, they say, was far bigger relative to the economy during the early years of the the postwar economic boom than it is today.
So, this thinking goes, the mounting debt should not keep the new Administration from spending its way to a more robust economic recovery or bankrolling more public investment.
But a powerful new tool for analyzing how tax burdens are spread across different generations -- called generational accounting -- shows that this sanguine view is shortsighted at best.
Learning to live with the deficit amounts to forwarding the bills for today's spending orgy to the nation's children and grandchildren.


Just Punishment for Iraq's Offenses
If ever a rogue regime courted punishment, it is the one led by the Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein.
He has flouted United Nations cease-fire terms, ignored Security Council ultimatums and played cheat-and-retreat with his coalition adversaries.
Yesterday's carefully targeted air strike by more than 100 allied warplanes seems the right penalty: proportional to the offense, and executed with minimal risk to civilians.
President Bush was right to strike, by all accounts cleanly, at surface-to-air missile sites and related communications facilities that menaced coalition aircraft in southern Iraq's no-fly zone.
And he was justified in ordering a U.S. battalion-size force to Kuwait.
Its troops are a warning that America will stiffen defenses against further border incursions by Iraqi soldiers to grab missiles left behind after Operation Desert Storm.


Sources of Inspiration In 'Toys That Teach'
In "Toys That Teach," an exhibition of 17 wooden toys in geometric shapes at the Canadian Center for Architecture in Montreal, visitors can see ghosts of long-ago childhoods and a source of Frank Lloyd Wright's architectural creativity.
There is a set of thin wood rods and round corks, a precursor of Tinkertoys.
There are triangles, rectangles and cylinders from the early 19th century.
And what are Legos but geometric shapes?


Payless Cashways Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 28


Hard to Stifle Press if Royals Do the Leaking
A Government attempt to bring the press to heel, largely for the way it covers the royal family, has backfired into a new scandal over Buckingham Palace that has done more damage to the reputations of the Princess of Wales, the Prince of Wales, the palace press office and even the Government.
The latest scandal began Tuesday when The Guardian printed a private letter written a month ago by Lord McGregor of Durris, who is chairman of the current Press Complaints Commission but has criticized suggestions of tighter controls.
The new proposals include a code of conduct to limit press reports on the private lives of public figures.


Clinton Backs Raid but Muses About a New Start
President-elect Bill Clinton said today that he would not rule out renewing the ground war against Iraq if necessary to force compliance with United Nations resolutions, but he also indicated that he was ready for a fresh start with President Saddam Hussein.
Mr.
Clinton, in an interview with The New York Times, said that he was not "obsessed" with Mr.
Hussein and that he could imagine a normal relationship with him, provided he behaved in accordance with international norms.


Met Museum Election
Annette de la Renta has been elected a vice chairman of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Announcing the appointment on Tuesday, the museum's chairman, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, cited her "years of tireless work" in behalf of the Metropolitan.
Mrs. de la Renta has been a trustee of the museum since 1981.


Best Western Picks Lord, Denstu &lt;


Bombing Causes Little Reaction
The price of the 30-year Treasury bond rose yesterday, but the rest of the market was little changed.
The bombing of Iraq appeared to have an impact in the auction of seven-year Treasury notes, but otherwise did not cause big changes in the market, traders said.
The 30-year bond seemed to get a boost from two factors.
One was that the price had fallen sharply lately and was due for a correction.
Since Jan. 4, the price of the bond had dropped almost two points through Tuesday and the yield had jumped to 7.47 percent from 7.32 percent.


A Split Decision
MARC McDOWELL of Madison, Wis., was named the 1992 Bowler of the Year by the Bowling Writers Association of America yesterday.
For only the fourth time in 30 years, the writers and the players, who voted DAVE FERRARO as the 1992 Professional Bowlers Association Player of the Year, disagreed on their selections. (AP)


Shetland Critics Urge New Regulation of Tankers
With millions of gallons of oil on the water and the tanker Braer a battered wreck near this rocky headland, conservationists and local residents are now demanding to know who is to blame and what will be done to prevent anything like it from happening again.
Paralleling similar arguments made in the United States after the Exxon Valdez spill off Alaska in March 1989, critics say the Braer accident -- in volume one of the worst oil spills in history -- shows that the British Government must move immediately to adopt tougher safety regulations as well as restrictions on the coastal movements of tankers, particularly in bad weather and in environmentally sensitive areas.


Payments Confirmed
A Texas A&amp;M internal inquiry has confirmed allegations by The Dallas Morning News that a prominent alumnus paid four football players for work last summer that they didn't do.
Texas A&amp;M suspended the four, including sophomore running back GREG HILL, on Dec. 26, declaring them ineligible to play in the Cotton Bowl, which was won by Notre Dame.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
CHOOSING the right glue from among the myriad varieties available can be confusing, and clerks at hardware and department stores are sometimes no better informed on the subject than the average consumer.
Here is a guide to the main categories of glue for home use; if you are an inveterate repairer, keeping a supply of the first four is worthwhile.
ALIPHATIC RESIN GLUE This is also called carpenter's wood glue and yellow woodworking glue, although dark-colored varieties are available for use with dark woods like walnut.


Short of Power, 8 Aluminum Concerns Cut Output
Eight aluminum companies in the Pacific Northwest, which produce 40 percent of the nation's supply, said today that they would cut production 25 percent because of an electricity shortage in the region.
The action came after the Bonneville Power Administration, the Federal authority that markets energy from more than 30 hydroelectric dams in the region, notified the producers that on Jan. 16 it would cut power supplies to its 15 largest industrial customers, including 10 aluminum smelters, for six weeks and maybe longer.
A Drought and a Cold Snap
A severe drought, now in its sixth year, has reduced hydroelectric production, and a cold snap, which has increased demand, forced Bonneville to make the cuts.
In addition, electricity is less available for import from Canada because frozen rivers have choked the output of hydropower dams there.


Baton Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Reagan Receives Nation's Highest Civilian Honor


Words of Advice, Bittersweet
JIMMY CARTER says he is sure that Bill Clinton will set a fine example in Washington.
Of course, when he was in the White House, Mr.
Carter sent his daughter, Amy, to public school.
Mr.
Carter said he was "very disappointed" to learn that Chelsea Clinton will attend the fashionable and private Sidwell Friends School.
Amy, he said, "really enjoyed" going to a "very low income" school with students "whose parents were the servants of foreign ambassadors."
Mr.
Clinton was a Rhodes scholar.
But Mr.
Carter came very close.
He was a finalist in 1946, but lost out to an Elizabethan scholar from Mississippi who knew nothing of current events.
"They couldn't ask me any question in Newsweek or Time that I couldn't answer," he ruefully recalled, as if the Rhodes examination were yesterday.
"But they chose him."


Levi's Tailors Dockers to New Market
LEVI STRAUSS &amp; COMPANY built Dockers into one of the apparel industry's most successful new brands -- indeed, one of the most successful new brands of any kind of the 1980's -- by selling men casual clothing to supplant store-brand or no-name pants and shirts in their wardrobes.
Now, the company is embarking on ambitious plans to expand Dockers into a market where rivals go by famous names like Ralph, Calvin, Tommy and Banana.


Hockey
Hodgkin's disease, the cancer of the immune system that was diagnosed this week in Mario Lemieux of the Pittsburgh Penguins, has a cure rate of over 90 percent when caught early, as it seems to have been in the case of the National Hockey League All-Star.
Lemieux, 27, is one of about 9,000 Americans who will be diagnosed this year with the disease, which is named for Thomas Hodgkin, a 19th century physician in London.
Hodgkin is credited with distinguishing the cancer from tuberculosis.


Two Brothers Found Dead In Brooklyn
A Brooklyn man killed his younger brother who was suffering from cancer and then placed a plastic bag over his head and killed himself, the police said yesterday.
The man, Jay Tunick, 34, and his brother, Alan, 27, were found at 9:30 P.M. on Tuesday in each of their bedrooms on the second floor of their home in the Midwood section of Brooklyn, said Detective Joseph McConville, a police spokesman.
The police said Alan had been struck in the head with a baseball bat.


Boxing; McGirt/Whitaker No. 1? Anybody Hear of Chavez?
Buddy McGirt, the World Boxing Council welterweight champion, may have taken quite a beating in the final round of his 12-round decision over Genaro Leon at the Paramount Theater Tuesday night, but it was nothing compared to the pummeling Julio Cesar Chavez received at Tavern on the Green yesterday morning.
Chavez wasn't there to defend himself when McGirt and his next challenger, Pernell Whitaker, appeared with their handlers at a news conference to promote their March 6 fight at Madison Square Garden as nothing less than the bout of the year, pitting the two best fighters in the world.


Excerpts From Bush's Remarks: Allies 'Did the Right Thing'
WASHINGTON, Jan. 13 (Reuters) -- Following are excerpts from remarks by President Bush in the White House today during a picture-taking session:
PRESIDENT'S STATEMENT
Once again, the American military in coalition with strong allies has performed in a superb fashion.
Our planes are all accounted for.
I've not yet seen a damage assessment or results of the strike, but they did the right thing and the coalition did the right thing.
And I have said before that we are determined that Saddam Hussein will abide by the United Nations resolutions, and we're very serious about that.


ENDEAVOUR LOFTED ON 6-DAY MISSION
The space shuttle Endeavour and five astronauts roared into orbit today on the first of eight missions scheduled for the nation's shuttle fleet this year.
Highlights of the six-day mission include a space walk by two astronauts, the release of a $200 million relay satellite, a science show for elementary schoolchildren and the ringing of a small replica of the Liberty Bell as part of Bill Clinton's inauguration fete.
The mission is the 53d flight since the shuttle program began in 1981.


Summit Care reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Huntington Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Perils of a Senator
Although a Federal grand jury has declined to indict Senator Charles S. Robb in an electronic eavesdropping case, the Virginia Democrat's troubles are far from over.
The jury's decision on Tuesday was a major surprise.
Even the Senator had predicted he would be indicted for recordings made of conversations involving his chief political rival, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder.
Something happened in the late stages of the grand jury's deliberations, but there are only questions, no explanations, of what.


KeyCorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Higher Jobless Rates Likely in New Survey
For the first time in 25 years, the Labor Department is revamping its monthly employment survey, and initial tests of the new questionnaire indicate that the United States has hundreds of thousands of people now listed as full-time workers who in fact hold only part-time jobs.
The tests also suggest that once the new survey replaces the present one, starting in January 1994, the unemployment rate may rise slightly.
That is partly because unemployment is probably greater than the current survey can capture, and the new, more accurate one is likely to capture at least some of the additional unemployment, Government officials said.


Bridge
The Cap Gemini invitational event, which begins today in The Hague, includes many of the world's best partnerships.
Among them are Sabine Zenkel and Daniela von Arnim, who regularly represent Germany in international competition although Zenkel now resides in Chicago.
She held the South cards on the diagramed deal, played in the World Women's Teams semifinal in Salsomaggiore, Italy, in September.
The contract was a modest two spades, reached quickly because North-South were using a 'four card major' style, but it led to tricky play.
West led her singleton club, and South captured the jack with the king and led a low trump.
East captured the jack with the queen and led her singleton diamond.


Mother Is Slain
A 37-year-old woman was slain in her apartment at 535 W. 51st Street, near 10th Avenue, at 9:30 last night, and her 10-year-old son shot in the head.
The boy was in critical condition at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman, said detectives had found no suspect or motive.
The victims' names were not released.


American Fructose reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A chart at the top of the Business Digest from Jan. 5 through yesterday, about spot oil trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange, carried erroneous price figures for the current spot contract, which calls for delivery of crude oil in February.
On Tuesday, the February oil contract closed at $18.38 a barrel, down 40 cents. (The erroneous figures were for the March contract.)


Lemieux Is Described as 'Stunned' but Upbeat
Several years ago, Mario Lemieux befriended his agent's sister-in-law as she suffered from and eventually died of cancer.
He learned about the disease, joining the Pittsburgh Cancer Institute as a spokesman and honorary chairman in 1988.
Two weeks ago, Lemieux discovered a lump in his neck through self-examination.
He knew enough to have it tested.
But nothing had prepared Mario Lemieux for the news he received from a Pittsburgh oncologist on Monday, when the great center for the defending champion Penguins was told he suffered from the earliest stages of Hodgkin's disease, a form of cancer that attacks the lymph nodes.


Mego Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Doctors Admit Ignoring Dying Patients' Wishes
In a large new survey, doctors and nurses say they often violate their own personal beliefs and ignore requests from patients to withhold life support in cases of terminal illness.
They also say they often fail to provide adequate pain relief for dying patients in hospitals, despite the patients' expressed wishes to be spared severe pain.
The lack of relief and the unwanted treatment occur even though laws, courts and hospitals support carrying out such requests, the study noted.


Corrections
The Almanac chart on Monday, with articles about the Presidential succession, misstated the number of right-handed Presidents.
There have been 36.


Giants' Moore Facing Felony Steroid Charges
The National Football League, which thinks it has controlled the use of anabolic steroids, may now be facing a problem from the use of another dangerous bodybuilding drug: human growth hormone, known as HGH.
Tuesday in Atlanta, Eric Moore, the Giants' starting right guard, and Mark Duckens, a Tampa Bay defensive end who played for the Giants in 1989, were arraigned on an indictment by a Federal grand jury on felony steroid charges.


2 Admit They Harassed Assemblywoman
Faced with public disclosure of their actions, two New York State Assemblymen issued sweeping apologies today to Assemblywoman Earlene H. Hill, admitting that they had been responsible for two of the three instances of sexual harassment she disclosed this week.
The admissions of the two members -- Harvey Weisenberg, a Democrat from Long Beach, L.I., and Ivan C. Lafayette, a Democrat from Queens -- came one day after Ms.
Hill's charges threw the Assembly into an uncomfortable uproar over this most sensitive of subjects.
They went part of the way toward answering the question that Ms.
Hill herself had refused to answer: Who was she talking about?


Lazare Kaplan International reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Health Management Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Casey's Widow Hails Hostage Theory's Rejection
The widow of William J. Casey, the man at the center of charges that advisers to Ronald Reagan struck a deal with Iran during the 1980 Presidential campaign to delay the release of American hostages, came to the Capitol today to praise a House report that concluded there was no truth to the accusations.
But in a display of the turbulent emotions aroused by the persistent but unproved charges, the widow, Sophia Casey, was immediately engaged in a sharp confrontation with several conspiracy theorists who challenged the report.


Who but the Child Is Victim in Custody Battle?; They're Not Property
To the Editor:
Child-custody cases, like that of B.G.C. (news article, Dec. 27), operate from an assumption that a child is property toward which claimants have rights.
Children are not property; they are people.
A child develops an intricate attachment to the parents who raise her, which provides the foundation for development.
The parents who raise a child are the psychological and emotional parents, whether they conceived that child biologically or not.


Who but the Child Is Victim in Custody Battle?
To the Editor:
"Custody Battle: Is Conception Parenthood?" (news article, Dec. 27) presents the struggle for a toddler known in court papers as B.G.C. as a battle between two sets of parents, the biological parents, Cara and Daniel Schmidt of Iowa, and Roberta and Jan DeBoer of Michigan, who adopted the 22-month-old girl.


Jury in Brooklyn Acquits Man In Death of Former State Senator
A retired jail supervisor was acquitted yesterday of charges that he murdered Vander L. Beatty, a former State Senator from Brooklyn whose career had collapsed in corruption scandals.
A jury in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn found Arthur E. Flournoy, 53, not guilty of charges that he shot Mr.
Beatty, a longtime friend, in his Prospect Heights campaign office during a personal dispute in August 1990.


Review/Television; Suppose David Lynch Remade 'Plaza Suite'
David Lynch has long raised suspicions that his work would be most at home on late-night television, but "Hotel Room" indicates otherwise.
This setbound omnibus drama, produced by Mr.
Lynch and featuring three weak episodes set in the New York City hotel room of the title, plays like a listless visit to a Lynch-style "Twilight Zone" where stories go nowhere, anecdotes are pointlessly bizarre and lame quips are echoed emptily, as if banality were a form of wit.
Not even the lateness of the hour ("Hotel Room" was first shown on Friday at 11 P.M. and will be rebroadcast tonight at midnight) shows these three vignettes off to good advantage.
But "Getting Rid of Robert," the one written by Jay McInerney and directed by James Signorelli, at least has the advantage of being cheerful and reasonably murk-free.
Like the two other episodes, which Mr.
Lynch directed, it is set in Room 603, a drab set that has been none-too-vigorously redecorated to suit each different time period. (The three segments take place in 1969, 1992 and 1936, in that order.) The cleverest conceit of "Hotel Room" is to use the same young actors (Clark Heathcliffe Brolly and Camilla Overbye Roos) to play bellboy and maid, no matter what the year.


Hockey; The Devils Acquire Nicholls
The Devils acquired Bernie Nicholls, one of the most productive centers in the league, from Edmonton last night in a trade for Kevin Todd and Zdeno Ciger.
Nicholls is expected to fill a glaring weakness in the Devils, who have tried several players at center without much success.
He had an assist last night in Edmonton's game against Winnipeg.
The Devils did not know when Nicholls would report to the team.
Nicholls was traded to Edmonton Oct. 4, 1991 with Steve Rice and Luis DeBrusk for Mark Messier and future considerations.
He was unhappy with the trade and didn't report to Edmonton until two months later.
The flamboyant center is currently the leading scorer for the Oilers with 40 points from 8 goals and 32 assists in 46 games.


Keino Appeals Decision
BOB KEINO, the son of the two-time Olympic gold medalist KIP KEINO of Kenya, is appealing a decision by the New Jersey State Interscholastic Athletic Association that stripped his state high school cross-country championship, his lawyer, DAVID FIELD, said yesterday.
The required papers will be sent to the state's department of education today, said Field.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE -- Announced the resignation of Steve Greenberg, deputy commissioner and chief operating officer, effective in 90 days.
American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Named Mark Meleski manager of Lynchburg in the Carolina League.
Agreed to terms with John Marzano, catcher, on a one-year contract.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Designated Franklin Stubbs, first baseman, for assignment.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with Gary Redus, outfielder, on a two-year contract and Craig Lefferts, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Agreed to terms with Chris Sabo, third baseman, and Rob Dibble, pitcher, on one-year contracts.
Sold the contract of Bill Doran, second baseman, to the Milwaukee Brewers.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Agreed to terms with Les Lancaster, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
Sent Bien Figueroa, shortstop, outright to Louisville of the American Association.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Fired Richie Adubato, head coach.
Named Garfield Heard interim coach.
PHOENIX SUNS -- Activated Tim Kempton, center, from the injured list.
Football  National Football League  GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed LeRoy Butler, safety, to a two-year contract extension.
Hockey  Colonial Hockey League  FLINT BULLDOGS -- Activated Dan Woodley, center, from the injured list.


Franklin Electronic Publishers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Burlington Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Piano; Images Suggested By Sound
Sometimes the most compelling performances on a program are those in which a musician leaves questions of technique and tone behind and produces a sound that is so carefully textured as to almost suggest visual imagery.
There were times when William Black achieved that effect on Tuesday evening when he played works by Bach, Poulenc, Griffes and Schumann at Alice Tully Hall.
Yet as counterweights to those transcendent moments, others seemed oddly distant and flat, as if the pianist had spent so much effort conceptualizing the music's structure and contours that he lost sight of its color and depth.
Mr.
Black's power of illusion was at its strongest in Poulenc's Nocturnes, eight gracefully descriptive character sketches composed between 1929 and 1938 and not played as frequently as they deserve to be.
Mr.
Black captured the spirit of each unfailingly and made their extramusical qualities -- a slight impetuousness in the first, mischievousness in the fifth, stateliness in the last -- seem vivid and tangible.
In technical terms, too, he was entirely on target.
He produced a sound that had a gentle haze, yet the music's textures were clean and unambiguous.


COMPANY NEWS: But a Scant Market for the Empties; P.&amp; G. Downy Bottles Shift to Recycled Plastic
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company introduced a plastic bottle for its Ultra Downy fabric softener yesterday that is made of 100 percent recycled plastic.
The company says the bottle will provide a use for at least 15 million pounds of plastic collected for recycling.
But once it is empty, the Downy bottle itself will be much less recyclable than the translucent milk and water bottles made of high-density polyethylene that will be the source of the recycled plastic.
That is because the Downy bottle is colored and there are far fewer markets for plastic made up of mixed colors than for clear and translucent containers.


Canandaigua Wine reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Justices Rule on Impeachment
In effect upholding the ouster of two judges, the Supreme Court backed the Senate's use of a shortcut in handling impeachments.
Page D25.


Excerpts From Court's Decision on Abortion Clinic Blockades
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision on abortion clinic blockades.
Justice Antonin Scalia wrote the majority opinion, which was joined in full by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and by Justices Byron R. White, Anthony M. Kennedy and Clarence Thomas.
Justice David H. Souter filed a separate opinion concurring in the judgment.
Justices John Paul Stevens and Sandra Day O'Connor wrote dissenting opinions, both of which were also signed by Justice Harry A. Blackmun.
BY JUSTICE SCALIA, For the Court


Calendar: Antiques And Crafts
A Dealer's Collection  Christie's, 502 Park Avenue (59th Street); (212) 546-1002.


Market Place; A Quick Descent For Boeing Stock
SHARES of the Boeing Company have been losing altitude.
The big aircraft maker, whose order backlog seemed immune to the problems of the airline industry well into the recession, now seems likely to cut back production this year as sickly airlines defer orders.
Boeing shares have fallen quickly, from more than $40 late last week to $38.25, unchanged, yesterday, on the New York Stock Exchange.


U.S. AND ALLIED PLANES HIT IRAQ, BOMBING MISSILE SITES IN SOUTH IN REPLY TO HUSSEIN'S DEFIANCE
Warplanes from the United States, France and Britain bombed missile sites in southern Iraq today, two years after the allies claimed to have decisively defeated President Saddam Hussein in the Persian Gulf war and just a week before President Bush is scheduled to leave office.
The 30-minute night attack, limited in scope and in duration, was clearly intended to deliver a political message of allied resolve in the face of Iraqi defiance and not a crushing military blow.


Events: Benefit for a Florida Garden
A Benefit Lecture
Horticultural Society of New York, 128 West 58th Street; (212) 757-0915.


Riggs National Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Commerce Nominee Cancels Party Planned by Companies
After President-elect Bill Clinton expressed disapproval, his choice for Commerce Secretary, Ronald H. Brown, today abruptly canceled a lavish inauguration party planned in his honor by some of the largest American and Japanese corporations.
Besides criticizing the party, Mr.
Clinton said in an interview in Little Rock, Ark., that he was considering whether to impose more stringent ethics rules on Mr.
Brown by requiring him to remove himself from issues involving former clients for more than a year after taking office.
Mr.
Brown has set a standard for recusing himself that is significantly less rigorous than the rules voluntarily adopted by the Bush Administration.


Oakwood Homes Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bush Sends a Final Message To His Old Nemesis in Iraq
President Bush marked time for almost a year before Manuel A. Noriega, the Panamanian military strongman, goaded him into military action in 1989.
Mr.
Bush waited five and one-half months in 1990 and 1991 before moving to crush Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait.
But with a new President all but knocking on the White House door, Mr.
Bush made the decision today to send American jets into southern Iraq and American troops into Kuwait, not primarily for military aims but to send an essentially political message to the defiant Mr.
Hussein.


Pier 1 Imports Sees a Role As an Exporter of Expertise
For 30 years, Pier 1 Imports Inc. has brought bits of the world into American homes -- brass from India, wicker sofas from Thailand, Indonesia and the Philippines and an array of other tchotchkes from exotic locales.
Now, it plans to go into the export business -- exporting its merchandise and retailing expertise.


Sports of The Times; Can Lemieux Skate at His Level Again?
IN the Pittsburgh airport last Saturday night, two workmen were discussing the Steelers' 24-3 loss to the Buffalo Bills.
"No Super Bowl for the Steelers," one said.
"Just like no World Series for the Pirates. But there's always the Penguins. The Penguins are going to win the Stanley Cup again."


Coltec Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Signing of Chemical-Arms Pact Begins
In what has been hailed as the first attempt to eliminate an entire category of weapons of mass destruction, more than 120 nations, including the United States and Russia, began today to sign an agreement to ban the production, stockpiling and use of chemical weapons.
All such weapons must be destroyed within 10 years of the treaty's entry into force.
It further establishes a system of on-site inspections of chemical plants capable of making chemical weapons and contemplates sanctions against countries violating the accord.


Skiing; Balance on Slopes Is More Than a Birthright
Alberto Tomba balances on the thin edge of one ski at a time as he plunges down ski slopes and maneuvers through gates on race courses.
Although many recreational skiers haven't the remotest idea of what it feels like to be so exquisitely balanced on one ski, they shouldn't be discouraged.
They may not be able to ski with the speed, confidence or style of a Tomba, but they can learn balance.
And by developing this ability to balance on skis, most recreational skiers will overcome a fundamental stumbling block to improving their skiing skills.


Choice Drug reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


International Jensen reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


First National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Boxes Bulging With Decades of Clinton's Life Await Journey Into History
It was a strange moment: The world was churning and bombs were dropping and President Bush was still facing down Saddam Hussein, making decisions in Washington that would dramatically shape the beginning of the new Democratic Administration.
And Bill Clinton was sitting in the small-town quiet of Little Rock, with his life as Governor packed up all around him.
Moving boxes marked for the White House had handwritten notations: "Scrapbooks," "Xmas decorations," "HRC -- Personal Files, No. 1," "Book Stand Table From Family Room," "Family Room Upstairs, Watercolor of Ballerina 'Chelsea,' " "Photo of BC and Chelsea," "Ornate Silver Frame, Color Photo of Chelsea," and "Picture of Boys Nation."


Ziegler Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bombay Death Toll Rising in Muslim-Hindu Strife
The death toll in nine days of Hindu-Muslim fighting and clashes with the police has soared to more than 550 in Bombay, hospital officials said today.
The toll is based on records from seven hospitals and city mortuaries, which have recorded 558 deaths, a figure that is more than three times that given by police officials.
The toll is likely to increase because bodies are still being found.


Aristide Urges Big U.N. Observer Team for Haiti
In an effort to forestall a huge new flow of refugees, Haiti's exiled President formally requested today that the United Nations send a large human-rights observer team to the Caribbean nation as the first step in new diplomatic efforts aimed at restoring him to office.
If the presence of as many as 500 United Nations observers is accepted by Haitian military leaders, as expected, officials of the Bush Administration and Clinton transition team hope that word of their arrival, the most significant progress in diplomatic efforts to restore elected democratic government in months, will encourage Haitians not to flee from their country.


Grief Over AIDS Spurs Gifts to Neediest Cases
They are struggling to make sense of it all: How can so many lives be snuffed out in their prime, as if nature's laws had suddenly imploded?
Why are once-healthy sons and daughters turning into invalids?
Who will care for the tens of thousands of poor people fallen ill?
Can anything stop this plague from further scarring a generation?
As the AIDS epidemic drags on, growing numbers of people are trying to exorcise some of their grief over the disease by sending contributions to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, asking that the money be used for patient care and prevention.


New Housewares In Search of a Home
In comparison with the rapidly changing electronics industry, which ended its giant Las Vegas show on Sunday, the nearly 1,900 housewares manufacturers who gathered here this week seem to be strolling toward the future.
The vast majority of product categories are evolving slowly, and that fact lent an almost sedate air to the 1993 International Housewares Show, despite its drawing nearly 50,000 visitors.
That is not to say that the exhibitors at McCormick Place were disappointed in the three-and-half-day show, which ended this morning.
With indications that consumer confidence is up from a year ago and with retail shelves emptier than usual after a strong Christmas season, buyers from department stores and mass retailers were out in force.


Genetics Laboratories Wound Care Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Products That Help Childproof a Home
FOR babies and toddlers, the home is an accident waiting to happen.
Hazards lurk everywhere -- stairs, stoves, kitchen cabinets, toilets, medicine cabinets, telephone cords, electrical outlets.
Home safety has inspired products that can help baby-proof a home.
Here are some of the latest:


Close Watch Was Kept on Chief Suspect
From the beginning, John Esposito, the longtime friend of the Beers family, was the chief suspect in the disappearance of Katie Beers.
Investigators watched his house in Bay Shore, L.I., almost around the clock.
They monitored his movements and travel.
And Mr. Esposito knew they were watching, a law-enforcement source said yesterday.


CHRONICLE
MERRILL ASHLEY, a principal dancer with the New York City Ballet, slipped and broke her foot at the beginning of Tuesday evening's performance of the "Barber Violin Concerto." She had only returned to dancing with the company on Jan. 6, after a two-year absence because of hip and ankle problems.
The curtain was brought down and Miss Ashley was examined at the New York State Theater by a company physical therapist.
"She saw a doctor this morning and has a small broken bone in her foot and a sprained ankle," DAVID GRAY, press director for the ballet company said yesterday.
"She is likely to be out eight weeks."


New Contracts for Reds
The Cincinnati Reds signed third baseman CHRIS SABO to a $3.1 million contract and relief pitcher ROB DIBBLE to a $2.5 million contract.
Sabo and Dibble had been eligible for salary arbitration.
Their signings leave four Reds eligible for arbitration: starting pitcher TIM BELCHER, first baseman HAL MORRIS, catcher JOE OLIVER and infielder-outfielder BIP ROBERTS.


RAYTHEON TO SUPPLY PATRIOT MISSILES TO KUWAIT
The Raytheon Company has received a $327 million contract to supply Patriot missiles to Kuwait, and the military contractor said the deal's value could rise to more than $450 million.
The order is for five Patriot fire units and 210 missiles.
But support hardware, test equipment and required engineering and logistical services will likely increase the deal's value.
Raytheon, based in Lexington, Mass., recently received a $1.03 billion order from Saudi Arabia for 12 Patriot fire units and 793 missiles.


No Headline
"I've something to tell you. I know where Katie is." -- JOHN ESPOSITO, suspect in the disappearance of Katie Beers.  [ B6:1. ]


Fletcher Challenge reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Secrets of Bay
Q.
A few years ago, I bought some sweet bay plants but they won't grow.
Are they just slow?
Or, what's the secret? -- George Floyd, Wynnewood, Pa.
A.
Actually, there's no great mystery to growing sweet bay (Laurus nobilis), which is really among the most undemanding of house plants.
Household bays can eventually reach about six feet tall, but in their native habitat of Asia Minor and the Mediterranean, they may stretch to 40 feet or more.


McDonnell May Submit Big C-17 Bill
The Air Force is expecting a "hardship" claim for hundreds of millions of dollars from the McDonnell Douglas Corporation as a result of changes in the development of the C-17 transport plane, an Air Force spokesman confirmed today.
Federal officials have yet to receive the claim, but have informally been told that it is being prepared, the spokesman, Lieut.
Col.
John Kirkwood, said.


Pro Football; Bills' Reich Passed Up In Favor Of Kelly
Bills Coach Marv Levy said today that quarterback Jim Kelly, who has missed Buffalo's previous two playoff games with strained ligaments in his right knee, will start against the Dolphins in the American Football Conference championship game Sunday in Miami.
That means that Levy has chosen to sit a hot quarterback in favor of one who has started in the last two Super Bowls.
Frank Reich, who guided the Bills to two playoff victories to get them to the championship game, will return to the bench as Kelly's backup.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  ALLIES BOMB SOUTHERN IRAQ
Warplanes from the United States, France and Britain bombed missile sites in southern Iraq, two years after the allies claimed to have decisively defeated Saddam Hussein in the Persian Gulf war and just a week before President Bush is scheduled to leave office.
A1  CLINTON WON'T RULE OUT FORCE
President-elect Bill Clinton said he would not rule out renewing the ground war against Iraq if necessary to force compliance with United Nations resolutions.
But he also indicated he was ready for a fresh start with President Hussein.
A1


Kohl Assures U.S. Jews on Neo-Nazi Strife
Chancellor Helmut Kohl told leaders of the Anti-Defamation League today that democracy in Germany was not in danger despite the recent surge in right-wing violence against foreign asylum-seekers, the Americans said after meeting with him here.
"Nobody we talked with disagreed that the Government response was a little slow and a little late," said Abraham H. Foxman, director of the league.
"We raised our concern about the delay," said Melvin Salberg, the national chairman.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Consolidated Edison Co. of New York is offering $100 million of 6 1/4 percent debentures due in 1998 at 99.70 to yield 6.32 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The noncallable debentures are rated Aa-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc., AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps Credit Rating Co.


Chemfix Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


No Charges Are Dropped In Abuse Case
The judge in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial refused today to dismiss any of the nine charges against four former football teammates accused of sexually assaulting a mildly retarded schoolmate in March 1989.
In rejecting a defense motion for an outright acquittal of the defendants, Judge R. Benjamin Cohen of Superior Court held that the prosecution had provided sufficient evidence and testimony so a "reasonable jury" could find the four defendants guilty of all charges beyond a reasonable doubt.


WHERE TO FIND IT
STANDING in his rug-filled gallery in SoHo, Lee Howard Beshar, president of A. Beshar &amp; Company, offered some rug-caring tips: Rotate rugs every year to slow their fading and to distribute wear.
Add moth crystals when storing rugs.
Keep potted plants off rugs (they can cause dry rot).
And when rugs become dirty and dingy, take them to a professional rug cleaner.
That last comment hardly seems surprising, since Mr.
Beshar's company, founded by his grandfather, has been cleaning carpets for 95 years.


Clinton's Choice for Justice Dept. Hired Illegal Aliens for Household
Zoe Baird, Bill Clinton's nominee to be Attorney General, employed two Peruvians living illegally in the United States as her baby sitter and part-time driver for nearly two years, Government and Clinton transition officials said today.
Transition officials said the couple began working for Ms.
Baird in the summer of 1990, when she was about to take a job at Aetna Life and Casualty in Hartford.
The husband stopped working for Ms.
Baird in March of 1992, but the wife continued to help care for Ms.
Baird's 3-year-old son until the woman left or was dismissed shortly after the election.


Southern National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


InterVoice Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Hubco reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Bold Cut in Big Board's Transaction Costs
In one of the most decisive moves it has ever made to combat shrinking market share, the New York Stock Exchange will cut certain customer transaction costs about 15 percent, William Donaldson, chairman, said yesterday.
Based on last year's volume, the change in pricing would pare such costs about $18.5 million for trades of fewer than 2,100 shares placed through the Big Board's computerized order system, Mr.
Donaldson said.
If volume grows in those trades, which are usually placed by individual investors, then the savings will increase, presumably giving the exchange the ability for further cuts.


Vertex Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Ponce Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TSR Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Britain and France Call the Raid A Necessary Lesson for Hussein
Britain and France, joining in the air strikes in southern Iraq tonight, emphasized that the attacks were limited in nature and necessary to teach President Saddam Hussein a lesson after he had repeatedly defied the United Nations.
Prime Minister John Major of Britain, meeting briefly with reporters outside 10 Downing Street, said that the raid had been successful and that all aircraft returned to base safely.


Israelis Keep Masks Packed
The Government told Israelis today to keep their gas masks packed because it saw little likelihood that Iraq would attack Israel with Scud missiles as it did during the Persian Gulf war two years ago.
An army statement said the American-led air raids against Iraq were "apparently a limited strike" that would not have repercussions beyond the Persian Gulf.


Doctor Faults Needle For H.I.V. Infection
A doctor has sued a manufacturer of hypodermic syringes, contending that she was infected with H.I.V. after she accidentally pricked her finger while recapping a needle used to draw blood from a hospital patient.
The doctor, a psychiatrist who lives in Manhattan, is identified in court papers only as Jane Doe.
The manufacturer, Becton Dickinson &amp; Company, filed papers on Monday to move the case from State Supreme Court to Federal District Court in Manhattan.


CIT Group Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Interco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Circon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Dance; A Duet in Movement and Music By Molissa Fenley and Philip Glass
Rarely in recent years have two contemporary artists appeared as compatible as Molissa Fenley and Philip Glass did onstage at the opening of Ms.
Fenley's dance season on Tuesday night.
Mr.
Glass played his "Metamorphosis" on a grand piano at stage left as Ms.
Fenley performed the choreography of her 1989 solo "Provenance Unknown" along a trajectory that led toward the composer but from whom she beat a consistent retreat until the end.


Americans Shrug Off Another Strike Against Iraq
With barely more than a shrug, Americans reacted to the strike against Iraq yesterday as inevitable, but not especially alarming, as Saddam Hussein has come to be seen as more of a pest than a threat.
"There's no sense getting excited about this," said Paul Simmons, a college student in Denver.
"We've already shown once that we can handle this character."


Soviet A-Bomb Built From U.S. Data, Russian Says
The first Soviet atomic bomb, whose explosion in August 1949 formally launched the cold war arms race, was a copy of the first American A-bomb, built from plans supplied by at least one spy, according to the Russian who built that bomb.
Yuli B. Khariton said that Soviet scientists were well on their way to making their own bomb when the Americans detonated an A-bomb in 1945 and proceeded to use them on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.


Jupiter National reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Walter Redisch, 94, A Professor Known For Research Work
Dr.
Walter Redisch, a research professor in physiology known internationally for his original work in vascular studies, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 94.
His family said he died after a long illness.


Broad Market Up, Though Dow Dips 1.08
Good earnings reports and a drop in interest rates proved more important to investors yesterday than the successful bombing raid in southern Iraq, and the broad stock market averages posted impressive gains.
Narrower measures did less well, however, including the Dow Jones industrial average.


Germany Frees Ailing Honecker, Who Flies to Chile
The former leader of East Germany, Erich Honecker, was released from a Berlin prison today because of his failing health.
He immediately departed for Chile, where his wife lives.
Mr.
Honecker's release marked the end of a failed effort to hold the top East German leaders criminally responsible for killings along the Berlin wall.
His two principal co-defendants, former Prime Minister Willi Stoph and the former secret police chief, Erich Mielke, have already been separated from the case for health reasons and are considered unlikely ever to face charges.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The unemployment rate is actually higher than now reported and thousands of full-time workers hold only part-time jobs, according to new data-collection methods.  [ Page D1. ]
The New York Stock Exchange will cut some customer fees 15 percent to combat shrinking market share.  [ D1. ]


Jackpot Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dionex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Shaw Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Domestic Oil Demand Up in '92 and Import Rise Filled Gap
Oil demand rose significantly in 1992 for the first time since 1988, the industry's main trade association said yesterday, attributing the rise to "the stirrings of a turnaround in the economy."
But domestic production continued its seven-year decline, hitting the lowest level since 1960.
The gap between consumption and domestic production was filled by imports, which the trade association, the American Petroleum Institute, said rose by about 4 percent last year.


A Mahler Celebration At Carnegie In 1993-94
Carnegie Hall is to begin a two-year survey of Mahler's major works next season, with performances by the Berlin Philharmonic, the Vienna Philharmonic, the Israel Philharmonic, the Boston Symphony, the St.
Louis Symphony and the Pittsburgh Symphony.
The Mahler cycle is one of the central features of the hall's 103d season, which is to open on Sept. 23 with Wolfgang Sawallisch conducting the Philadelphia Orchestra with Midori as guest soloist.
The season runs through May 15, 1994, when Dennis Russell Davies and the Swedish trombonist Christian Lindberg are to give the New York premiere of Ellen Taaffe Zwilich's Trombone Concerto.


OIL TANKER PLAN IS BACKED IN WEST
A state agency today approved an oil industry plan to use tankers for three years along the coastline north of Los Angeles.
The decision comes after a decadelong standoff among oil producers, environmentalists and government officials over one of the nation's richest oil fields.
The 7-to-4 vote by the California Coastal Commission permits the loading of up to 50,000 barrels of crude oil a day into tankers that will travel from the Point Arguello oil field off the coast near Gaviota to refineries in the Los Angeles area.
Up to seven shipments a month will be allowed.


Baseball; Owners' Labor Agent Doesn't Favor Lockout
Baseball's club owners and players have a stunning record of seven work stoppages in the last seven labor negotiations, but the clubs' chief labor executive told union negotiators yesterday that he would recommend to the owners that they not lock out the players either before or during the 1993 season.
"I will recommend to the owners that under all circumstances baseball should be played in 1993," Richard Ravitch, management's latest labor representative, said as the two sides began negotiations for a new collective bargaining agreement.


Newspaper Union Chief Accused of Corruption
Douglas LaChance, president of the newspaper deliverers' union in New York City, has held secret partnerships in nonunion delivery companies, used strong-arm tactics against newspapers and competing companies to enrich himself, and has undercut his own union, prosecutors charged yesterday.
Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney, announced a grand jury indictment against Mr.
LaChance, a convicted felon who faces a possible return to prison for a parole violation, and four other people and two companies, charging them with criminal conspiracy, restraint of trade, extortion and other offenses.


Immigrants Find Immortality, at a Price
Seymour Rexite, a Yiddish actor on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, and C. Lawrence Huerta, the former chief of the Pasquayaqui Indian tribe in Arizona, have but one thing in common.
Mr.
Rexite, who emigrated from Poland in 1922, and Mr.
Huerta, who never migrated at all, are both listed on the new American Immigrant Wall of Honor on Ellis Island.
The wall, which opens today, is more precisely a wall of donors.
For $100, any individual, immigrant or not, was able to buy a spot on this national monument, which does not pretend to be of precise historical significance.
Rather, the wall represents the apotheosis of the American dream, allowing anyone and everyone a chance to purchase a place in American history.


Intel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Strong Defense
The airline stock flight pattern traced by the top line above might well be steeper than anything allowed in commercial aviation.
Airline stocks have soared ahead of the market on hopes that an accelerating recovery will multiply their earnings, especially since they are cutting their costs.
But fare wars breaking out anew can reverse profits and share prices alike, as UAL fell 2 3/8, AMR 1 5/8, Delta 3/4 and US Air 1/2 yesterday.


Thomas B. Curtis Is Dead at 81; Missouri Republican Defied Nixon
Thomas B. Curtis, an influential Republican Congressman from Missouri who later headed three Federal commissions and quit one in a dispute with the Nixon Administration, died Sunday at a hospital in Allegan, Mich.
He was 81 and had retired to nearby Pier Cove on Lake Michigan.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Pioneer-Standard Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


How Tiny Parks Dept. Subsidizes Board of Ed
To the Editor:
In "School Custodians' Dirty Tricks" (Op-Ed, Dec. 18), John Fager indicts New York City school custodians for profiteering, rather than performing.
New Yorkers are deprived of custodial services in another way.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about a bridge over Lefferts Boulevard in Kew Gardens, Queens, misidentified the president of the Kew Gardens Improvement Association.
She is Sylvia Hack.


New Tax Rules for Foreign Companies Disclosed
The Treasury Department disclosed today a broad revision of the nation's tax regulations for foreign companies, but it was unclear what effect, if any, the changes would have on tax revenue.
The revision aims to clarify existing regulations rather than enact sweeping changes.
Though the Bush Administration would like to increase tax collections from foreign companies, Administration officials say huge increases are not feasible.
President-elect Bill Clinton said during the campaign that billions of dollars could be raised through increased taxes on foreign businesses.


RESULTS PLUS
SKATING  Russians Win Pairs
Marina Yeltsova and Andrei Bushkov gained the first title for Russia as a separate country in the European figure skating championships yesterday as they won the pairs competition in Helsinki, Finland.
The Russians came from behind to win the final free-skating program worth two-thirds of the final scoring with a lyrical routine to the music of "Samson and Delilah." It gained them the best marks of the evening, from 5.5 to 5.8 on a scale up to 6.0. (AP) SOCCER  Bolton Stuns Liverpool
Visiting Bolton pulled off one of the biggest upsets in English soccer history last night when it knocked the defending champion, Liverpool, out of the Football Association Cup with a 2-0 victory.
Goals on headers by John McGinlay (in the sixth minute) and Andy Walker (in the 78th minute) stunned some 34,000 fans at Anfield as the Division Two team won the third-round replay.
Liverpool, which has won five F.A.
Cups and 18 English League titles, is in the Premier League, the highest division.
It trailed by 2-0 two weeks ago before tying the game and forcing the replay. (AP)


Let Congress Decide
Congress, rather than Bill Clinton, may have to resolve the question of homosexuals in the military.
Some Clinton advisers are advocating a low-key approach to modifying the ban: a directive by the Secretary of Defense rather than a Presidential order.
But that seems to be a distinction without a difference and would not satisfactorily address the underlying issues.


College Basketball; Wright Makes His Presence Felt
A small but significant point of progress in the career of Seton Hall center Luther Wright may have come Monday night, in the victory over Syracuse, when the 7-foot-2-inch center was charged with his fourth foul with 6 minutes 45 seconds to play.
And he stayed in the game.


Authoritative Answers on M.I.A.'s
The thorough Senate committee report released yesterday on the fate of Americans missing since the Vietnam War should dispel suspicions of a U.S.
Government conspiracy or cover-up.
Should, but probably won't.
Word that Henry Kissinger's lawyer was given a last-minute opportunity to propose cosmetic changes in language criticizing the former Secretary of State will damage the report's credibility, even though telling substantive criticisms of Nixon-era officials seem to have survived largely intact.


American Safety Closure reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Groupe Val Royal reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Home Video
Viewers of the four-part documentary "The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money and Power," the last segment of which is on PBS tonight, see that the series is available on videocassette.
At the end of the two-hour programs, which began Monday, an announcement appears that tapes are available from KCET, a PBS station in Los Angeles, and an "800" number is provided.
Offers like this are common, but "800" number video solicitations on PBS broadcasts have become an increasingly sore point with independent producers and distributors who feel PBS is exerting unfair control over access to public airwaves.


Delays in Subway Strand Riders
Hundreds of thousands of Brooklyn-bound subway passengers were stranded during last night's rush when an electrical failure in a Manhattan generating station knocked out power for 92 minutes to track signals on most subway line in Brooklyn.
New York City Transit officials said signal power on the A and C lines was not affected because they receive power from another source.
But service on all other lines between Brooklyn and Manhattan was reduced to a crawl in both boroughs as riders shouldered their way through huge crowds in an effort to get home.


The Knicks Fall Into A Rocky Abyss
In a game they were expected to win, the Knicks found a way to lose -- badly.
The Denver Nuggets, who came into the game having lost 16 of their last 17, outplayed and outhustled New York and left with a convincing 108-92 victory tonight at McNichols Arena.
The Knicks (20-13) have now lost three of their last four games and six of their last 10.
But this was by far their most disappointing defeat during that skid.


Linear Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


INSIDE
Union Chief Accused Of Conspiracy and Extortion
A grand jury indicted Douglas LaChance, president of the newspaper deliverers' union in New York City, on charges of conspiracy, extortion and other offenses.
He was accused of having secret partnerships in nonunion delivery companies.
Page B1.
Feinstein's Deal Rejected
Barry Feinstein, one of New York City's influential union leaders, lost a bid to have civil corruption charges against him dismissed.
Page B1.
Drug Shows Promise In Sickle Cell Disease
Preliminary tests on patients suggest that a chemical injection could treat the underlying cause of sickle cell disease and related blood disorders.
But researchers say longer studies with more patients are needed to establish clinical benefits.
Page D25.
New School Choice Plan
The New York City Board of Education voted to give parents across the city the right to choose any public school for their children.
Page B3.
Chemical Arms Pact Signed
Over 120 nations, including the United States and Russia, have begun to sign an accord banning the production and use of chemical arms.
Page A16.
Data on First Soviet Bomb
The first Soviet A-bomb was a copy of the first American one, based on espionage, a Russian said.
Page A12.
Carter on Clinton
On a book tour, the last Democratic President spoke of the next one with generosity, up to a point.
Page C1.


Books of The Times; On Schools and Politics: The Chancellor Has His Say
Tales Out of School Joseph Fernandez's Crusade to Rescue American Education By Joseph A. Fernandez With John Underwood. 278 pages.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95.


Coleman and Anderson Roll
When Maurice Cheeks came in the game tonight against the Cleveland Cavaliers with 3 minutes 14 seconds left in the third period, it was as if Elvis had entered the building judging by the way the 10,202 fans cheered for him.
Yet, truth is, Cheeks had little impact in his first game since New Jersey signed him as a free agent on Jan. 7.
Cheeks played five minutes, didn't score and didn't have an assist while his teammates were the real story.
New Jersey beat a very good Cavalier team, 104-98, thanks to some big baskets down the stretch by Derrick Coleman and Kenny Anderson.


Allied Strike: Swift and Unchallenged
The approximately 80 allied warplanes that carried out the attack today on surface-to-air missile sites in southern Iraq swept in virtually unchallenged and destroyed several mobile missiles and an air defense network, military officials said today.
Waves of Navy bombers from an American aircraft carrier and Air Force jets from bases across Saudi Arabia joined French and British warplanes in the 30-minute attack, which took out four radar and communication sites that controlled most of the surface-to-air missiles in southern Iraq.


Court Upholds Shortcut Used in Ousting 2 Judges
In a decision effectively upholding the removal of two Federal judges, the Supreme Court ruled 9 to 0 today that the Senate's use of a shortcut procedure for handling impeachments is not open to challenge in Federal court.
The Constitution gives the Senate not only the last word but essentially the only word on how to discharge its duty to "try all impeachments," the Court said in rejecting the arguments of a former Federal judge, Walter L. Nixon, who had challenged the procedure the Senate used to convict and remove him from office in 1989.


Iraqi Leader Voices Defiance, Vowing to Repel Allied Raids
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, speaking on television after allied air strikes on his country, said today that "the criminals have come back" and called on Iraqi forces to "fight on against the aggressors so that the Iraqi airspace from the north to the south, from the east to the west, is turned into fiery lava."
In a sober but rambling speech filled with references to the Koran, Mr.
Hussein in effect announced that an air strike had been conducted by allied aircraft on military targets in southern Iraq.
He made no reference to any damage or casualties in the raids, however.


Centura Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Somalia Clans Hold Talks on a Joint Police Force
Somalia's two main warring factions are holding talks to set up a jointly run police force in Mogadishu, a senior United States official said today.
The official, Robert B. Oakley, Washington's special envoy to Somalia, said the talks, which began this week, had gained new urgency after a United States marine was killed on Tuesday in an ambush while on a night patrol near the airport.
The marine, Pfc.
Domingo Arroyo, 21, of Elizabeth, N.J., was the first foreigner to die in combat in the five-week-old military operation.


Books of The Times; On Schools and Politics: The Chancellor Has His Say
Tales Out of School Joseph Fernandez's Crusade to Rescue American Education By Joseph A. Fernandez With John Underwood. 278 pages.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95.


Playing in Reunion, Cream Is the Finale Of Rock Ceremonies
A searing three-song reunion of Cream, the British psychedelic blues-rock band that last performed publicly in 1968, was the finale and climax of the eighth annual Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame induction ceremony.
Eric Clapton on guitar, Jack Bruce on bass and Ginger Baker on drums tore into two classic blues songs, Albert King's "Born Under a Bad Sign" and Robert Johnson's "Crossroads," along with Cream's own blues "Sunshine of Your Love," revamping the trio's old arrangements and playing with the improvisational spark that made Cream's concert-length jam sessions legendary 1960's events.
"If the three of us can be together again," Mr.
Bruce said, "anybody can be together again." Backstage, Mr.
Bruce had said of the group's bitter breakup, "I'm completely happy that we all split up because we're all still alive."


Senate Panel Report Fails to Settle M.I.A. Dispute
No issue has been more enduring or painful over the last three decades than the fate of thousands of United States servicemen taken prisoner or missing during the Vietnam War and still unaccounted for.
But after 17 months of hearings, the largest declassification of Government documents in history and search missions throughout Asia, today a special Senate panel issued a report that may succeed only in fanning the embers.


Parker Drilling Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Pro Football; Dolphins Just Love to Let Him Boot One
For a shocking moment, Pete Stoyanovich was labeled with the "choke" sign on the national stage.
It was an uncharacteristic tag for the Dolphins' place-kicker, who has been a routine producer of last-second victories for Miami.


Groupe Videotron reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Alexander Soper, 88; Historian of Asian Art
Alexander Coburn Soper 3d, a distinguished historian of Asian art who taught at the Institute of Fine Arts in New York City for more than 30 years, died yesterday at his home in Rosemont, Pa.
He was 88.
He died of heart failure, said a spokeswoman for the institute.


Laidlaw Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Sparta Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vacation Spa Resorts reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Christopher Sees A Place for Force
Secretary of State-designate Warren M. Christopher sought today to remake his Carter-era image of conciliation and negotiation, presenting himself to Congress as a man who believes in "discreet and careful" use of force to maintain the United States as a world power.
Mr.
Christopher was Deputy Secretary of State in the Carter Administration, and the impression has arisen that he, like Cyrus R. Vance, Mr.
Carter's Secretary of State, would negotiate endlessly to avoid military confrontations.


Motorola Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about the State of the State Address given by Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey misidentified the minister who delivered the invocation.
She was the Rev.
Rochelle Hendricks, associate pastor of Grant Chapel Church in Trenton.


Printronix reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Judge Rejects Plea Bargain for Teamster
In an apparent setback for Barry Feinstein, one of New York City's most influential union leaders, an administrative judge yesterday rejected a plea-bargaining agreement to dismiss civil corruption charges against him.
The decision by the judge, Frederick M. Lacey, means that Mr.
Feinstein must undergo a full review of allegations that he misused $500,000 for personal expenses as the president of a powerful municipal employees union, Local 237 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.
Judge Lacey could choose to ban him from the union.


RAYTHEON TO SUPPLY PATRIOT MISSILES TO KUWAIT
The Raytheon Company has received a $327 million contract to supply Patriot missiles to Kuwait, and the military contractor said the deal's value could rise to more than $450 million.
The order is for five Patriot fire units and 210 missiles.
But support hardware, test equipment and required engineering and logistical services will likely increase the deal's value.
Raytheon, based in Lexington, Mass., recently received a $1.03 billion order from Saudi Arabia for 12 Patriot fire units and 793 missiles.


Russian Debt Plan Delayed
A dispute between Russia and Ukraine has delayed Western efforts to give Russia more time to repay billions of dollars of debts of the former Soviet Union, American officials said today.
Last month, Western governments offered to stretch out over 10 years Russia's repayment of $15 billion of principal and interest.
But Russia never accepted this offer because it was unable to complete a tentative deal with Ukraine.


Sand Technology Systems International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Hockey; Vanbiesbrouck Faces Barrage, but the Payoff . . .
Ron Smith lied.
He said the videotapes were enough satisfaction.
He said that he didn't mind the tough loss to Philadelphia or the frustrating tie against Vancouver, because he could watch the replays and know that his Rangers were playing well.
Hah.
Smith would rather have the 2 points for a victory, no matter how they come.
And last night, they came ugly.
Smith was quick to concede that.


Chase Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Cash Influx Lowers Yields On Money Market Funds
Yields offered by tax-exempt and taxable money market funds were down sharply in the latest week, after a month-long climb driven by year-end adjustments by investors and portfolio managers.
The latest survey by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report shows tax-exempt yields sharply lower for the week ended Tuesday, as money from the recent huge redemptions of municipal bonds and end-of-year dividend payouts poured into the money funds.


Basic Earth Science Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.81
2.91
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.98
3.00
3.80
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.13
3.15
3.89
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.41
6.36
6.79
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.43
7.47
7.57
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.46
8.50
8.76
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.39
6.40
6.69
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Luther Medical Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Enzo Angiolini, 50, A Designer of Shoes
Enzo Angiolini, 50, a designer of women's and men's shoes in the United States and Italy, died on Jan. 3 at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He lived in Manhattan and Florence, Italy.
He died of cancer, according to a statement issued by his shoe company's corporate parent, the Nine West Group in Stamford, Conn.


Perils of a Senator
Although a Federal grand jury has declined to indict Senator Charles S. Robb in an electronic eavesdropping case, the Virginia Democrat's troubles are far from over.
The jury's decision on Tuesday was a major surprise.
Even the Senator had predicted he would be indicted for recordings made of conversations involving his chief political rival, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder.
Something happened in the late stages of the grand jury's deliberations, but there are only questions, no explanations, of what.


Pilgrim's Pride reports earnings for Year Sept 26


More Campaign Music
He's back, and frankly, we're all ears.
Henry Ross Perot wants $15 from every citizen so he can crank up something called "United We Stand, America." Sure, it seems churlish of the richest candidate in American history to demand "multiple family memberships." But we are attracted to his promise "to give the American people a voice," because it is clear whom the people are going to sound like.
That nasal voice cuts like the crack of a drover's whip through the mooing of the Washington herd.
And who can resist the paranoiac symmetry of Mr.
Perot's vision of American government?
Fellow citizens, he says, we are battling a conspiracy so vast we may never know its true dimension, a conspiracy so insidious that each of you may have enlisted without knowing it.


Northland Cranberries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


College Basketball; Redmen's Cain Finding His Touch
St. John's point guard David Cain has picked a fine time to start having career nights.
Cain, a 6-foot senior from the Bronx, scored a career-high 23 points tonight to lead the Redmen to a 76-70 victory over Villanova in duPont Pavilion.
It was the third time in the last four games that he improved his top single-game point total.


Books of The Times; On Schools and Politics: The Chancellor Has His Say
Tales Out of School Joseph Fernandez's Crusade to Rescue American Education By Joseph A. Fernandez With John Underwood. 278 pages.
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95.
Aside from the stories of his youthful drug use and street-gang rambles, the advance news about "Tales Out of School," by the New York City Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, has centered on his purportedly confrontational remarks about Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, Mayor David N. Dinkins and the members of the New York City Board of Education.
Various officials have been prompted by such remarks to wonder whether "Tales Out of School" constitutes Mr.
Fernandez's unofficial resignation.


Supreme Court Says Klan Law Can't Bar Abortion Blockades
The Supreme Court ruled today that a Reconstruction-era civil rights law enacted to protect blacks from the Ku Klux Klan does not give Federal judges jurisdiction to bar anti-abortion protesters from blockading abortion clinics.
The vote in the closely watched case was 6 to 3, with a majority opinion by Justice Antonin Scalia.
The dissenters were Justices John Paul Stevens, Sandra Day O'Connor and Harry A. Blackmun.
Justice David H. Souter agreed with the central holding in the case but did not join Justice Scalia's opinion; he filed a separate opinion instead.  [ Excerpts from the ruling, page D24. ]


European Community Holds Balkan Key
To the Editor:
Beyond whatever short-term military intervention is feasible and appropriate in the former Yugoslavia, and beyond war crimes prosecution for a few identifiable individuals, a third international strategy can shift the geopolitical balance back toward peace.


Liberty National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Colleges; Word 'Playoff' Rattles N.C.A.A. Convention
Executive Director Richard Schultz opened the National Collegiate Athletic Association convention this evening by suggesting that a national college football playoff game might be an effective way of generating new revenues at a time when many intercollegiate programs are losing money.
Schultz raised the idea as one way to provide money for new women's sports programs and to support those that exist.
It was also a response to the increasing numbers of women's athletics administrators who are demanding equitable funding of men's and women's programs.


Knogo Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Judge Attacks Policy Curbing Plea Bargains
A new policy against plea bargaining in the Bronx has begun to burden the borough's court system, increasing the usual caseload and swelling an already huge backlog of felony cases, the Bronx's top judge, Burton B. Roberts, said yesterday.
But the Bronx District Attorney, Robert T. Johnson, said the policy, which he announced abruptly in November, was not to blame and has in fact begun to work as he intended.
In an interview yesterday, Mr.
Johnson also appeared to step back from what had seemed a hard-line policy, saying his office would still allow defendants to plead guilty to lesser charges in some cases.


METRO DIGEST
MISSING GIRL IS FOUND
Katie Beers, the 10-year-old Long Island girl who had been missing for two weeks, was found alive and well, hidden in a small room beneath a garage at the home of the Bayshore, L.I., man who had claimed he was with her when she disappeared.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  JUDGE CRITICIZES PLEA-DEAL POLICY


Abortion-Rights Groups See A Rise in Attacks on Clinics
Abortion clinics may face more disruptions from protesters as a result of yesterday's Supreme Court decision that an 1871 law protecting blacks from the Ku Klux Klan cannot be used to insure women's access to the clinics.
Abortion-rights groups said that unless Congress or President-elect Clinton stepped in, defending clinics against blockades by Operation Rescue and other anti-abortion groups would become far more difficult.


Oh, Please Don't Paint That Bridge Bright Red
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 26 "About New York" column, on painting the Hell Gate railroad bridge, fails to mention that the New York City Art Commission has the final say on the selection of a paint color.


CHRONICLE
Rumors have been flying for weeks about HILLARY CLINTON'S inaugural wardrobe and who would design it.
Would it be someone famous?
One of her favorites from Arkansas?
An unknown?
The rumor cropping up in gossip columns this week seems to have some grounding in possibility, though it hasn't yet been confirmed by the Clinton office.
You might say it's all unofficially official that Mrs.
Clinton's Inaugural Ball dress has been designed by SARAH PHILLIPS, a little-known New York designer.
The dress is said to be a floor-length, long-sleeved sheath of violet lace, re-embroidered and beaded with iridescent crystals, with a flowing overskirt of blue-violet mousseline that is shirred and gathered at the waist, held by a beaded belt with a jeweled buckle.


Ballard Medical Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bradley Would Give Clinton Line-Item Veto
Abandoning longstanding opposition to line-item veto powers for the President, Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey today proposed giving Bill Clinton that power on a two-year trial basis to help bring a runaway Federal budget under control.
"Giving the President the line-item veto isn't going to balance the budget tomorrow, and isn't going to balance the budget by itself," Mr.
Bradley said at a news conference.
"There is no single quick fix, no deficit-reduction silver bullet, but this at least is a beginning."


American Maize Products Co.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


A Slot Machine Parlay; Weicker and Indian Tribe Make a Big Bet
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. signed an agreement today permitting slot machines at the Mashantucket Pequot Indian tribe's casino in Ledyard, and the tribe in turn agreed to contribute at least $100 million a year in gambling profits to a fund to aid troubled cities and towns.
With the agreement, Mr.
Weicker, who has been a forceful opponent of casino gambling, and the tribe, which would face competition from expanded gambling venues, appear to have outflanked the gaming industry, which has been pushing the state to approve casinos in Hartford and Bridgeport.


Mogadishu Journal; School Bell Rings in Somalia, for the Lucky Few
The national teacher-training center just outside the city was once the heart of Somali education, preparing all the nation's secondary-school teachers.
But most of the acrid-smelling rooms no longer hold any clue that they were once classrooms.
The desks and chairs were stolen long ago, and the windows replaced with plywood.
The dark rooms are now packed wall to wall with cots and soiled mattresses, home to refugees who fled the shelling in Somalia's capital.


Canonie Environmental Services reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Essay; Clearing Clinton's Throat
How private is a President's health?
Even a politician has a privacy zone, and I am rarely an absolutist on anything, but to the question posed above, my answer is: The President's health is the public's business.


Perils of a Senator
Although a Federal grand jury has declined to indict Senator Charles S. Robb in an electronic eavesdropping case, the Virginia Democrat's troubles are far from over.
The jury's decision on Tuesday was a major surprise.
Even the Senator had predicted he would be indicted for recordings made of conversations involving his chief political rival, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder.
Something happened in the late stages of the grand jury's deliberations, but there are only questions, no explanations, of what.


Catholic Group Won't Fight Proposed Right-to-Die Bill
A Cuomo administration bill that would allow family members and friends to end life support for patients who can no longer make decisions received a boost today when the state's Roman Catholic bishops suggested that they would not explicitly oppose it.
Speaking at a hearing held by the Assembly Health Committee, Bishop Howard J. Hubbard of Albany said that the New York State Catholic Conference had not formulated a final position on the bill.
But he took pains to say that the legislation would not necessarily conflict with church doctrine.


AC&amp; R Sheds A Seiko Account
AC&amp; R Advertising and the Seiko Corporation of America said yesterday that they had decided to part ways on the watch company's Pulsar and Jaz Paris accounts, with combined billings estimated at $3 million.
AC&amp; R will continue to handle three other Seiko brands -- Lassale, Lorus and Seiko -- with combined billings estimated at $22 million.
Harry J. Koenig, AC&amp; R's vice chairman and chief operating officer in New York, said that since Pulsar and Jaz Paris had grown in the last couple of years, it was felt that "it's time they emerge from under the shadow of the Seiko brand."


Brady Warns Clinton On Spending for Jobs
In blunt advice to President-elect Bill Clinton, Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady said today that the economy was gathering steam and warned that it would be unwise for the new president to spur growth through a short-term program of increased Federal spending.
Though job gains are weak, "I don't think you ought to go at job creation by investment spending of the Federal Government," he said in an interview a week before he leaves office.
"The Government doesn't create jobs. Two-thirds of the jobs are created by small business." He urged Mr.
Clinton to rely on exports and small business for job creation.


Uno Restaurant Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Attackers Kill 3 Cambodians At a Voter Registration Post
Two Cambodians working for the United Nations were killed along with a young girl when unidentified men attacked a voter registration post in northwest Cambodia with rockets and rifle fire, the United Nations said today.


Sallie Mae Notes
The Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, yesterday offered $500 million of floating-rate notes due in 1998 priced to yield 35 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point, more than the three-month Treasury bill.
Underwriters were led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Noncallable through maturity, the notes will pay interest quarterly, with the interest accrued from the settlement date on Jan. 21 and adjusted weekly.
Late yesterday, the three-month Treasury bill was yielding about 3.04 percent.


Foreign Affairs; Iraq, What Next?
Good.
The U.S. and friends finally rebuked Saddam Hussein in language he seems to comprehend.
But Bill Clinton should not expect that the joint air attack -- a rather modest one at that -- will end the Iraqi bad man's insults and evasions of U.N. resolutions.
Nor will these rare rebukes dissuade Saddam from continuing cat and mouse games, thus diddling and distracting the new President as he has the outgoing one.
Worse, Saddam may now be ready to go beyond marginal provocations and present Mr.
Clinton with a fiendishly tough and intricate choice between another war and "peace."


Board of Education Votes A School-Choice Program
The New York City Board of Education voted last night to give parents across the city the right to choose any city public school for their children -- space permitting -- creating one of the largest school-choice programs in the country.
The plan was approved in a unanimous vote despite fears by some educators and watchdog groups that it could worsen conditions in the city's most troubled schools, discriminate against poor parents who cannot afford to pay the cost of transportation, and stifle creativity in some of the city's 32 local school districts.


Mr. Florio's Call for 'Real Reform'
To hear New Jersey's Jim Florio tell it, life as a Democratic Governor with a Republican Legislature is just a bowl of cherries.
Though the Republicans passed a budget and a tax cut over his veto last year, his State of the State address was a hymn to harmony.
Focused on economic development, it proposed little that Republicans found objectionable.
But his "first priority" -- "real reform" in campaign funding -- will test both parties.
His leadership on this is laudable.
"Last year one-half million people in our state turned away from both political parties to vote for Ross Perot for President," Mr.
Florio said, "because they didn't believe that government works for them anymore." Among other things, he continued, there is a "growing perception that government is for sale to the highest bidder." The House has approved a campaign reform bill, and the Senate is working on one, but Mr.
Florio declared that neither was "the strong medicine we need."


In Paraguay, Little Has Really Changed
To the Editor:
In "Asuncion Journal: Remember Paraguay? It Is Rejoining the World" (Dec. 24), you do not point out that President Andres Rodriguez is a walking-talking protege of the former dictator, Gen.
Alfredo Stroessner, and that nothing of substance in Paraguay has changed in nearly 40 years.


Intel's Good Fortune Is Surprisingly Good
Wall Street had been expecting good news from the Intel Corporation.
But virtually no one thought it would be this good.
Intel, the largest semiconductor maker in the world, reported today that its fourth-quarter profits had more than doubled.
The surge was driven by runaway sales of personal computers that predominately use Intel's chips.
For investors, Intel's results were cause for celebration.
The company's stock soared $8.125 today, closing at $110.125 in over-the-counter trading.
Most Profitable in the World
"They've clearly confirmed that they are the most profitable semiconductor company in the world," said Millard J. Phelps, an analyst with Hambrecht &amp; Quist.
He said that in 1993 Intel would probably make more profit than the combined earnings of all the other semiconductor companies that sell their chips for use by other manufacturers.


Assemblymen Apologize to Female Colleague
Two New York State Assemblymen admitted yesterday that they had made improper comments to Assemblywoman Earlene H. Hill, who had cited the incidents as examples of sexual harassment in the State Legislature.
Assemblyman Harvey Weisenberg of Long Beach, L.I., left, said he had been "totally insensitive" when he said that he often thinks of sex when he sees Ms.
Hill.
And Assemblyman Ivan C. Lafayette of Queens, right, admitted that he insisted to Ms.
Hill that she climb over him to get to her seat three years ago.
Ms.
Hill shocked her colleagues earlier this week when she disclosed three incidents of harassment by male members of the Legislature.
No one has admitted to the third incident in which Ms.
Hill said that an assemblyman threatened to throw her out of a window after she rebuffed his advances.
Article, page B4.


Centennial Cellular reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Art in Review
'This Is the American Earth'
American Museum of Natural History
Central Park West at 79th Street
Through Jan. 24
"This Is the American Earth," an exhibition of text and photographs presented in San Francisco in 1955 under the aegis of the Sierra Club, was a landmark event in the environmentalist movement in the United States.
Organized by the photographer Ansel Adams and Nancy New hall, a critic, curator and editor, the show offered a poetic evocation of the beauties of the American land, as well as a condemnation of the damage done to it by the growth of cities and the spread of industry.
With allusive texts by Newhall and photographs by Adams, Eliot Porter, Minor White and other artists, the show was a hit, traveling to 20 other cities here and later to Europe; in 1960, an edited version of the show was published in the first of the lavish picture books for which the Sierra Club has become famous.


At Home Abroad; A Different President
Imagine a President who under the country's Constitution has no executive power and must stay out of politics -- but who by force of character achieves a popular moral leadership.
That unlikely description fits Mary Robinson, President of Ireland and one of the most remarkable heads of state in the world today.
When I spoke with her, I began by saying awkwardly that I knew there were limits on what she could say.


Betting the Farm on the Capricious Consumer
This is the time of year when the Garden State's vegetable farmers begin their spring planting, setting out uncounted thousands of seeds under acres of greenhouse glass.
Midweek found many of them at the annual New Jersey Vegetable Growers' Association at the Taj Mahal casino, where the talk was about the annual gamble that absorbs them all: what will the grocery shoppers want this year?
Will it be the slender Oriental eggplant or the imposing white ghost buster, only two of the six eggplants and 75 varieties of vegetables that Robert J. Matarazzo is starting as greenhouse seedlings, to be transplanted to his fields in Belvidere in April.
Should John Formisani put out more escarole or endive this year, or should it be radicchio or arugula, to make up for five and a half acres of romaine lettuce he plowed under last fall, when the price at the Vineland Produce Auction fell so low that it barely covered the cost of the carton?
Will anise be this year's star herb, the next cilantro, which was the next basil?


Bridge
How a bottom-seeded team with few hopes of success pulled off an upset.
If you are the bottom-seeded team out of 32 in a knockout event, and have to play the defending champions and top seed in the first round, the odds against your surviving are long indeed.
They become a little shorter if your opponents are missing some key players, but realistically you have little hope.


Corrections
Because of a production error, a sports article yesterday about the ailing hockey star Mario Lemieux, under the headline "Lemieux Is Described as 'Stunned' but Upbeat," was omitted from some copies.
Its place was taken by a duplicate of an adjoining article that described his illness, Hodgkin's disease, and the athlete's probable treatment.
Readers wishing copies of the correct article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Diner's Journal
French and Asian at Vong
Foie gras and cod may not be staples of Thai cuisine, but if you forgo authenticity and revel in the fireworks of flavor at Vong, the new French-Asian restaurant owned by Jean-Georges Vongerichten, a provocative experience awaits.
The four-week-old dining room, in the so-called lipstick building on Third Avenue at 54th Street in Manhattan, is as exotic as the food.
The former sleek white Italian restaurant Toscana has been transformed into a raucous burnt-orange lair trimmed in gold leaf, with bold collages, romantic little booths and dramatic lighting.


Art in Review
Deborah Kass
Fiction-Nonfiction
21 Mercer Street (at Grand Street)
SoHo
Through tomorrow
In this wittily deadpan show, Deborah Kass wraps up feminist critique and homage in a single neat package.
The work is based on Andy Warhol's silk-screen celebrity images from the 60's.
But in her series "The Jewish Jackies," Ms.
Kass replaces Warhol's Jackies and Marilyns with a profile of Barbra Streisand, and for Warhol's figure of Elvis, she substitutes Ms.
Streisand dressed in male attire for the film "Yentl."


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Clinton's Headaches: A World Afflicted by Wars and Poverty -- Japan and East Asia; A Rising Sun; Crises-in-Waiting
While Bill Clinton was elected President pledging to focus on the American economy like a "laser beam," his attention to domestic issues may be diverted by foreign affairs, a point brought home since the election by events in Iraq, Somalia and Bosnia.
Here is a region-by-region look at the world, showing some of key issues that the new President is likely to face.
For all of what Bush Administration officials describe as their foreign policy successes elsewhere, the concede that they are leaving Mr.
Clinton with an overarching problem in Asia: a Japan policy that is in disarray, with few fresh ideas about how to deal with America's biggest economic competitor.
The trade deficit, after declining temporarily, is almost at record levels -- nearly $50 billion in 1992.
With Japan in the midst of one of its steepest economic declines in years, the chances for a boost in imports of American goods this year are virtually nil.
And the Japanese fear a backlash that will lead to unilateral American action to restrict Japanese imports, poisoning early relations with the new Administration.
Lurking beneath the surface is resentment at the failure of the Bush Administration to focus on Japanese concerns; as Secretary of State, James A. Baker 3d spent more time visiting Ulan Bator than Tokyo.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Clinton's Headaches: A World Afflicted by Wars and Poverty -- Japan and East Asia; A Rising Sun; Crises-in-Waiting
While Bill Clinton was elected President pledging to focus on the American economy like a "laser beam," his attention to domestic issues may be diverted by foreign affairs, a point brought home since the election by events in Iraq, Somalia and Bosnia.
Here is a region-by-region look at the world, showing some of key issues that the new President is likely to face.
For all of what Bush Administration officials describe as their foreign policy successes elsewhere, the concede that they are leaving Mr.
Clinton with an overarching problem in Asia: a Japan policy that is in disarray, with few fresh ideas about how to deal with America's biggest economic competitor.
The trade deficit, after declining temporarily, is almost at record levels -- nearly $50 billion in 1992.
With Japan in the midst of one of its steepest economic declines in years, the chances for a boost in imports of American goods this year are virtually nil.
And the Japanese fear a backlash that will lead to unilateral American action to restrict Japanese imports, poisoning early relations with the new Administration.
Lurking beneath the surface is resentment at the failure of the Bush Administration to focus on Japanese concerns; as Secretary of State, James A. Baker 3d spent more time visiting Ulan Bator than Tokyo.


I.B.M. Loses Triple-A Rating
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation yesterday dropped I.B.M. from the dwindling ranks of AAA-rated corporations.
It also said it was reviewing the creditworthiness of the parent companies of United Airlines, American Airlines and Delta Air Lines for a possible downgrade.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that are to close soon:
Closing This Weekend
MARC CHAGALL'S JEWISH THEATER MURALS, Guggenheim Museum SoHo, 575 Broadway, at Prince Street.
Through Sunday.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 10 P.M.; Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: adults, $6; children under 12, free.
Information: (212) 423-3500.
"CULTURES AT CROSSROADS: SOUTHEAST ASIAN TEXTILES FROM THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL GALLERY," Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street.
Through Sunday.
Today, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: adults, $2; children and the elderly, $1.
Information: (212) 288-6400.
"MASTERWORKS FROM THE MUSEE DES BEAUX-ARTS, LILLE," Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82nd Street.
Through Sunday.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; Sunday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
Admission: adults, $6; students and the elderly, $3.
Information: (212) 535-7710.
"THE TIMES," Long Wharf Theater, New Haven.
A musical by Joe Keenan and Brad Ross.
Through Sunday.
Tonight at 8 P.M; tomorrow at 4 P.M. and 8:30 P.M.; Sunday at 2 P.M. and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $27 and $32.
Information: (203) 787-4282.
Closing Next Weekend
"ALEXANDER JACKSON DAVIS (1803-1892): AMERICAN ARCHITECT," Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82nd Street.
Through Jan. 24.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
Closed on Monday.
Admission: adults, $6; students and the elderly, $3.
Information: (212) 535-7710.
"PATHWAYS OF TRADITION: INDIAN INSIGHTS INTO INDIAN WORLDS," National Museum of the American Indian, Heye Center at United States Custom House, 1 Bowling Green, lower Manhattan.
Through Jan. 24.
Hours: Daily, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free admission.
Information: (212) 283-2420.
"THIS IS THE AMERICAN EARTH," American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street.
Through Jan. 24.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; Sunday through Thursday 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.
Admission: adults, $5; children, $2.50.
Information: (212) 769-5800.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
New tax regulations effective today have turned what had been a routine calculation into an uncertain exercise for millions of taxpayers who must estimate quarterly tax payments.  [ Page D1. ]
Retail sales climbed 1.2 percent in December, confirming a banner holiday selling season, and producer price inflation rose just two-tenths of 1 percent.
But new unemployment claims rose.  [ D1. ]


Gerald Ames; Author, 86
Gerald Ames, who wrote more than 50 children's books on science and magic, many of which were translated into other languages, died on Jan. 2 at his home in Manhattan.
He was 86.
He died of heart failure, said his wife and co-author, Rose Wyler.


Baseball; Gooden in a Minor Car Accident
Dwight Gooden suffered minor head and chest injuries yesterday when he was involved in a single-car crash in St.
Petersburg, Fla., according to officials with the Mets and the St.
Petersburg police.
Gooden, who was driving his 1991 Ford Explorer, was forced off a rain-slickened street by another car shortly before 3 P.M., the police said.
Gooden's vehicle struck a mail storage box, and he was taken by ambulance to Bayfront Hospital, where he was examined and treated, according to the Mets and Gooden's agent.


New Sponsor Calls for Unity Over Irish Parade
The group that won the permit to run this year's St.
Patrick's Day parade invited the event's traditional participants yesterday to join in and said it would ask John Cardinal O'Connor to help head off a possible boycott over the inclusion of a gay Irish group.
The gestures appeared to be part of a move to isolate the parade's traditional organizer, the Manhattan chapter of the Ancient Order of Hibernians, which has sponsored the parade for more than 150 years.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the awarding of the Presidential Medal of Freedom to former President Ronald Reagan referred incorrectly in some editions to Caspar W. Weinberger.
He was Mr.
Reagan's Secretary of Defense, not of State.


Islamic Militants, Pushed Aside, Express Anger in Somali Port
In a quiet open-air mosque here, less than a hundred yards from where American soldiers have set up a command center, Abdurahman Ali Jama sat stiffly on a tattered rug, searching for the right words to express his anger.
"The way I see it," said Mr.
Jama, a leader of the Islamic Union, Somalia's militant fundamentalist sect, "the Americans are an occupation force."


Anti-Immigrant Attitude Starts in Washington; Plenty Here Already
To the Editor:
"Canada's policies will still be more liberal than those of the United States," you state in your Dec. 22 report on Canada's new immigration law, and "Canada assesses applicants on the basis of professional, educational and financial backgrounds." But our Federal laws reserve relatively small numbers for professionals and the highly skilled.


Miscellany
*
Two Long Island-based agencies, Lowell/Harrison Inc. in Rockville Centre, and Robert Scott Advertising Inc. in Valley Stream, merged to form Lowell/Harrison/Leifer Inc., Rockville Centre.
The new shop, with 12 employees, will have combined billings estimated to exceed $5.6 million.
John Harrison, former president at Lowell/Harrison, was named president, and Herb Leifer, former president at Robert Scott, was named executive vice president and creative director. *
Bride's &amp; Your New Home, New York, said its February/March issue, at 1,048 pages, exceeded by two pages the record the magazine set last year for the largest single issue of an American magazine.


PUEBLO INTERNATIONAL PLANS TO EXPLORE ALTERNATIVES
Pueblo International, a food retailer and videotape rental concern, said it had retained the First Boston Corporation to explore various alternatives, including a public offering, a recapitalization or a sale of the company.
Pueblo had been publicly traded until it was taken private in 1988 in a management-led buyout sponsored by First Boston and the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.
Pueblo International has 55 supermarkets and 19 Blockbuster Video stores in Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands and Florida.
It also has real estate assets.


Review/Film; Did She Use Her Body As a Murder Weapon?
What to do about poor Madonna?
After gaining screen credibility with sharp, funny performances in smallish roles in "Dick Tracy" and "A League of Their Own," and as the great mocking Queen Bee in her own documentary, "Truth or Dare," she lands back at square one in "Body of Evidence," a sluggish courtroom melodrama relieved only by unintenional laughter.
As major corporate decisions go, "Body of Evidence" ranks with the Edsel.
It's not going anywhere.
As a movie, it looks as if it wanted to be "Basic Instinct," though it winds up more like "Ilsa, She-Wolf of the SS."


Xircom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Principal's Legacy: Hope Mixed With Despair; Red Hook Struggles to Prove That an Educator's Violent Death Was Not in Vain
The shooting at the Red Hook Houses started a few minutes after midnight Friday.
Pop.
Pop.
Pop.
At least six quick pops.
Jennie Martinez listened to the shots and went to sleep.
Over the years, Mrs.
Martinez has learned to live with the dangers beyond her door.
When she walks her two children the three blocks to Public School 15, she says, she is always ready to throw them to the ground and cover them.


Many Arabs See 'Double Standard' . . .
Arab reaction to the allied air raid on Iraq was muted today, reflecting little concern for Iraq but focusing on what several leading Arab figures described as a double standard in applying United Nations sanctions to Arabs and non-Arabs.
Syria, Jordan and the Palestinians bemoaned the West's stern position in dealing with Iraq's violations of United Nations resolutions, while overlooking infractions by other countries, particularly Israel and Yugoslavia.


Federal Express Pilots Vote for Union
The Air Line Pilots Association, the largest pilot union in the airline industry, won a major victory yesterday when pilots at the Federal Express Corporation voted to be represented by the union.
The move was a defeat for Federal Express, the nation's largest air carrier of documents, packages and heavy air freight, which has worked hard to keep its work force nonunion.
The company is based in Memphis, where unions have had a difficult time winning support.


Pro Basketball; Nets Hand Reed Keys to the Kingdom
Calling it a very important day in the team's history, Nets executives today announced that Willis Reed has been given a three-year contract extension, effectively making him the team's personnel man until 1997.
The extension gave Reed both financial and job security, which a person close to the situation who requested anonymity estimated to be worth about $300,000 a year.
Reed's title is now executive vice president/basketball and general manager, and the promotion includes other responsibilities besides those involving basketball.
The Nets hope to use Reed's outgoing personality -- as well as his Hall of Fame credentials -- to expand his duties into the community affairs and marketing areas of the franchise.


Parametric Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Pro Football; N.F.L.P.A. Soon To Be a Union
The National Football League Players Association said yesterday that it had begun the process of becoming a union again so its members, the players, can ratify the new labor agreement reached with the league Jan. 6.
The association decertified itself on Nov. 8, 1989 so it could legally file lawsuits against the N.F.L., challenging its rules against free agency.
The move helped force the league to agree on a new labor contract.


Italian Art Songs
The New York Festival of Song is to present a program of Italian art songs by Donizetti, Mascagni, Toscanini, Puccini, Dallapiccola and others, Sunday at 5 P.M. in the Renee Weiler Concert Hall of the Greenwich House Music School, 46 Barrow Street, Greenwich Village.
Cyndia Sieden, a soprano, and Michael Barrett, a pianist, are the principal performers.
Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 242-4770.


Trenton Adds Keno Game to Gamblers' Menu
Hoping to realize $100 million more annually in lottery revenue, New Jersey today approved adding computerized keno, a nearly instant form of gambling, to its assortment of numbers games.
Starting in the spring, keno will be available in 200 to 300 establishments like restaurants, taverns and convenience stores in eight counties, said Eugene McNany, chairman of the State Lottery Commission.
If this trial run is successful, he said, the game could be expanded to as many as 2,200 agents in all 21 counties.


Administrator for Maxwell Considers Macmillan Sale
The administrator for the bankrupt Maxwell Communication Corporation said yesterday that the company would consider selling Macmillan Inc. to other companies rather than offering stock in it to the public.
Simon Scott, a spokesman for Price Waterhouse, the bankruptcy administrator of Maxwell Communication, said last night in a telephone interview from London that his firm's initial strategy had been to sell Official Airline Guides, another of Maxwell's United States property,and take Macmillan public.
Bass Bid Prompted Decision
But in November, the Texas billionaire Robert M. Bass offered $1.2 billion for both properties.
While Price Waterhouse found that offer low, Mr.
Scott said it had prompted interest in bids for the properties and that those bids would now be considered.
Among the companies rumored to be interested are Paramount Communications, which owns Simon &amp; Schuster.


Pro Basketball; Time for Basics: Take Ball and Put in Hoop
Since Jan. 1, the Knicks are 2-4, and they have scored more than 100 points just once.
Needless to say, they have not had a happy new year.
"It's disturbing how we're playing right now, both on the road and at home, to be honest," said guard Doc Rivers, after the Knicks absorbed a 108-92 beating in Denver on Tuesday.
The Nuggets had lost 16 of their previous 17 games.


The Spoken Word
POETRY READING, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
A reading by Julie Patton, tonight at 10.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.
SLIDE SHOW AND WALKING TOURS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street.
Sunday.
Slide shows and lectures: $4.
Walking tours: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Workshop: $10.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street.
"Papermaking in the History of Art," by Mindell Dubansky, today at 11 A.M.; "French Painting of the Second Empire", today at 3 P.M.; "The Costume Collections at the Metropolitan Museum," by Beth Alberty, today at 6 P.M.; "Portraits of American Artists," by Marvin Schwartz, today at 6 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $6; children and the elderly, $3.
Information: (212) 535-7710.
GALLERY TALKS, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"Jean-Michel Basquiat," by Lisa Panzera, tomorrow at 2 P.M.; "The Geometric Tradition in American Art, 1930-1990," by Ms.
Panzera, tomorrow at 3:30 P.M.; "Photography: Expanding the Collection," by Ms.
Panzera, Sunday at 2 P.M.; "Agnes Martin," by Ms.
Panzera, Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $6; students and the elderly, $4.
Information: (212) 570-3611.


SPORTS PEOPLE: Soccer; Year's Best Collegians
BRAD FRIEDEL , the goalkeeper for the United States Olympic team and U.C.L.A., and MIA HAMM , a forward at North Carolina, Hamm were selected last night as winners of the Hermann Trophy, awarded to the best college soccer players in the United States.
Friedel, a junior from Bay Village, Ohio, allowed 10 goals and had 10 shutouts as U.C.L.A. went 13-3-3.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Top of the Ticket; Gore Finds His Role Shrinking Since Campaign, Article Says
Since the Presidential election, Al Gore has been given a sharply reduced voice in Bill Clinton's transition arrangements and choices for the Cabinet, and faces an even smaller role as Vice President when the Administration gets under way, according to an article in The New York Times Magazine this Sunday.
While Mr.
Gore and Mr.
Clinton had an outwardly close partnership during the campaign, there were strains that had to be smoothed over for the ticket's sake, and there are new signs that the relationship will not be as close in the White House and that Mr.
Gore is chafing at his diminished status, the article says.


Allstate Cuts Back In Florida
The Allstate Insurance Company announced yesterday that it would stop selling homeowner insurance to most new customers in Florida and that it was studying cutbacks in coverage in coastal sections of the New York area.
The move is a further sign that the insurance industry, after suffering more than $16 billion in losses from Hurricane Andrew, is cutting back on property coverage along America's most storm-prone coasts.
Previously, cutbacks were announced by State Farm and other insurers in Florida and by the Travelers Corporation in the New York region.


First Chicago reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Molson, No. 1 in Canada, Sells Stake to Miller
Seeking to enhance its position in a sluggish domestic beer market and energize its presence internationally, the Miller Brewing Company has agreed to buy a 20 percent stake in Molson Breweries, Canada's leading maker of beer, for $273 million.
With it, Miller would get the rights to import and distribute Molson, as well as other brands Molson distributes, in the United States.


Robert G. High, 46, Securities Executive And Puzzle Designer
Robert Gordon High, a Connecticut securities executive and a devotee and promoter of go, the ancient Asian game of strategy, died last Friday in an accident in Chile.
He was 46 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
High, who was also a white-water rafting enthusiast, died while on the first commercial rafting expedition on the Futaleufu River in the southern Chilean Andes.
His raft capsized after entering a canyon, said Michael J. Simon, treasurer of the American Go Association in New York, of which Mr.
High was the new president.


The Historians Are in the Bleachers
The Entourage, as Buzzy calls them, sauntered in just before game time, one by one, Bernie and John and Charles, smiling and waving, Manny and Adam and Casey, as comfortable in this cavernous gym as if it were "Cheers."
Depending on the importance of the game, the weather and aging health, there will be at least a dozen of them, perhaps as many as 50, at an Elizabeth High School basketball game, sitting in clumps of four and five, a few rows up in the center of the wooden stands on the visitor's side.
They like to face the benches, the better to second-guess the coaches, whom they have seen play as youngsters, and study the players, who are young enough to be their grandchildren.


Why Ticket Scalpers Don't Qualify for Entrepreneur Status
To the Editor:
In "Tickets? Supply Meets Demand on Sidewalk" (front page, Dec. 26), you present economic arguments for ticket scalping.
However, the implication is that tickets to the Matisse exhibition at New York's Museum of Modern Art operate under the same economic forces as grain does.


I.R.S. Has Come Up With a New Headache
As if dandelions and crabgrass were sprouting through the snow, tax panic is coming three months early this year.
Today is the quarterly deadline for more than 12 million people, about one in 10 taxpaying Americans, to pay estimated taxes on income for the final three months of 1992.


Health &amp; Rehabilitation Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Charles Tillon, 95, French Communist Who Fought Nazis
Charles Tillon, a Communist leader of the French Resistance and a Cabinet minister under Charles de Gaulle, died Tuesday night.
He was 95.
Family members said Mr. Tillon died at a convalescent home.


Art in Review
Dale Chihuly
Charles Cowles Gallery
420 West Broadway (at Spring Street)
SoHo
Through Jan. 23
Dale Chihuly is one of the few contemporary artists working in glass who have made the crossover from the craft category into the fine arts, and there is no mistaking the objects in this show for anything less than the extravagant sculptural forms they are.


Girl, 10, Is Wounded as Robbers Flee Store
A 10-year-old girl who was playing in front of an Elmhurst bodega was shot in the side and seriously wounded yesterday after three men who had held up the store began firing at its owner as they were leaving, the police said.
The girl, whose name was not made public because of her age, was admitted to the Elmhurst Hospital Center.
She was listed in serious condition last night, a hospital spokesman said.
She lived in the Queens neighborhood close to the store, the Fernandez Grocery at 98-11 Alstyne Avenue near Corona Avenue, the police said.


IMC Fertilizer Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Art in Review
Lee Krasner
'Umber Paintings 1959-1962'
Robert Miller Gallery
41 East 57th Street
Manhattan
Through Jan. 30
This is a moving and beautiful exhibition.
It brings together works from one of the most impressive phases of Lee Krasner's career, when she painted large, emotionally charged abstractions, primarily in black, white and various shades of brown, with just a few hints of the brilliant color that would characterize her later work.


Digital Stock Surges 21% On Report
Stock of the Digital Equipment Corporation surged yesterday as Wall Street reacted to a better-than-expected earnings report.
Analysts had been expecting a loss in excess of $110 million for the company's second fiscal quarter, which ended Dec. 26.
But the company said it had a loss of only $74 million, compared with a loss of $155 million in the corresponding quarter last year.
Revenues surged 6 percent from a year earlier, to $3.7 billion.


Ex-Employee Testifies That G.M. Knew Truck Design Wasn't Safe
A former engineer for the General Motors Corporation told a jury here today that company officials believed in 1983 that the fire-safety design of some of its pickup trucks was "no longer defensible."
The engineer, Ronald E. Elwell, who worked for the auto maker for about 30 years as a safety specialist, also said that some top engineers at G.M. had decided by 1983 that the vehicles' fuel tanks had to be altered.
But the company did not change the design until 1988.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Clinton's Headaches: A World Afflicted by Wars and Poverty -- China; Beijing Awaits Decision on Trade
While Bill Clinton was elected President pledging to focus on the American economy like a "laser beam," his attention to domestic issues may be diverted by foreign affairs, a point brought home since the election by events in Iraq, Somalia and Bosnia.
Here is a region-by-region look at the world, showing some of key issues that the new President is likely to face.
America's relations with China for years to come may be determined by Mr.
Clinton's handling of a single issue in the next six months: extension of "most-favored-nation" trading status for China.
Mr.
Clinton suggested in the campaign that he wanted to add human rights conditions to any extension of this status, which guarantees the low tariffs that are applied to virtually all of the United States' trading partners.
If Mr.
Clinton decides to impose tough conditions that Beijing feels it cannot meet, relations could deteriorate precipitously.


21 Tax Rise For Cigarettes Is Considered
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo plans to propose a 21-cent increase in the 39-cent-per-pack state tax on cigarettes next week to help balance the state budget, discourage smoking and raise revenue for public health needs, Cuomo administration officials said today.
They said the increase in tobacco taxes, which would generate an estimated $180 million, would be the largest source of new revenue in the budget that the Governor is to propose on Tuesday.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Clinton's Headaches: A World Afflicted by Wars and Poverty -- Middle East; Pursuit of Peace In Troubled Lands
While Bill Clinton was elected President pledging to focus on the American economy like a "laser beam," his attention to domestic issues may be diverted by foreign affairs, a point brought home since the election by events in Iraq, Somalia and Bosnia.
Here is a region-by-region look at the world, showing some of key issues that the new President is likely to face.
If only because Saddam Hussein refuses to just go away, President-elect Clinton may find himself dealing more immediately and more deeply than he would have liked with fallout from the Persian Gulf war.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Bergen Brunswig Corp., Orange, Calif., is offering $100 million of 5 5/8 percent notes due 1996 at 99.83 to yield 5.687 percent, and $150 million of 7 3/8 percent debt due in 2003 at 99.26 to yield 7.481 percent through Merrill Lynch.
Both issues are rated Baa-1 by Moody's Investor Service and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
District of Columbia is offering $84.5 million of tax-exempt certificates of participation through Paine Webber Inc.
The certificates are priced to yield 6.10 percent for an issue due 1998, 7 percent for another due in 2003 and 7.50 percent for one due in 2013.
The financing is rated BBB by both S.&amp; P. and Fitch Investors Service. *
First Chicago Corp. is offering $200 million of 7 5/8 percent subordinated notes due 2003 at 99.55 to yield 7.69 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable notes are rated Baa-2 by Moody's, A- by S.&amp; P. and BBB+ by Duff &amp; Phelps Credit Rating. *
PepsicoInc., Purchase.
N.Y., is offering $300 million of 6 1/8 percent notes due 1998 at 99.036 to yield 6.298 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The noncallable notes are rated A-1 by Moody's and A by both S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


METRO DIGEST
MAN ACCUSED OF KIDNAPPING ARRAIGNED  The man accused of holding Katie Beers hostage in an underground bunker was arraigned in a Central Islip, L.I., court on kidnapping charges and held in $500,000 bond.
Hours later, with the 10-year-old girl still in the custody of Suffolk County authorities, her mother said she would press the county to return Katie to her.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  NEW PHILOSOPHY ON ZONING  After years of preserving industrial zoning for thousands of acres of land in the hope that New York City's manufacturing base could be revived, the city's planners say that policy has failed and want to open the land for other, more promising economic uses.
A1.
PARADE GROUP SEEKS COMPROMISE
The group that won the permit to run this year's St.
Patrick's Day parade invited the event's traditional participants to join in and said it would ask John Cardinal O'Connor to help head off a possible boycott.
B2.
GOVERNMENT MOVES AGAINST GOTTI  The Federal Government made its first move to seize the ill-gotten wealth of John Gotti and some of the New York City sites where he and his confederates plotted, toiled and lounged.
It filed a suit that could bring the shutdown of legendary Mafia lairs like the Ravenite Social Club in Little Italy.
B3.
ACQUITTAL IN A CROWN HTS.
CASE  A Brooklyn jury took one hour to acquit a 29-year-old black man of charges that he helped to incite the violence that rocked the neighborhood of Crown Heights in 1991.
The defendant, Raymond Wesley, was never accused of being part of a group who attacked a Hasidic scholar.
B3.
Dinkins meets with black leaders in Crown Heights.
B3.
Noxious gas empties a Queens school.
B3.
Bias charges leveled at Daily News owner.
B3.
High concentrations of lead found in soil beneath the Triborough Bridge.
B7.
REGION
GUN LAW IS PROPOSED To curtail gunrunning and reduce a flood of illegal firearms into the New York City area, three Northeastern Representatives proposed legislation making it a Federal crime to buy more than one handgun within 30 days.
B2.
AGAIN, THE TV LIGHTS COME TO LONG ISLAND  The tall man with the white shirt and suspenders loped into the studio, slipped into his suit jacket, faced the camera and said, "Well, they found Katie Beers." With those five words, and the 59 often-convoluted minutes that followed, Phil Donahue once again transformed a shocking local story into something more.
B4.
SEX ASSAULT TRIAL IN DISARRAY  The Glen Ridge sex assault trial was thrown into disarray today by an unspecified problem with the jury in the Newark courtroom.
B5.
The farmers come to Atlantic City.
B5.
Keno is coming to New Jersey.
B5.
From Oz to Syracuse, a trial.
B6.
Neediest Cases B2
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B5
Chronicle B7


David Letterman Takes a Hike
In his farewell to the "Tonight" show last August, Johnny Carson noted that the earth's population had increased by 2.4 billion during his 30 years on the air, and predicted that half of those people would one day have late-night talk shows.
It's been raining talk shows, as networks vie for younger, more affluent viewers.
Late-night television, once largely ceded to NBC and Carson the Invincible, has become almost as hotly contested as prime time.


Lincoln Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nantucket Industries reports earnings for 13wks to Nov 28


Boxing; Bowe Looks Past Dokes To a Holyfield Rematch
His first fight as heavyweight champion is barely three weeks away, but Riddick Bowe, in the grand plan being drawn up by his manager and confidant, is already looking months ahead, perhaps to a rematch with Evander Holyfield in the fall.
Rock Newman, Bowe's manager, said today that he has already held discussions with Holyfield's representatives about a second fight between the current and the former champions.
Bowe took the title from Holyfield last November in a 12-round decision at Las Vegas, Nev.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Designing Woman; At the Inaugural Balls, Cinderella's the Designer
It is a Cinderella story in a way.
Sarah Phillips always wanted to design clothes, her own collection.
After attending the Parsons School of Design, she worked for other fashion houses, including Ralph Lauren, Yves St.
Laurent and Christian Dior.
Finally, with the encouragement of her husband, Tom Hatch, a sculptor, she put together her own collection in April 1991.
She worked out of their home in lower Manhattan and had the clothes produced in a factory on West 20th Street.


Needed: Answers From Ms. Baird
The revelation that Zoe Baird, President-elect Clinton's choice for Attorney General, hired two illegal aliens sounds like somebody's idea of a bad joke.
But it's no joke.
Ms.
Baird would be the country's chief legal officer, overseeing a vast bureaucracy that includes the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Yet she carried out what appears to be a clear, prolonged violation of the immigration law.
Ms.
Baird and the Clinton staff said there were mitigating circumstances and an attempt to follow proper procedures that made Ms.
Baird's conduct acceptable.
If so, now is the time to make that case, convincingly and rigorously.


Pro Football; D.E.A. Says More Players Are at Risk
A Federal investigation into the illegal trafficking of steroids and human growth hormone that has resulted in the indictments of two National Football League players is continuing, and there were indications in Atlanta yesterday that more players could be arrested in connection with the case.
Eric Moore, an offensive guard for the Giants, and Mark Duckens, a defensive end for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, were arraigned Tuesday in Atlanta and pleaded not guilty to three felony charges involving possession of anabolic steroids and human growth hormone with intent to distribute.
Each charge carries maximum penalties of five years in prison and a $250,000 fine.
The players are both 27 years old and are brothers-in-law.
Each was released on a $10,000 personal-recognizance bond.


Rowan Companies reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gander Mountain reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Anti-Immigrant Attitude Starts in Washington
To the Editor:
Growing evidence of animus against immigrants in the United States is discussed in news articles Dec. 11 and 13.
You report a poll Dec. 15 showing that most Latino immigrants believe there are too many immigrants here.


Oscar, It Seems, Really Is a Grouch
DALE BLUM (yes, her parents were expecting a boy) was expecting no trouble when she chose a name for her new little shop in this old little town.
For 11 years, she was correct.
What's in a name, right?
It's what the name stands for that matters.
Right?
But now Ms.
Blum has attracted the sincere interest of the Hollywood entertainment world, a California community positively brimming with sincerity.


Barnett Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Retail Sales Advance 1.2%; Initial Jobless Claims Jump
In a mixed report that nonetheless confirmed banner holiday merchandising and continuing economic growth, retail sales climbed 1.2 percent in December to stand 8 percent above levels a year earlier, Commerce Department figures showed today.
Automobiles and other durable goods jumped 2.5 percent from November levels while nondurables gained a modest four-tenths of 1 percent.


80 Injured by Noxious Fumes at School in Queens
An invisible cloud of noxious gas spread through a Queens elementary school yesterday morning, injuring 80 students and teachers.
The fumes seeped through the third floor of Public School 111 in Long Island City and spread into classrooms and hallways, forcing students and teachers to evacuate the floor, with some coughing, having difficulty breathing and suffering from nausea.


The Katie Beers Case; Their Day on 'Donahue': Dirty Linen on the Air
The tall man with the white shirt and suspenders loped into the studio, slipped into his suit jacket, faced the camera and said, "Well, they found Katie Beers."
With those five words, and the 59 often-convoluted minutes that followed, Phil Donahue once again transformed a shocking local story into something more.
A story that has been a preoccupation of parents in places like Long Beach, L.I., and Huntington, L.I., suddenly became a preoccupation of parents in places like Long Beach, Calif., and Huntington, W.Va.


Pro Football; Dolphins Learn There's No Sure Thing
They thought it would never end: playoff games, championship games, a Super Bowl coming when they barely were in their 20's.
And then, suddenly, Dan Marino, Mark Clayton and Mark Duper grew older and the playoff games became scarcer.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Clinton's Headaches: A World Afflicted by Wars and Poverty -- The Americas; Haiti, Cuba And Free Trade
While Bill Clinton was elected President pledging to focus on the American economy like a "laser beam," his attention to domestic issues may be diverted by foreign affairs, a point brought home since the election by events in Iraq, Somalia and Bosnia.
Here is a region-by-region look at the world, showing some of key issues that the new President is likely to face.
The Clinton Administration will need a delicate touch in handling the intricate economic issues surrounding the consolidation of the North American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico, and the expected expansion of trade arrangements to other countries in the region.


Loral Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Colleges; Men's Basketball On Short End of Votes
Division I men's basketball programs suffered a significant setback today when delegates to the 87th National Collegiate Athletic Association convention voted down proposals that would have added a fourth full-time assistant coach and would have delayed a cutback in scholarships from 14 to 13.
Despite an emotional plea from Mike Krzyzewski, the Duke University basketball coach, delegates rejected the proposal to add a coach by a vote of 257 to 61.
The scholarship proposal failed, 178-134.


Xilinx Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


24 Candidates Jostle in the Stampede To Be the Next Mayor of Los Angeles
For a job that carries comparatively little formal power and faces daunting urban problems, it is extraordinary how many people want to be the next mayor of Los Angeles.
Twenty-four people have announced their candidacies in the April 20 election to succeed Mayor Tom Bradley.
Mr.
Bradley, at age 74, is retiring after leading the nation's second largest metropolis, after New York, for two decades.


Anti-Immigrant Attitude Starts in Washington; A Vital Distinction
To the Editor:
In "Calls to Restrict Immigration Come From Many Quarters" (The Week in Review, Dec. 13), you document the strong anti-immigrant sentiments of many Americans.
Statements you quote show a public failure to differentiate between immigrants and refugees.


Matrix Service reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


For Muslims in Bombay, Fear Turns to Grief and Rage
The Muslims of this port city, who have suffered the most in the religious frenzy of the last 10 days, find their initial shock now turning to grief and anger.
"It is a pogrom of Muslims, it is a nightmare," said Alyque Padamsee, a Muslim who runs an advertising agency and is also a playwright and actor.


On Stage, and Off
Saks Tells His Story, Angrily
Effectively sundering one of the theater's most successful collaborative teams, Gene Saks, who was fired last week as director of "The Goodbye Girl," the Neil Simon musical now in its pre-Broadway tryout in Chicago, spoke angrily about his dismissal in an interview this week, saying he expected never to work with Mr.
Simon, or his longtime producer, Emanuel Azenberg, again.


Review/Film; Discovering Brotherhood In the Arctic Wilderness
John Berry's film "A Captive in the Land" is the perfect winter movie for people who can't get enough cold, snow, darkness and gloom.
Set in northeast Siberia near the Arctic Circle, where much of it was filmed, it lards a taut, Jack London-like survival story with a sticky dollop of humanistic uplift.
When an American meteorologist (Sam Waterston), bumming a ride in an R.A.F. transport plane over the polar ice cap, spots some aircraft wreckage, he rashly insists on parachuting down with first aid.
Upon landing, he finds only one survivor, a Soviet airman (Aleksandr Potapov) who is too badly injured to walk.
Once they repair to the shell of the crashed plane, a storm closes in and shifts the position of the ice cap on which they are situated, all but dashing their chances of rescue.
Eventually they give up hope of being found, and using the sun to guide them, set out on a desperate journey through the Arctic wilderness toward civilization


State Street Boston reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a request by the exiled Haitian president, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, for a United Nations observer team for Haiti misstated the length of his term in office.
It was nearly eight months, not nine months.
The article also characterized Father Aristide's politics incorrectly.
He was a leftist priest who won election.


Some Iraqi Missile Sites Damaged, U.S. Says, Calling Raid a Success
In their raid on Iraq, American warplanes destroyed only one of the four Iraqi surface-to-air missile batteries they targeted, the Pentagon said today.
Despite that assessment, the Pentagon characterized the raid as a success, saying that Iraq had been forced to disassemble the three other missile batteries and that two of Iraq's stationary air-defense command sites had been seriously damaged.


RSI Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Review/Dance; Colleagues and Pupils Honor Alwin Nikolais
As an internationally known choreographer and modern-dance pioneer, Alwin Nikolais has received the Kennedy Center Honors, as well as medals from more than one Government, beginning with the French, for whom he set up a contemporary dance center in the 1970's.
But on Thursday night, he was honored by those who really count: fellow dancers and choreographers and, above all, the generations of students he has taught since 1948.
The evening was billed as a gala tribute to the 82-year-old Mr.
Nikolais as an artist and for "his 45 years as a master teacher in the art of dance."


National City Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Clinton's Headaches: A World Afflicted by Wars and Poverty -- China; Beijing Awaits Decision on Trade
While Bill Clinton was elected President pledging to focus on the American economy like a "laser beam," his attention to domestic issues may be diverted by foreign affairs, a point brought home since the election by events in Iraq, Somalia and Bosnia.
Here is a region-by-region look at the world, showing some of key issues that the new President is likely to face.
America's relations with China for years to come may be determined by Mr.
Clinton's handling of a single issue in the next six months: extension of "most-favored-nation" trading status for China.
Mr.
Clinton suggested in the campaign that he wanted to add human rights conditions to any extension of this status, which guarantees the low tariffs that are applied to virtually all of the United States' trading partners.
If Mr.
Clinton decides to impose tough conditions that Beijing feels it cannot meet, relations could deteriorate precipitously.


Restaurants
Some restaurants have seasonal specials.
Others have special seasons.
At Voulez-Vous, the neighborly bistro on First Avenue at 76th Street in Manhattan, that season is winter.
If the warmhearted and generous staff does not melt the January ice in your veins, chances are the ingenuous Alsace cooking will: choucroute garnie, cassoulet, bouillabaisse, pot-au-feu, brandade de morue, onion soup and more.
It is surprising that after eight years of conscientious, low-key existence, Voulez-Vous remains largely a neighborhood restaurant.
On a recent evening, a family of five lingered over dinner as the owner, Jacques Rameckers, stopped by to chat with the parents and affectionately ruffle the hair of their little boy.
When an older couple came in from the cold, they were greeted warmly and escorted to what appeared to be their regular table.
It's that kind of place.


Art in Review
Wilhelm Lehmbruck
Michael Werner
21 East 67th Street
Manhattan
Through tomorrow
Although Wilhelm Lehmbruck (1881-1919) made paintings and prints whose violent and sexual content bring to mind Die Brucke, he was different from other German artists of his generation in the restraint and introspection of his work.
He was primarily a sculptor who strove to connect the academic tradition from which he came with a style that would be distinctly modern.
At one point he emulated Rodin, and then he settled on the smooth, attenuated, Mannerist forms for which he became known.
He was particularly interested in industrial materials, and he made variations of certain motifs, like the standing female nude, in plaster, bronze and marble, experimenting with various patinas.


Octel Communciations reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dyersburg Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Pennsylvania R.E.I.T.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Dump Hussein
So the coalition's bombers are at it again.
The measured strikes by the U.S., France and Britain at air defense targets in southern Iraq should have been no surprise to anyone, least of all Saddam Hussein.
It would be surprising, however, if the attacks achieved the stated goal of persuading Saddam Hussein to stop attempting to undermine the territorial and military terms imposed by the victors in the Persian Gulf war.
For him, the benefits of showing the Arab world he can still thumb his nose at the West outweigh the costs of losing a few radar and missile sites.
Soon -- within a few months, at best -- Mr.
Hussein will resume his nibbling.
Then the allies, including the new team in Washington, will respond, as they must, with air strikes against targets that he values more.
Those responses are unlikely to be decisive, and the round of move and countermove will continue.
Saddam Hussein and the coalition are locked in a ritual dance from which there is no easy exit.
The coalition will thus pay a price for failing to press the 1991 war to the point of toppling him.
But at that time carrying the ground war into Baghdad's streets seemed likely to cost too many coalition and Iraqi lives and to be unnecessary.
Surely, it was assumed, the Iraqi armed forces, with critical help from Washington, would purge the leader who had brought them so catastrophic a defeat.
That calculation did not reckon with Mr.
Hussein's ability to coerce continued loyalty from an inner circle ruthless enough to suppress opposition.
The means of persuasion at the coalition's disposal today are far fewer than they were two years ago.
Renewing the ground war is not among them.
Nor need it be: the available instruments are sufficient to get two clear messages across.
The first message is for the Iraqi military establishment.
Deprived of modern air defenses, its forces are acutely vulnerable to air attack.
It should understand that the strikes will continue, and be more and more costly, until the nibbling stops.
The second message is the same, but it is for the Iraqi people.
The coalition will not attack them directly.
Nor does it want to attack military targets in their midst.
But the Iraqis should realize that the comfortable life they enjoyed before 1990 will be impossible so long as Saddam Hussein continues his provocations.
That means maintaining the blockade, at least to the point where only essential medical supplies and foods can enter Iraq.
It means continuing the embargo on oil sales and thus denying Iraq the money needed to import anything of value.
For middle- and upper-class Iraqis, it means no travel abroad.
Such responses should lead the Iraqi military and people to realize that time is not on Saddam Hussein's side.
Obviously, the coalition cannot stop all embargo- and blockade-busting.
But sufficient pressure can be maintained for a very long time, particularly if substantial oil sales are prevented.
Iraqis must realize that Mr.
Hussein has reduced Iraq to the status of marginal actor in the Middle East; by continuing to exert steady military, political and economic pressure, the coalition can insure that it will remain one.
Mr.
Hussein's posturing in the prison he has made of his country should not prevent the Clinton Administration and its allies from focusing on the issue that will most affect the Middle East's future stability: the continuing effort to bring about peace between Israel and its neighbors.


F.C.C. Acts on a New Pager, Stretching Reach of the Phone
In a move that could make it harder to avoid telephone calls, the Federal Communications Commission today assigned a small block of radio frequencies for new satellite paging services that would let people send and receive brief messages anywhere on the globe.
The system would also make it easier to track stolen cars and find lost hikers.
Using about two dozen small, relatively inexpensive satellites that orbit a few hundred miles over the earth, the services are expected to let people communicate with hand-held devices that cost a few hundred dollars each.
They could also serve as tracking devices, pinpointing within one mile the location of a person or a vehicle with such a device.


The Stampede From a Tax Cut
The rush of the Democrats away from the middle-class tax cut is beginning to look like one of those wildebeest migrations on a National Geographic special.
But maybe the herd is moving in the right direction, provided President-elect Clinton is clear about his economic and political destinations.
The movement of the Congressional Democrats and his own budget appointees is a recognition that as a candidate, Mr.
Clinton made promises he knew he couldn't keep.
He pledged to spend more than $200 billion on infrastructure and training, cut the deficit in half and reduce taxes on the middle class -- without gutting a major Federal program.


BancTec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Queens Families Told of Lead Peril Under Bridge
Tests of soil in a backyard beneath the Triborough Bridge in Queens have found high concentrations of lead, including levels that exceed those considered safe by the Federal Government, the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority announced yesterday.
The authority said it would clean up the contaminated soil and conduct further tests near more than 400 homes just north of the bridge in Astoria.
In the meantime, the authority recommended that homeowners near the bridge forbid their children from playing in their yards.


POVERTY TERMED A DIVORCE FACTOR
Poverty is a major factor contributing to the breakup of American families, the Census Bureau said today.
More generally, it said, stresses associated with economic insecurity and financial need make it more likely that families will dissolve.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  CLINTON RETREATS ON HAITIANS
Fearing an exodus of Haitians to the U.S., Bill Clinton announced that he would at least temporarily abandon a campaign pledge and would continue the Bush Administration's policy of forcibly returning Haitians who try to immigrate to the U.S.
A1  Advocates of Haitian refugees expressed disappointment.
A2


First Michigan Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Judge Sees Plan by White House To Defy Orders and Purge Data
A Federal judge said today that the Bush Administration has indicated that it will begin destroying White House and National Security Council computer tapes on Friday, in defiance of his orders.
The judge, Charles R. Richey, today issued his second order in seven days demanding that the Administration preserve the records, which investigators say may be relevant to the Iran-contra affair.
But he said in an interview this afternoon that court papers filed by the Administration, which leaves office Wednesday, led him to believe that it would begin erasing the material on Friday morning despite his rulings.


Apple Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Lawyer Recalls No Doubt on Nazi Guard
Testifying in a Federal court inquiry into the Justice Department's investigation of John Demjanjuk 15 years ago, a former Government Nazi hunter said today that he did not recall sharing any of the misgivings about the case against the man accused of having been a Nazi concentration camp guard.
In fact, Norman A. Moscowitz, who had been a lawyer with the department's Office of Special Investigations, said he recalled mostly how compelling the accounts were of some of the Jewish survivors of the Treblinka death camp who identified photographs of Mr.
Demjanjuk.
They said the photographs were of the brutal and hated guard called Ivan the Terrible, who operated the camp's gas chambers.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Clinton's Headaches: A World Afflicted by Wars and Poverty -- The Americas; Haiti, Cuba And Free Trade
While Bill Clinton was elected President pledging to focus on the American economy like a "laser beam," his attention to domestic issues may be diverted by foreign affairs, a point brought home since the election by events in Iraq, Somalia and Bosnia.
Here is a region-by-region look at the world, showing some of key issues that the new President is likely to face.
The Clinton Administration will need a delicate touch in handling the intricate economic issues surrounding the consolidation of the North American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico, and the expected expansion of trade arrangements to other countries in the region.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
2.87
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.98
3.78
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.13
3.87
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.26
6.41
6.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.39
7.43
7.66
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.46
8.46
8.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.38
6.39
6.66
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Southwestern Public Service reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Cara Operations reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 6


Wheat Prices Keep Rising As Corn and Soybeans Fall
Wheat prices continued to rise today, based on a revitalized export market and shortages of high-quality wheat.
Corn and soybean prices fell as investors liquidated bullish positions.
Buying of wheat picked up late in the session at the Chicago Board of Trade, carrying the March contract 4 cents higher, to $3.79 1/4 a bushel.


Steel Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Microsoft Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Morgan (J.P.) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Top Honor to Gymnast
MISSY MARLOWE, the Utah gymnast who won four individual N.C.A.A. titles, has been named winner of the Broderick Cup as the nation's outstanding college female athlete.
Marlowe is the first gymnast to win the award, which is voted upon by N.C.A.A. schools.
She set N.C.A.A. championship meet records with her scores in the all-around (39.65), beam (9.90) and floor exercise (9.975).
She won the uneven bars with a score of 9.925 while leading Utah to the 1992 N.C.A.A. team title. (AP)


Unitel Video Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


ICF International reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Hilton Hotels reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Charles Tillon, 95, French Communist Who Fought Nazis
Charles Tillon, a Communist leader of the French Resistance and a Cabinet minister under Charles de Gaulle, died Tuesday night.
He was 95.
Family members said Mr. Tillon died at a convalescent home.


Government Sues to Seize Gotti's Assets
The Federal Government made its first move yesterday to seize the ill-gotten wealth of John Gotti and some of the New York City sites where he and his Mafia confederates plotted, toiled and lounged.
It filed a civil forfeiture suit that could bring the shutdown of such legendary mob lairs as the Ravenite Social Club in Little Italy, one of Mr.
Gotti's headquarters, where Federal agents successfully eavesdropped on him to build a case that eventually led to his conviction and imprisonment.


Winter Cuts for Summer Fruit


It's March in January, With Madness to Prove It
If this is Thursday, it must be the Swamp.
No, wait.
Monday was East Rutherford, 07073, where Seton Hall took another positive step toward . . . where?
Tuesday was Ann Arbor, where Alan Henderson's game-winning basket and last-second block of a Chris Webber rebound helped Indiana beat Michigan.
Wednesday was Music City, U.S.A., where the scoreboard in big, old Memorial Gymnasium screamed "MEMORIAL MAGIC," and Vanderbilt smoked Kentucky two days after the Wildcats had ascended to No. 1, and the raised maple floor became a stage that bore a black-and-gold resemblance to Times Square on New Year's Eve.
Duke loses at Georgia Tech on Sunday.
Kentucky inherits the top ranking and falls three days later.


Eastex Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Park Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Vest (H.D.) Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Abbott Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Richter's Confidence Melts Like Ice in July
The first day he didn't dress for a Rangers game, Mike Richter arrived at Madison Square Garden prepared to play and found Corey Hirsch in the locker room and his own name absent from a posted lineup list.
It was a surprise -- a shock, really -- and Richter had no idea how to make sense of it, his confidence already damaged by Roger Neilson's decision to pull him out of the goal after more than one shaky start.
Neilson, who lost his job as Rangers' head coach 12 days ago, often did things like that.
He had a room full of players who believed they should be playing, and he let those who would not learn the news from a lineup posted on the locker room wall -- sometimes after the morning skate on game days.
In Richter, he had a goalie who plays brilliantly when confident and erratically when not, and he responded to Richter's on-ice difficulties with confidence-killers.
He banished him to the stands in favor of Hirsch (who never played a minute) and failed to talk to him for days.


No Headline
"What we're celebrating is I'm not being fired. It's very, very strange." -- JAY LENO.  [ C26:4. ]


Crestar Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Record Sales For Microsoft And Apple
Apple Computer Inc. and the Microsoft Corporation, two of the computer industry's hottest rivals, today announced record revenues for their first and second quarters, respectively.
But neither company was able to show the earnings strength that sent technology stocks up on Wednesday in the wake of the Intel Corporation's strong fourth-quarter report.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Washington Talk; Echoing Over Years: Belafonte And Music
For Harry Belafonte, next week's galas prove that history, like Broadway, is capable of staging a good revival.
Thirty-two years ago he stood on another stage at another inauguration and watched artists -- still shivering from the long winter of McCarthyism -- gather in the name of political commitment.
"McCarthyism played havoc in the artistic community," Mr.
Belafonte recalled.
"The Kennedy Administration kind of became the first time that there was a broad response from the arts community to a political experience and a political environment."


Clinton's Headaches: The Unsettled World
While Bill Clinton has pledged to focus on the American economy like a "laser beam," his attention may well be diverted by foreign affairs.
A region-by-region look at the key issues, page A16.


F.B.I.'s Proposal on Wiretaps Criticized by Federal Agency
Nine months after the Federal Bureau of Investigation proposed a law to make the nation's telephones easier to wiretap, the legislative proposal has yet to find a Congressional sponsor.
One reason may be division within the Government over the wisdom of the proposal, according to newly released documents detailing unusually sharp criticism of the F.B.I by the General Services Administration.
In the documents, the G.S.A. said the proposed legislation could hurt the nation's competitiveness in "the international trade arena" and could pose a danger to national security.


Reviews/Film; Tasteful Cannibalism As Upbeat Viewing
"Alive," an account of plane-crash survivors who had to resort to cannibalism to last out their ordeal in the Andes, is a study in madness, not on the parts of the Uruguayan rugby players who are the film's principals but on those of the Hollywood film makers who felt this story had the makings of upbeat, big-budget entertainment.
Sure enough, despite the air-bag potential of its subject matter, "Alive" is being marketed as yet another "triumph of the human spirit."
Indeed, as directed by Frank Marshall and written by John Patrick Shanley, "Alive" has a bright look and an inspirational tone, not to mention a tendency to sugarcoat its story's more ticklish aspects.
Chief among these, of course, is the problem that confronted these stranded survivors once their supply of chocolate-covered peanuts ran out.


Hockey; Step Aside, Gretzky, a Steamroller Is Coming Through
The high spirits that surrounded the Devils all day as a result of the team's acquisition of Bernie Nicholls apparently carried onto the ice in tonight's game at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Playing with spark in their skates and fire in their eyes from start to finish, the Devils had no problem handling Wayne Gretzky and the Los Angeles Kings in a 7-1 victory that represented New Jersey's fifth victory in a row and seventh straight game without a loss (5-0-2).


CLINTON SAYS U.S. WILL CONTINUE BAN ON HAITIAN EXODUS
Saying that he feared a mass exodus of Haitians unless he acted, President-elect Bill Clinton announced today that he would at least temporarily abandon a campaign pledge and would continue the Bush Administration's policy of forcibly returning Haitians who try to emigrate to the United States.
It was Mr.
Clinton who helped create the expectation of an exodus from Haiti when he condemned the Bush Administration for a "cruel policy of returning Haitian refugees to a brutal dictatorship without an asylum hearing."


Sarajevo's Riskiest Trip: 1,000-Yard Dash for Food
In the ghostly glare of flares fired from the nearby hills, the Bosnians dashing across the frozen scrub grass at the Sarajevo airport looked like fugitives from the cold war, darting, crouching figures desperately seeking sanctuary beyond the barbed wire and the searchlights and the stuttering guns.
Every night for three months, after the russet glow of dusk on the hills has ceded to the blackness of night, thousands of people have headed out from a row of ruined buildings near the airport for a dash across the only ground that offers hope of reaching the world beyond the siege.
It is a deadly gamble against Serbian tank crews and snipers who consider every shadow a target.


Atmel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Triton Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Black Leaders in Crown Heights Meet With Mayor About Unrest
Mayor David N. Dinkins met yesterday with black religious and political leaders in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, in an effort to reassure them that he would look for ways to help prevent racial unrest from recurring there.
In a closed meeting that lasted nearly 90 minutes at Medgar Evers College in Crown Heights, the Mayor stressed that he would be responsive to the requests of a coalition formed after racial violence rocked the community 17 months ago, participants said afterward.


Executive Changes
BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB CO., New York, said E. Lynn Johnson had been named president of the Mead Johnson Nutritional Group in Evansville, Ind.
Mr.
Johnson, 48, succeeds Donald G. Harris, 60, who will retire on April 1.
COOPERS &amp; LYBRAND INTERNATIONAL, New York, the accounting firm, named Eugene M. Freedman, chairman of its United States operations, to the additional post of chairman.
He succeeds C. Brandon Gough, who remains chairman of the British operation.
The chairmanship rotates every two years among members of the executive committee.


Late TV's Sure Winner: the Marketer
Is CBS's decision to lure David Letterman from NBC on the Top 10 list of smart programming moves?
Or will the waspish host of television's first post-modern talk show turn out to be the Joey Bishop of the 1990's?
For advertising agency executives responsible for buying commercial time, whose judgments will help answer those questions, Mr.
Letterman's prospects are uncertain.
For every success in late night television, there have been a score of misfires by the likes of Dennis Miller, Dick Cavett and Mr.
Bishop.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Clinton's Headaches: A World Afflicted by Wars and Poverty -- Africa; Famine and Chaos In Cold War Wake
While Bill Clinton was elected President pledging to focus on the American economy like a "laser beam," his attention to domestic issues may be diverted by foreign affairs, a point brought home since the election by events in Iraq, Somalia and Bosnia.
Here is a region-by-region look at the world, showing some of key issues that the new President is likely to face.
The biggest question about President Clinton's Africa policy is whether he will have one.
America has no colonial past in Africa, no major economic stake, no more cold war to fight out through African proxies, and little taste for foreign aid or intervention.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Clinton's Headaches: A World Afflicted by Wars and Poverty -- The Americas; Haiti, Cuba And Free Trade
While Bill Clinton was elected President pledging to focus on the American economy like a "laser beam," his attention to domestic issues may be diverted by foreign affairs, a point brought home since the election by events in Iraq, Somalia and Bosnia.
Here is a region-by-region look at the world, showing some of key issues that the new President is likely to face.
The Clinton Administration will need a delicate touch in handling the intricate economic issues surrounding the consolidation of the North American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico, and the expected expansion of trade arrangements to other countries in the region.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Clinton's Headaches: A World Afflicted by Wars and Poverty -- Ex-Soviet Lands; Nervousness In the Kremlin
While Bill Clinton was elected President pledging to focus on the American economy like a "laser beam," his attention to domestic issues may be diverted by foreign affairs, a point brought home since the election by events in Iraq, Somalia and Bosnia.
Here is a region-by-region look at the world, showing some of key issues that the new President is likely to face.
Bill Clinton is in effect the first "post-Communist" American President, who will deal with Russia and the other former Soviet republics as independent states from the outset of his Administration.
The prospect has caused some apprehension in Moscow.
In the Bush Administration, Russia enjoyed a distinct primacy among other former republics and was treated as the successor to the Soviet Union in arms controls and other areas.
It was evidently for this reason that President Boris N. Yeltsin pushed to sign the latest strategic arms reduction treaty, known as Start II, while Mr.
Bush was still in charge.
Mr.
Yeltsin has also asked for a quick meeting with the new President to maintain that special relationship.


A Guard Is Accused Of Smuggling a Gun
A correction officer on Rikers Island, Roger Morice, 24, of the Bronx was arrested yesterday and charged with smuggling into the jail the .22-caliber pistol that was used to shoot another guard two weeks ago, correction officials said.
Susan E. Shepard, the Commissioner of the City Department of Investigation, said Officer Thomas Jones, 23, was shot in the leg on Jan. 2 while trying to break up a fight at the jail with the gun that Mr.
Morice brought in.
The weapon was quickly recovered, but the identity of the person who fired the shot is still unknown, Commissioner Shepard said.


Hockey; Nicholls Knows the Neighborhood, and the Net
He had not even joined his new team yet and already Bernie Nicholls was providing some production.
He was producing high hopes and glowing reviews from his coach and teammates-to-be.
All agreed Nicholls would help supply the offense the Devils have so desperately needed from the center position this season.


Laws Often Disregarded for Household Workers
While President-Elect Clinton promised a Cabinet that looks like America, Zoe Baird, his nominee for Attorney General, apparently behaved a bit too much like America: she hired, in this country illegally, a Peruvian couple as a baby-sitter and driver and she failed to pay the required Social Security taxes.
Accountants and lawyers say the system for reporting income paid to domestic workers is so cumbersome, and the supply of household workers so saturated with illegal aliens, that hundreds of thousands of Americans, and maybe millions, are probably flouting the law.


Hartmarx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Man Is Acquitted in Crown Heights Disorder
A Brooklyn jury took one hour yesterday to acquit a 29-year-old black man of charges that he helped to incite the violence that rocked the neighborhood of Crown Heights in several nights of racial disorder in 1991.
The defendant, Raymond Wesley, was never accused of being part of a group of about a dozen blacks who the police said attacked a Hasidic scholar, Yankel Rosenbaum, who was stabbed to death on Aug. 19, 1991.
Nevertheless, the original prosecution complaint when Mr.
Wesley was arrested linked his actions to the Rosenbaum slaying, even though the killing occurred three hours after the disturbances began and five blocks away.


Money Fund Assets Are Up
The total assets of the nation's 610 retail money market mutual funds increased $1.78 billion, to $386.38 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 379 taxable retail money market funds fell $68.7 million, to $302.91 billion, while the assets of the 231 retail tax-exempt funds increased $1.85 billion, to $83.47 billion.


Review/Theater; A Fierce View of Tragic Lives
MAYBE it's just the nature of Americans to rush forward, forever shedding their past.
Whatever the reason, it is now British directors, far more often than our own, who dust off neglected American plays and startle audiences with their rediscoveries.
While prominent New York companies were boring theatergoers silly last month with mannered rehashes of Chekhov and Buchner, the air was electric in London, where the Royal National Theater opened Nicholas Hytner's revelatory take on Rodgers and Hammerstein's "Carousel." Last week, public television broadcast a feverish new version of Tennessee Williams's "Suddenly, Last Summer," directed by Richard Eyre of the National.


Elcor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Valley Resources reports earnings for 12mos Nov 30


Teachers Asks for Help With School Violence
The nation's largest teachers union called today for a coordinated effort by Federal, state and local governments to combat growing violence in the nation's schools.
Citing Justice Department statistics from 1991 showing that each day about 100,000 of the nation's 45 million students bring guns to school, Keith Geiger, president of the National Education Association, called on the incoming Clinton Administration to enforce fully a law that makes it a Federal crime to carry firearms onto school property.


International Dairy Queen reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Sounds Around Town
Wistfulness for Hard Times
Richard Barone and Jane Scarpantoni, Fez, under the Time Cafe, 380 Lafayette Street, at Great Jones Street, East Village, (212) 533-2680.
With his band of American new-wave troubadours, the Bongos, Richard Barone wrote songs that sounded as if he had a crush on the melancholy ephemera of pop music itself.
Since those early 80's days, he's kept up a steady offering of wistful melodies for increasingly harder times.
Jane Scarpantoni, a cellist whose simpatico performances have graced work by Bob Mould, Freedy Johnston, Tiny Lights and many others, joins Mr.
Barone for these shows.
Tonight and next Friday at 9 and 11.
Tickets: $10.
The Dark Zones
Come, CBGB, 315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street, East Village, (212) 982-4052.
Come's music evokes those moments in rock's demonic journey when the seam is about to split: the Rolling Stones, stunned, in a hotel room after the death ride at Altamont; Lou Reed in 1975, hiding the wreckage of his wasted face with an extra layer of black makeup; Sid Vicious nodding off as he's brought to trial for murder.
This Boston band travels through these dark zones, with the singer and guitarist Thalia Zedek as an intrepid guide.
Some people call it the blues.
With Versus, Wider, Stigmata a Go Go, and Smack Melon.
Tickets are $8.
The show tomorrow begins at 9:30 P.M. and Come plays at 12:30.
Le Jazz Hot
Lou Donaldson Quartet, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
One of be-bop's foremost interpreters sets the pace with his own quartet.
Lou Donaldson works an alto sax as if it's a friendly sidekick; he's jovial, but always keeps his edge.
Peppering his performances with bawdy songs and vaudevillian patter, Mr.
Donaldson delivers hot jazz with a grin.
Admission: $15, and a $7.50 minimum.
Tonight and tomorrow, sets are at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M.; there's also a set at 1 A.M. tomorrow.


Cup Windfall Predicted
The New York-New Jersey site for the 1994 World Cup is expected to generate revenues of at least $400 million to the area, according to an economic report released by Gov.
JIM FLORIO of New Jersey.
"The World Cup will have a major economic impact on New Jersey and will provide a tremendous boost to the state," Florio said at a news conference yesterday at Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J.


TVWeekend; Marching With Sousa, The Oompah Master
Fans of military marches are in luck.
"If You Knew Sousa," tonight's offering in "The American Experience" series, is filled with the music that has been stirring patriotic juices for more than a century.
The series host, David McCullough, calls the Sousa march America's answer to the Strauss waltz.
Although the rousers reached their peak of popularity in the early 1900's, bands around the country are still beating out "The Stars and Stripes Forever" and "The Washington Post March," and you can hear them and other favorites through most of tonight's 90-minute documentary.


Learonal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Commonwealth Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wachovia Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Commerce reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bond Prices Up on Economic Data
The tug of war continued in the bond market yesterday as investors and traders tried to resolve whether the news of moderate growth should push prices higher or whether concerns about the Clinton Administration's ability to cut the Federal budget deficit and restrain fiscal stimulus should push them lower.
The battle has been going on since the beginning of the year.
So far, it has jerked the yield on the 30-year bond down to a low of 7.32 percent and up to a high of 7.47 percent.


Analysts International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A St. Patrick's Puzzle
To the Editor:
If the St.
Patrick's Day parade is a religious event, as John Cardinal O'Connor maintains in sharply questioning New York City's decision to give the permit for the event to a group that will allow a gay and lesbian organization to march (news article, Jan. 11), then why is there a need for anti-English slogans carried by some of the marchers?
This is not part of the Roman Catholic creeds, is it? (Rev.) JOHN ANDREW  Rector, St.
Thomas Episcopal Church New York, Jan. 12, 1993


Books of The Times; Closing Gates, to the Past and Others
The Man Who Was Late By Louis Begley 243 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $21.
Louis Begley's richly acclaimed first novel, "Wartime Lies" (1991), recounted the story of a young Jewish refugee who survives the horrors of World War II through flight and deceit and who must later come to terms with the dark legacy of his childhood, which he has tried to disclaim for so many years.
A similar story is told in Mr.
Begley's latest novel, "The Man Who Was Late." Once again, we are introduced to a worldly man who in early middle age realizes "he has no good deeds to look back upon," a cultivated, self-created man who has managed to misplace his authentic self.


Congressmen Propose Bill To Curb Handgun Traffic
To curtail gunrunning nationwide and reduce a flood of illegal firearms into the New York City area, three Eastern Representatives proposed legislation today making it a Federal crime to purchase more than one handgun within 30 days.
"How can good tough gun laws in New York, in New Jersey and in other states have any impact when people are driving as little as an hour, purchasing handguns and returning to the site of their planned criminal activity?" said Representative Robert G. Torricelli of Englewood, N.J.


Police Bullet Removed From Boy in Connecticut
A 13-year-old boy was hit by a police bullet during a shootout between officers and a gunman who had hijacked a school van taking the youth home Monday, evidence released here today showed.
The discovery of the bullet today, while a doctor was re-examining X-rays taken shortly after the shootout, helped investigators settle the question of who had fired the shot that critically wounded Joshua Sawicki: the police or the gunman, Dwight Giles Pink Sr., who was fatally wounded by the police.


CHRONICLE
JEAN S. HARRIS, who was released from the hospital on Monday after quadruple bypass surgery on Dec. 29 -- the day she was told that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo was granting her clemency -- has returned to the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla.
She has a blood clot in the leg from which a vein was taken for use in the surgery.
She was reported in fair condition yesterday.


Glacier Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


CHRONICLE
Shrouding the Reichstag in Berlin in fabric may never be a wrap for the artist CHRISTO.
WOLFGANG SCHAUBLE, the leader of the Christian Democrats in the German parliament, said this week, "I have told the president of the parliament in the appropriate manner that packaging the Reichstag is out of the question for this group."


Fingerhut Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Sex Abuse Trial Disrupted As Judge Begins Inquiry
The Glen Ridge sex assault trial was thrown into disarray today by an unspecified problem with the jury.
Judge R. Benjamin Cohen interrupted proceedings at the start of the day and began questioning the jurors privately, one by one, in his chambers.
The inquiry lasted from 10 A.M. until 3:45 P.M., with an hour off for lunch.
Nine jurors were questioned today; the other six are to be interviewed Friday.


Bank of New York reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


PPG Selects Three Agencies
PPG Industries in Pittsburgh, maker of Olympic, Lucite and Pittsburgh stains and paints, said it had selected three agencies to handle its accounts, with combined billings estimated at $16 million.


Haitians' Advocates Admit Some Feelings of Betrayal
For advocates of Haitian refugees, President-elect Bill Clinton's announcement today that he plans to temporarily continue a Bush Administration policy of the summary return of Haitian boat people falls just short of an outright betrayal.
For weeks, refugee advocates who have urged a more compassionate treatment for Haitians fleeing their country have spoken almost giddily of their expectations of dramatic policy changes.


People
*
David Curtis, executive vice president and senior creative director at FCB/Leber Katz Partners, New York, was promoted to the new position of group creative director.
Dennis Ferrone, Sam Gulisano, Nanette Koryn, Bob Neuman and Joel Sobelson, all senior vice presidents and senior creative directors, were promoted to the new positions of group creative directors. *
Scott Franks, executive vice president at Ketchum Advertising, Philadelphia, was named president, succeeding Sam Rand, who was promoted to the new position of executive vice president at Ketchum Advertising U.S.A., New York.
And Charles Housam, executive vice president and director of operations and planning at Ketchum Philadelphia, was promoted to the new position of chief operating officer.


Donations To Neediest Give Value To Holiday
It was 2:30 A.M. on Jan. 1.
After hours of cheering and hugging and feasting and toasting, the guests had finally left Natalie Manzino's home in Brooklyn.
She sat down to enjoy the silence and wondered whether there was a more personal and meaningful way to usher in the New Year.
She decided that she wanted to highlight how lucky she felt to have two loving sons, close friends and a secure job.
Her first post-party act of 1993, she resolved, would be to remember less fortunate people in New York City by writing a check to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


City National reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
CRAY RESEARCH INC., Minneapolis, said NASA's Ames Research Center had ordered two supercomputing systems.
Terms were not disclosed.
WHITBREAD &amp; CO., London, a brewer and restaurant owner, said it would cut 321 jobs when it closed its Sheffield Brewery in northern England and reorganized its headquarters and distribution operations.


Wall Street Disappointed By Morgan's Profit Report
Hurt by losses in mortgage-backed securites, J. P. Morgan &amp; Company said yesterday that fourth-quarter profits were off sharply from the third quarter.
Though Morgan, with $103 billion in assets and return on equity of 22 percent, reported higher profits for the year and remains among the most profitable of the country's largest banks, the sharp swing in earnings from the third to fourth quarters worried analysts.


Grand Valley Gas Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Pro Football; The Message for the Niners: Victory Can Often Be Secondary
After the Catch, there was the Tackle.
Everyone remembers Dwight Clark's 6-yard touchdown reception from Joe Montana with 51 seconds left that propelled the San Francisco 49ers to a thrilling 28-27 National Conference championship game victory over the Dallas Cowboys 11 years ago in Candlestick Park.
Few remember that 13 seconds later, 49ers cornerback Eric Wright grabbed Dallas receiver Drew Pearson from behind on Pearson's 31-yard reception and brought him down near midfield.


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section on Wednesday, about the opening of a Manhattan branch of Marquet Patisserie, misidentified the shop's owners.
They are Lynne Guillot and Jean-Pierre Marquet.


Guatemalan Refugees' Homeward Trek Is Delayed
Relatives and supporters of Guatemalans who have spent the last decade in refugee camps in southern Mexico thronged to the border on the Pan American Highway today only to learn that a long-anticipated trek homeward had been delayed.
As musicians played, refreshments were sold and welcoming banners strung, delegations of church, peasant and international relief groups made their way back and forth across the border, passing through hundreds of milling people along the fence that divides the two countries.


Results Plus
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Manhattan Loses by 19  Rob Robinson scored 26 points, including 16 in the second half, to lead Niagara to an 83-64 victory over Manhattan (8-5 over all, 0-1 conference) in a Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference game last night in Niagara, N.Y.
Niagara (10-1, 2-0) received scoring help from Dwayne Daniel with 17 points, while Reggie Moore added 10 more as the Purple Eagles notched their 10th straight victory and moved into first place in the conference. (AP) GOLF


AUTO DEALERSHIPS SEIZED IN CAPITAL
A Federal grand jury indicted one of the nation's largest car dealers today on money-laundering charges after Federal agents, posing as Columbian cocaine traffickers, bought dozens of cars on the pretext that they were trying to conceal narcotics profits.
More than 100 Federal agents descended on dealerships owned by two car dealers in the Washington metropolitan area, seizing about $2.7 million worth of cars, cash and other assets and arresting 19 managers and salesmen.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Clinton's Headaches: A World Afflicted by Wars and Poverty -- China; Beijing Awaits Decision on Trade
While Bill Clinton was elected President pledging to focus on the American economy like a "laser beam," his attention to domestic issues may be diverted by foreign affairs, a point brought home since the election by events in Iraq, Somalia and Bosnia.
Here is a region-by-region look at the world, showing some of key issues that the new President is likely to face.
America's relations with China for years to come may be determined by Mr.
Clinton's handling of a single issue in the next six months: extension of "most-favored-nation" trading status for China.
Mr.
Clinton suggested in the campaign that he wanted to add human rights conditions to any extension of this status, which guarantees the low tariffs that are applied to virtually all of the United States' trading partners.
If Mr.
Clinton decides to impose tough conditions that Beijing feels it cannot meet, relations could deteriorate precipitously.


Colombia Volcano Erupts, Killing 6 Experts
A volcano erupted in southern Colombia today as a group of scientists from around the world was collecting gas samples inside the crater, officials said.
At least 6 of the experts were killed, 8 were injured and 10 are still missing, the Red Cross and the local fire department said.
Three consecutive explosions of rock, gas and lava, accompanied by a small earth tremor, shook the region near the town of Pasto, 375 miles south of Bogota, Pasto's fire department said.


Xavier Gonzalez, 94, Painter and Sculptor
Xavier Gonzalez, a painter and sculptor who taught at the Art Students League for several years, died on Saturday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 94 and lived in Manhattan and Wellfleet, Mass.
He died of leukemia, said his wife, Ethel Edwards, a painter.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 2 about race relations in the Williamsbridge section of the Bronx misidentified a Hispanic resident whose business is next to others run by blacks and whites.
He is Jose A. Rodriguez.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The Confirmation Hearings; Democratic Senators Press Cabinet Choice on Welfare
In the first confirmation hearing to cause difficulty for a prospective member of Bill Clinton's Cabinet, Donna E. Shalala encountered tough questioning today from Democratic senators who contended that she seemed to be ignoring Mr.
Clinton's campaign promise to "end welfare as we know it."
Many other prospective nominees have sailed through their confirmation hearings, but Dr.
Shalala, who is Mr.
Clinton's choice for Secretary of Health and Human Services, had a bit more trouble.


Art in Review
'Photographs From the 19th Century'
James Danziger Gallery
415 West Broadway (near Spring Street)
SoHo
Through Jan. 23
For its first exhibition of 19th-century work, the James Danziger gallery has assembled a diverse selection of images, from the familiar to the offbeat.
In the first category are two of Julia Margaret Cameron's posed allegorical scenes, on the themes of "Heaven" and "Faith," both from 1864, and several marvelous photographs of floral arrangements by the French photographer Charles Aubry, also from the 1860's.
Other important figures represented here include Roger Fenton, Carleton Watkins, Eadweard Muybridge, Edouard-Denis Baldus and Edward S. Curtis.


Carriage Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


On My Mind; Saddam Closer Up
From the West, far away, Saddam Hussein seems mysterious, off his political rocker.
Why on earth would this man, defeated by an American-led military coalition two years ago, now openly provoke United States attacks again?
But a lot closer geographically and historically, in an Arab country whose survival depends on being able to understand threats from within Islam like Saddam Hussein or fundamentalists, suddenly it is the West that seems obtuse and enigmatic, not that man in Baghdad.


Zuckerman Is Accused of Bias in Dismissals
Signaling the start of a public battle that could help determine Mortimer B. Zuckerman's success as the new publisher of The Daily News, three New York City black community advocates yesterday asserted that he discriminated against black employees because many of them lost their jobs as a result of his hiring practices.
They threatened to escalate the boycott called by the Newspaper Guild of New York, and spokespeople for the Rev.
Jesse Jackson said he would offer his assistance.


Law Lesson as Dorothy Is Tried
The witnesses came directly from the Land of Oz: One by one, the Wizard, the Lion, the Scarecrow, the Munchkins, and even a winged monkey took the stand in the case of the State v.
Dorothy Gale.
Miss Gale, of Kansas, was charged with first-degree manslaughter in connection with the death of the Wicked Witch of the West, a death that took place in Chapter 12 of L. Frank Baum's most popular book, "The Wizard of Oz."


Boston-Area Theater Wins $1 Million Grant
The American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Mass., has received $1 million from the Harold and Mimi Steinberg Charitable Trust for the production of new American plays, the theater's artistic director, Robert Brustein, announced yesterday.
The grant, to be paid over the next five years, is believed to be the largest single grant to support new American work, he said.


One Who Won't Join White House Staff
Harold M. Ickes has been active in New York City politics for years, and his longtime friends, including Mayor David N. Dinkins, had looked forward to having their man in the White House.
He had repeatedly been mentioned as the leading candidate for the post of deputy chief of staff for Bill Clinton.
But it was Mr.
Ickes's role as the lawyer for Mr.
Dinkins's successful 1989 campaign that has helped make him a figure of controversy in recent days and may have led to his decision yesterday to take himself out of contention for the White House job.





Serenity Amid Chaos: A City Skater's Odyssey
THE pleasures of ice skating in New York City are few, its terrors many.
I blame this largely on global warming, which, the recent chill stretch notwithstanding, restricts the enterprise to exercise-in-the-round and reduces its grandiose free-spiritedness to something a little more, well, rinky-dink.
Ice skating, ideally, is travel.
But the weather being what it is, you can't even flout the law and zip around on the Central Park lakes anymore.


The Balkans Rapes: a Legal Test for the Outraged
Horrified by accounts of mass rapes in the ethnic fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina, women's advocacy groups and human rights groups are seeking legal avenues to stop the assaults and to prosecute those responsible as war criminals.
The groups have formed the Ad Hoc Women's Coalition Against War Crimes in the former Yugoslavia, a group that now meets regularly to discuss how to put pressure on the international law system to bring people responsible for rape to justice.
At the same time, the coalition is discussing how the violation of Balkan women is an exaggerated reflection of sexual violence against women worldwide, and how that pattern of behavior and attitudes about it can be changed.


As Ordeal of Captive Girl Unfolds, Custody Is Issue
The man accused of holding Katie Beers hostage in an underground bunker was arraigned this morning on kidnapping charges as a legal battle, pitting the mother against Suffolk County authorities, began over custody of the 10-year-old girl.
The suspect, John Esposito, a longtime friend of the Beers family, pleaded not guilty to second-degree kidnapping and was held on $500,000 bail.
Prosecutors said later that they were weighing possible additional charges, including sexual abuse, when they present the case to a grand jury but were still reserving judgment.
The Suffolk police were reluctant to discuss the nature of any possible charges because the identity of the victim was known.


RPM Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


INSIDE
No Easy Sailing For Health Nominee
In the first confirmation hearing to cause difficulty for a prospective member of Bill Clinton's Cabinet, Donna E. Shalala encountered tough questioning from members of her own party, who said she seemed to be ignoring his promise to "end welfare as we know it." Page A15.
More Clinton Appointments
The President-elect rounded out his White House staff and named his campaign manager, David Wilhelm, as Democratic chairman.
Page A14.
Insurer Cuts Back Coverage
Allstate plans to stop selling homeowner insurance to most new customers in Florida, and it may make cutbacks in New York.
Page D1.
New Problems for Taxpayers
Tax panic is coming three months early this year, as people who must pay estimated taxes by today face complicated new rules.
Page D1.
Retailers' Strong December
Retail sales rose 1.2 percent, providing another sign of economic growth, while inflation at the producer level increased slightly.
Page D1.


SI Handling Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Monday with an article about complaints of discrimination by women in economics misstated the numbers of men and women who are tenured full professors at four universities as well as percentages for the faculty totals of the 30 universities listed.
Duke University has 2 women and 22 men who are tenured full professors of economics; the University of California at Berkeley 2 women and 28 men; the University of California at San Diego no women and 16 men; the University of Wisconsin 3 women and 20 men.
At the 30 universities listed, 3.5 percent of the tenured economics professors are women.


Honecker Reunited With Family in Chile


Review/Art; Group Shows in SoHo for a Weekend of Gallery Hopping
If SoHo sometimes feels like one big art campus, then last Saturday was definitely the first day of second semester.
Numerous downtown galleries ended the Christmas break in unison, and as new exhibitions opened right and left, the art-world equivalent of back-to-school giddiness filled the air.
Several of the new shows are solo affairs -- most notably the 14-painting survey of Jasper Johns's career at the Leo Castelli Gallery -- and there are also quite a few in the three-artist category.
But the dominant mode may be the group exhibition, present this weekend in unusual abundance and quality.


Small Is Strong
Small stocks usually do well in January, but a slump during the first week of 1993 had analysts wondering if this year might prove an exception to the rule.


Accounts
*
William Carter Co., Morrow, Ga., said it had narrowed a review on its account to three or four agencies.
Though Brek Benson, vice president of brand management at the marketer of baby and infant apparel, declined to identify the finalists, he said the company expected to decide by early next month.
Before Carter changed ownership, the account, inactive recently, had been at Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson, Boston, for many years.


The Katie Beers Case; Mystery Surrounds Suspect and Underground Chamber
As Long Island police investigators with dogs searched the grounds of Katie Beers's subterranean prison for signs of other missing children, an unsettling portrait emerged of the man accused of kidnapping her, a 43-year-old friend of the Beers family who offered himself to youngsters as a "big brother" while concealing a conviction for child snatching.
The friend, John Esposito, a contractor who had initially reported Katie missing from an outing to a video parlor on Dec. 28 and came forward on Wednesday to say that she was hidden in an elaborate chamber under his Bay Shore bungalow, was arraigned yesterday and ordered held on $500,000 cash bond.


Review/Architecture; Harmonizing Nature and Technology
In the architecture of Renzo Piano, we glide through tubes of never-ending space.
Mr.
Piano's buildings may have finite dimensions, but they open boundless prospects.
Paris spreads out before visitors as they ascend the escalator inside a transparent cylinder clipped to the side of the Pompidou Center.
At Kansai Airport, a project now under construction on an artificial island off the coast of Japan, people-movers will convey travelers along the gleaming metal spine of a terminal building more than a mile in length.
These and other celestial transports, or at least table-top versions of them, are on view in "Renzo Piano Building Workshop: Selected Projects," an exhibition at the Urban Center.
The show, organized by the Architectural League, uses models, photographs, drawings and hands-on computer terminals to affirm that Mr.
Piano is our great poet of circulation.
Many architects in this century have dreamed of adapting the static condition of architecture to the mobility of modern life.
None have come closer than Renzo Piano to realizing this ambition.


Robert G. High, 46, Securities Executive And Puzzle Designer
Robert Gordon High, a Connecticut securities executive and a devotee and promoter of go, the ancient Asian game of strategy, died last Friday in an accident in Chile.
He was 46 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
High, who was also a white-water rafting enthusiast, died while on the first commercial rafting expedition on the Futaleufu River in the southern Chilean Andes.
His raft capsized after entering a canyon, said Michael J. Simon, treasurer of the American Go Association in New York, of which Mr.
High was the new president.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: President-Elect; Clinton Selects a Mostly Youthful Group of White House Aides
Only six days before he becomes President, Bill Clinton today announced a mostly youthful group of White House aides and tapped David C. Wilhelm, his campaign manager, to head the Democratic Party.
In addition to Mr.
Wilhelm, a veteran political consultant from Chicago, whose selection must be ratified by the Democratic National Committee, Mr.
Clinton singled out two others who would accompany him to the White House: Carol H. Rasco, a longtime adviser in Arkansas on welfare and education, who will be chief domestic policy adviser, and Eli J. Segal, the campaign's chief of staff, who will head an effort to establish a national service program for young people.


Dr. George Gero, 91, A Psychoanalyst, Dies
Dr.
George Gero, a psychoanalyst for six decades, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 91.
He died of congestive heart failure, his family said.


Whitman Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Market Place; A Hot Company With a Low Profile
THE nation's holiday selling season ends on Dec. 24, but for Little Switzerland, a chain of 19 duty-free shops in the Caribbean and the Bahamas, Christmas doesn't end until Easter.
For most retailers, the peak season starts the day after Thanksgiving and ends late Christmas Eve.
It's after that when Little Switzerland's sales start moving up, with the arrival of tourists seeking sun, sand and duty-free Rolexes.


Robert G. High, 46, Securities Executive And Puzzle Designer
Robert Gordon High, a Connecticut securities executive and a devotee and promoter of go, the ancient Asian game of strategy, died last Friday in an accident in Chile.
He was 46 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
High, who was also a white-water rafting enthusiast, died while on the first commercial rafting expedition on the Futaleufu River in the southern Chilean Andes.
His raft capsized after entering a canyon, said Michael J. Simon, treasurer of the American Go Association in New York, of which Mr.
High was the new president.


Art in Review
Richard Baker
Washburn Gallery
20 East 57th Street
Manhattan
Through Jan. 30
Richard Baker's paintings owe an all-too-obvious debt to the Surrealism of de Chirico and Morandi (and they have something in common with the work of Pierre Roy), but they are done with an intensity and a fineness that make them special.
They are small, at most 20 inches high, and depict flowers, tools, glasses and fish, often resting on a table or platform, sometimes floating, like one of Chagall's figures, over a landscape.
The painted surface is heavily worked and very handsome, if self-consciously so.


CLINTON AFFIRMS U.S. POLICY ON IRAQ
Anxious to erase any impression that he would change American policy on Iraq, President-elect Bill Clinton said today that he had "no intention" of re-establishing diplomatic relations with Saddam Hussein.
Asked about the subject at a news conference today in Little Rock, Ark., Mr.
Clinton said that The New York Times had misinterpreted his policy in its account of what he said in an interview Wednesday.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Clinton's Headaches: A World Afflicted by Wars and Poverty -- Africa; Famine and Chaos In Cold War Wake
While Bill Clinton was elected President pledging to focus on the American economy like a "laser beam," his attention to domestic issues may be diverted by foreign affairs, a point brought home since the election by events in Iraq, Somalia and Bosnia.
Here is a region-by-region look at the world, showing some of key issues that the new President is likely to face.
The biggest question about President Clinton's Africa policy is whether he will have one.
America has no colonial past in Africa, no major economic stake, no more cold war to fight out through African proxies, and little taste for foreign aid or intervention.


Baseball; So When Comes the Bullpen?
It has become an annual sort of board game at Shea Stadium.
Spin the wheel.
Move Howard Johnson to another position.
Roll the dice again.
The 1993 version of the game was made official by the Mets yesterday.
Johnson, as expected, will be back at third base this season.
"We needed pop at third base," said Manager Jeff Torborg.
"It's a natural fit."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  AL -- Added Terry Craft and Chuck Meriwether to their roster of umpires.
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Acquired Harold Baines, outfielder, from the Oakland Athletics for Bobby Chouinard and Allen Plaster, pitchers, and agreed to terms with Baines on a one-year contract.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Announced that Jim Pankovits will return as manager of the New Britain Red Sox.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Agreed to terms with Billy Spiers, infielder, and Marshall Boze and Rafael Novoa, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
Invited Bobby Hughes and Mike Matheny, catchers; Larry Sheets, outfielder; William Suero, infielder; and Matt Maysey, pitcher, to spring training as non-roster players.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Named Toby Harrah roving batting instructor for Oklahoma City of the American Association and Tulsa of the Texas League and Tom House special assistant to the general manager.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Invited Jose Bautista, Bill Brennan, Blaise Ilsley, Dave Smith and Mike York, pitchers; Orlando Mercado, catcher; Kent Anderson, infielder; and Scott Wade and Eduardo Zambrano, outfielders, to spring training as non-roster players.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Agreed to terms with Dave Anderson, infielder, on a one-year contract.
Horse Racing  California Harness Racing Association -- Named Ron Goldman assistant general manager.


It's Too Easy to Blame the Music for the World
To the Editor:
In a Dec. 28 front-page article about the shooting incident at Simon's Rock College in Great Barrington, Mass., you draw facile connections between Wayne Lo's fondness for hard-core punk music and whatever psychological collapse led him to the acts of violence he committed Dec. 14.
Much attention has been drawn to our band because Mr.
Lo was wearing a Sick of It All T-shirt when arrested.


Young Wins Award As N.F.L.'s Top Player
San Francisco quarterback STEVE YOUNG has been named winner of the Maxwell Football Club's Bert Bell Award as the National Football League player of the year.
Young received 530 first-place votes, or 56 percent of the 953 ballots cast by news media, league coaches and adminstrators, and fans.
He outpointed running back EMMITT SMITH of Dallas, 1,968 to 1,251.
The award will be presented at a dinner in Philadelphia on Feb. 23. (AP)


At the Bar; A Brooklyn-born lawyer finds himself at the center of a civil-rights case in Israel.
Joshua Schoffman tried but failed to block the deportation of 415 Palestinians to Southern Lebanon last month, and he incurred the wrath of Israel's Prime Minister for his efforts.
But the experience accelerated his quest to import to his embattled adopted home the kinds of civil liberties he learned to appreciate in his native land.
On Dec. 17, as 22 busloads of handcuffed and blindfolded Palestinians, mostly members of the Islamic fundamentalist group Hamas, headed north from the Negev to the Lebanese border, Mr.
Schoffman -- Orthodox Jew, committed Zionist and legal director of the Association for Civil Rights in Israel -- took on the Israeli Government and many of his fellow Israelis.


Robbery Hinted in Slayings in Chicago Suburb
Nearly a week after seven people were found shot to death at a fast-food restaurant in this Chicago suburb, the police are still saying very little about their investigation.
But other law-enforcement sources say the victims may have been slain during an armed robbery.
As days pass with no arrests or the identification of any suspect, the police -- recently joined by agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who offered their help -- are facing questions from residents and families of the victims about their handling of the investigation.


General Magic to Disclose Its Strategy and Sponsors
One of Silicon Valley's most closely watched start-ups will introduce its corporate sponsors and some of its strategy at a New York City news conference on Feb. 8, perhaps shedding some light on just where Apple Computer Inc. is heading as it tries to extend personal computing into growth areas involving portable electronic gadgets.
Many computer companies are trying to build these gadgets, and to what extent Apple is determined to lead and to what extent it will work with General Magic, a company in Mountain View, Calif., that it helped found in 1990, is unclear.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: New Haven Journal; Illegal Help? Few Eyebrows Raised
A gentle snow fell steadily on St.
Ronan Street today, rendering the gracious neighborhood virtually deserted save for an occasional jogger wearing a Yale sweatshirt, or for people walking their dogs.
But genteel quiet is not unusual on this street of stately homes where Zoe Baird, the nominee to be the next Attorney General, lives.
People seldom congregate on the sidewalk to share community gossip here.
Nor do they become especially excited about the accomplishments of one another.


Poll Finds Strong Support For Raid From Americans
Americans overwhelmingly support the allied air strike on Iraq, according to a New York Times/CBS News Poll taken Wednesday night after the raid.
Of 390 adults interviewed by telephone across the country, 82 percent said they approved of United States military action to try to force President Saddam Hussein to comply with United Nations resolutions, 15 percent disapproved, 3 percent had no opinion.


Hockey; The Party's Over: One Strong Period and Then Pffffft!
It was back to ground zero for the Islanders tonight at Nassau Coliseum as they were shut out, 3-0, by the Washington Capitals, whose veteran goaltender, Don Beaupre, turned impenetrable for the first time since 1991.
Faced with 33 shots by the Islanders, Beaupre halted them all in registering his first shutout of the season and the 13th of his career.
It marked the third time the Islanders have been held scoreless this season.


Salick Health Care reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


From 'Beulah' to 'Oprah'
IN "Beulah," a show that made its debut on ABC in 1950, the title character was a huge black maid with a mooching, irresponsible boyfriend; a dimwitted, high-strung girlfriend; a keen sense of rhythm, and an apparently inexhaustible supply of patience.
"Beulah" was the first television sitcom to feature a black lead, preceding "Amos 'n' Andy" by a year.
It was one of several shows of the early 1950's that helped perpetuate old stereotypes in a new medium, leading many black actors and politicians to protest that television represented a setback to the cause of equal rights.


Venezuelan Winds
The Octeto Academico de Caracas, a wind ensemble from Venezuela, is to give its only New York concert of the season, tomorrow evening at 8 o'clock at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street.
In addition to Hummel's Octet-Partita in E flat, Mozart's Serenade in E flat, Brahms's Hungarian Dance No. 7 and excerpts from Dvorak's Slavonic Dances, the ensemble will play Beethoven's Quintet in E flat for Piano and Winds, with Grant Johannesen as soloist.
Tickets are $15, and include a free compact disk.
Information: (212) 570-3949.


For Children
Kidbits Computer Center
42-32 235th Street
Douglaston, Queens
(718) 279-2630
Recommended ages: 2 1/2 and up
This small new center is intended to make children as comfortable sitting at a computer as they are in front of a television set.
Kidbits is owned and run by Sam Greenberg, a former professor of computer science at Dowling College in Oakdale, L.I.; his wife, Lilly Strauss, a computer and math teacher at a public intermediate school in Bayside, Queens, and Angela Lukin, a junior-high computer teacher.
They select and teach software appropriate for children from 2 1/2 years old to adolescence.


Eagle Precision Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Sports of The Times; All Muscles Not the Same, Rats Prove
RATS on body-building drugs.
It's a frightening thought.
I've seen a few rats I thought were chemically enlarged, as they scuttled in the shadows.
Other rats stayed in the laboratory and helped prove the dangers of human growth hormone, the body-building substance that Eric Moore of the New York Giants and Mark Duckens of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers were charged with carrying, and intending to distribute, the other day.
The rats say Moore and Duckens might be taking big chances with the only bodies they have.


Nellcor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Clinton's Headaches: A World Afflicted by Wars and Poverty -- Europe; Bosnia and GATT In Need of Action
While Bill Clinton was elected President pledging to focus on the American economy like a "laser beam," his attention to domestic issues may be diverted by foreign affairs, a point brought home since the election by events in Iraq, Somalia and Bosnia.
Here is a region-by-region look at the world, showing some of key issues that the new President is likely to face.
In Europe, President Clinton will immediately face the urgent need for two decisions: What to do about the continued fighting in the Balkans, and how to rescue a critically endangered accord on world trade that is the best hope for respite from a spreading global recession.
The Bush Administration left the problem of the Balkans to the Europeans, who have demonstrated that they are unable to take effective measures and passed the buck to the United Nations.


Artisoft Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Environmental Concerns Unite a Neighborhood


Review/Music; More 'Ado' For Opera By Berlioz
Hector Berlioz, who had perhaps the finest literary mind among 19th-century composers, loved Shakespeare above all else.
Tragically, he was able to complete only one full operatic setting of a Shakespeare play: "Beatrice and Benedict," his final work.
This refined adaptation of "Much Ado About Nothing" is the most workable of the Berlioz operas, but it is still difficult to bring off smoothly; the American premiere was only 33 years ago.
On Wednesday night the Boston Lyric Opera presented a new production of "Beatrice," created by Colin Graham, in which the Shakespearean element is expanded even beyond Berlioz's intentions.
Mr.
Graham, working in conjunction with the set and costume designer John Conklin (also his partner for "The Ghosts of Versailles"), has entirely revised the libretto, inserting direct excerpts from "Much Ado" in place of Berlioz's own dialogue.
The performance, while not completely successful, continues the Lyric Opera's revival of opera in Boston, taking the place of Sarah Caldwell's moribund Opera Company of Boston.
With recent productions of Blitzstein's "Regina" and of "Ariadne auf Naxos," this small company has established itself as a fresh and intriguing presence on the operatic scene.


Seeing the Big Picture (and Talking About It): A Museum Series Schedule
"Changing the Picture: The Emergence of African-Americans in Television," a series of screenings of documentaries, dramas, comedies, movies, sports events, music and talk shows, runs through March 28 at the American Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
Lectures and discussions are scheduled throughout the series.
The date of a planned discussion with the actress and dancer Deb bie Allen has not yet been announced.


John Davenport, 62, A TV Journalist, Dies
John Davenport, an Emmy Award-winning television journalist who originated the show "Washington Week in Review" for PBS and served as its moderator in 1966 and 1967, died on Saturday at his home in Houston.
He was 62.
His son, John Gordon Davenport, said Mr. Davenport had had diabetes.


Sounds Around Town
Heart and Soul
Chuck Brown and the Soul Searchers, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
The groove is the fundamental measure of dance-music pleasure.
Work it, and it'll make your feet move; work it longer and it'll make your head swim.
Work it still longer and it will liberate your soul.
Chuck Brown and the Soul Searchers' go-go grooves are as deep and wide as they come, dressed up in his jazzy guitar and low, growling voice, with the special addition of the P-Funk Horns.
The music starts at the feet, works its way to the head and eventually cuts to the heart of soul.
Tomorrow at 8:30 and midnight.
Admission: $5.
Rocking the Roots
The Friggs and World Famous Blue Jays, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
Somewhere to the right of the Cramps but definitely left of the Go-Go's -- even the early-period Go-Go's, back when Belinda and the girls were still getting drunk -- exist the Friggs, a trashy, smashy and ultimately charming female mod-rock collective.
The roots-rocking World Famous Blue Jays boil it all down to the really important things in life, like the good, greasy, grill-cooked taste of a "Cheeseburger Deluxe." Plus the wistful power-pop of the Vacant Lot.
Tomorrow night at 10:30.
Admission: $6.
Take-Off and Landing
Marc Ribot's Shrek, the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, East Village, (212) 219-3055.
As a guitarist, Marc Ribot can swerve from avant-garde screech to jazz improv to rock riffing to pure noise, all in the name of good-natured dementia.
His influences range from Ornette Coleman to Jimi Hendrix, which means that even his most out-there excursions tend to have solid landings in more traditional turf.
His latest combo, Shrek (it's Yiddish for horror), is a take-off on his former Rootless Cosmopolitans, with a guitar-bass-drums lineup.
Tonight and tomorrow night at 9 and midnight.
Tickets: $10 in advance, $12 the day of the show.


Leo Burnett Wins A Hoover Account
The Hoover Company, the vacuum-cleaner maker based in North Canton, Ohio, said yesterday that it had selected Leo Burnett Ltd. in London to handle its European consumer products account, previously at the Lowe Group in London.
Billings are estimated at $7 million.
Burnett was awarded the account after a five-month review that included two other London shops, Abbott Mead Vickers/BBDO, which continues to handle Hoover in Britain, and BMP DDB Needham.
In the United States, Burnett is the agency for Hoover's parent, the Maytag Corporation.


Executive Shuffle At DFM/Tatham
DFM/Tatham in Chicago yesterday disclosed changes in top management that arose from recent moves by its parent, Euro RSCG, involving its agencies there.
Albert Jay Rosenthal, 64, who had been chairman at the Chicago office of Della Femina, McNamee Inc., will continue in that role at DFM/ Tatham.
Jack Wiegand, 66, who had been vice chairman, has retired.
Geoffrey Charlton-Perrin, 52, who had been president and chief creative director, will add the additional title of chief executive officer.


Nissan and Mazda Planning to Sell Vehicles to Each Other
Two of Japan's leading automobile companies, Nissan and Mazda, said today that they were planning to supply vehicles to each other to cut costs.
The move is part of a new wave of cooperative efforts among Japan's suddenly struggling vehicle manufacturers.


Lindros's Waiting Game
Two weeks?
Three weeks?
Four weeks?
The only thing certain about ERIC LINDROS is that nobody's really sure how soon he will return fully healed from his nagging knee injury.
The 19-year-old's debut season has been interrupted by the sprained left knee, originally hurt on Nov. 22.
He tried to come back last month, and after missing games because of pain and swelling, he's under doctors' orders to stay out for three weeks.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Clinton's Headaches: A World Afflicted by Wars and Poverty -- Africa; Famine and Chaos In Cold War Wake
While Bill Clinton was elected President pledging to focus on the American economy like a "laser beam," his attention to domestic issues may be diverted by foreign affairs, a point brought home since the election by events in Iraq, Somalia and Bosnia.
Here is a region-by-region look at the world, showing some of key issues that the new President is likely to face.
The biggest question about President Clinton's Africa policy is whether he will have one.
America has no colonial past in Africa, no major economic stake, no more cold war to fight out through African proxies, and little taste for foreign aid or intervention.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Justice Dept. Designee; CLINTON NOT FAZED BY NOMINEE'S HIRES
President-elect Bill Clinton knew but was not worried that Zoe Baird, his nominee to be Attorney General, had hired two illegal aliens to work in her home in New Haven , transition officials said today.
"It was fully disclosed," said Dee Dee Myers, Mr.
Clinton's press secretary.
"He considered it and did not think it was a problem."


In Final Report Quayle Makes Pitch for Developing Space Weapons
In a surprisingly blunt report as the departing head of the National Space Council, Vice President Dan Quayle says the United States should develop futuristic space weapons to fire at foes trying to exploit the high ground of space in war.
The weapons, he said in a report to President Bush, would destroy enemy spying, communications, navigation and weather satellites.


Price Co. reports earnings for 16wks to Dec 20


The Catch of Catches, And Still a Grabber
Inevitably and inexorably, the National Football Conference championship game Sunday between the San Francisco 49ers and Dallas Cowboys is compared with their title tussle 11 years ago, a matchup forever recalled from the film clip of Dwight Clark's incandescent game-winning catch of a pass from Joe Montana.
Calling the CBS game were Vin Scully and Hank Stram.
Stram said he believed it was the inaugural use of the now-commonplace TeleStrator.


TV Networks Prove Crime Really Pays
To the Editor:
Amy Fisher, the Long Island teen-ager who was tried for shooting the wife of the man she said was her lover, has made the three television networks believers.
Prime-time crime does pay -- even in triplicate.


A Balkan Vietnam
Both supporters and opponents of American intervention in Bosnia have been reluctant to draw explicit lessons from Vietnam.
The wars and the world situation are indeed different.
But real parallels exist, not between Serbian irregulars and the Vietcong but between the calls of well-intentioned commentators then and now for a "moderate" American approach: gradual, limited military involvement.
Three decades ago, the U.S. had to choose among four basic options: noninvolvement; striving for a negotiated settlement; limited intervention, and overwhelming force to guarantee a client's victory.
National leaders agreed that we should prevent South Vietnam from falling to the Communists, but not risk war with China or the Soviet Union, so they ruled out the first and last options.
Since the second option did not really exist, they ended up walking fatalistically into a quagmire.


BB&amp;T Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


. . . And Some of the Israelis See It, Too
"They cannot go against the United Nations. They cannot go against all their neighbors."
The speaker was Shimon Peres, the Israeli Foreign Minister, and he was talking on Wednesday about Iraq and why he felt the American-led alliance had to stage its air raids.


CHRONICLE
JAMES A. BAKER 3D, the departing White House chief of staff and former Secretary of State, will soon be associated with a Houston university whose roots reach deep into his family background.
Mr.
Baker has been elected to the board of Rice University, which will also establish the James A. Baker 3d Institute for Public Policy.
The announcement was made yesterday by CHARLES DUNCAN, the board's chairman.


GenCorp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


First Fidelity Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Technology Issues Lead Broad Market Advance
Stocks staged another broad advance yesterday, pushed higher by another surge in high-technology issues and a sharp rebound in the volatile transportation sector.
Compared with the broader market, blue chips continued to struggle.
The Dow Jones industrial average, down about 10 points at its midsession low, rallied later and closed with a gain of 4.32 points, at 3,267.88.
Big Board volume was heavy: 304.6 million shares changed hands.


Ketema Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Trial Is Set in B.C.C.I. Case
New York State's highest court today rejected a motion by Robert A. Altman to have state charges against him dismissed in the Bank of Credit and Commerce International scandal, paving the way for a criminal trial.
The ruling by the Court of Appeals comes three days after a state judge in Manhattan rejected a bid by Mr.
Altman's co-defendant, Clark M. Clifford, to have the state indictment dismissed because of his poor health.


Health Care Property reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Going Head to Head Late at Night: Letterman on CBS, Leno on NBC
Jay Leno, the host of the "Tonight" show, and David Letterman, the man who wanted to replace him, finally ended that competition last night.
In dueling news conferences less than an hour apart, Mr.
Leno, in California, said happily that he would get to keep his job at NBC, and Mr.
Letterman, in New York, said just as happily that he would move his show to CBS.


Josephine T. Moran; Volunteer, 90
Josephine T. Moran, a former Westchester resident who was active in many civic organizations, died on Wednesday at her home in Boulder, Colo.
She was 90.
She died of emphysema, said a son, Charles Moran 3d of Pelham, Mass.


The Art Market
Shows in London
Antiques shows are the topic of the week, at least for the dealers and collectors who assiduously follow them.
With the Winter Antiques Show only a week away, there is much speculation about how brisk business will be when the doors to the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan open next Friday night for the preview party that kicks off the 39-year-old event.
Dealers are already arriving in New York City from all over the world, for both the show and the Americana auctions that coincide with it, and one topic of conversation among these dealers is the increase in London antiques shows.


Holiday on Monday
The anniversary of the birth of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., actually Jan. 15, will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK


Society Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Clinton's Headaches: A World Afflicted by Wars and Poverty -- Japan and East Asia; A Rising Sun; Crises-in-Waiting
While Bill Clinton was elected President pledging to focus on the American economy like a "laser beam," his attention to domestic issues may be diverted by foreign affairs, a point brought home since the election by events in Iraq, Somalia and Bosnia.
Here is a region-by-region look at the world, showing some of key issues that the new President is likely to face.
For all of what Bush Administration officials describe as their foreign policy successes elsewhere, the concede that they are leaving Mr.
Clinton with an overarching problem in Asia: a Japan policy that is in disarray, with few fresh ideas about how to deal with America's biggest economic competitor.
The trade deficit, after declining temporarily, is almost at record levels -- nearly $50 billion in 1992.
With Japan in the midst of one of its steepest economic declines in years, the chances for a boost in imports of American goods this year are virtually nil.
And the Japanese fear a backlash that will lead to unilateral American action to restrict Japanese imports, poisoning early relations with the new Administration.
Lurking beneath the surface is resentment at the failure of the Bush Administration to focus on Japanese concerns; as Secretary of State, James A. Baker 3d spent more time visiting Ulan Bator than Tokyo.


New York City Planners Seek New Uses for Industrial Areas
After years of preserving industrial zoning for thousands of acres of land in the futile hope that New York City's manufacturing base could be revived, the city's planners said yesterday that they wanted to open the land for more promising uses.
The proposal by the City Planning Department, is aimed at improving neighborhood services, creating jobs and generating more tax revenues.
In many cases, the plan would make it easier to put into productive use land that is now vacant, underused or has only abandoned multistory industrial buildings.


Boxing; Foreman Is So Busy He Can't Retire
George Foreman turned 44 years old this week but barely paused to acknowledge the milestone.
Too busy.
There will be the fight tomorrow night with Pierre Coetzer, the first fight in what could be the final year of his boxing career if he doesn't get a title match.


Numbers and Numbers: Where's Einstein Street?


Culverhouse Has Cancer
A biopsy has confirmed the recurrence of a cancerous tumor in the right lung of HUGH CULVERHOUSE, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers' owner.


Puget Sound Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First of Long Island Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Coastal Areas Have to Prevent More Damage in Wake of Storm
To the Editor:
"Storm Points Up Problem of Elite L.I. Beaches" by James Rempel and "Will D'Amato Learn?" by Rutherford H. Platt (letters, Dec. 26), on the Dec. 11 storm, reflect the wrong approach to coastal policy.


Dow Up 3.24, to 3,271.12, Despite a Rush to Sell
Sometimes when the sirens go off and everyone runs for cover, there really isn't much danger.
Such was the case with the stock market yesterday.
The New York Stock Exchange's report at 3 P.M. of an excess of sell orders to be executed at the market's close an hour later helped generate a 19-point plunge in the Dow over the subsequent 10 minutes. 'Hitting Stocks'
"A lot of people suddenly saw the imbalances," said Zemach Sternberg, a Salomon Brothers trader, "and everybody started hitting stocks."


Angels Trade Stevens
The California Angels traded first baseman LEE STEVENS to the Montreal Expos yesterday in exchange for minor league reliever JEFF TUSS.


Geriatric &amp; Medical Centers reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Traded Lee Stevens, first baseman, to the Montreal Expos for Jeff Tuss, pitcher; assigned Tuss to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Agreed to terms with Steve Frey, pitcher, on a one-year contract and Stan Javier, outfielder, on a minor league contract.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Agreed to terms with Ron Karkovice, catcher, on a three-year contract.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Mark Gardner, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Agreed to terms with Al Leiter, pitcher, on a one-year contract, and Dick Schofield, shortstop, on a minor league contract.
National League  CINCINNATI -- Named Grant Jackson pitching coach of Chattanooga of the Southern League; Steve Oliverio pitching coach of Princeton of the Appalachian League, and Ferguson Jenkins minor-league roving pitching instructor.
Promoted Darrell Rodgers, Appalachian League pitching coach, to assistant for baseball operations.
Signed Juan Samuel, second baseman, to a one-year contract.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Agreed to terms with Tom Pagnozzi, catcher, on a four-year contract, and Todd Zeile and Tim Jones, infielders, on one-year contracts.
International League  ROCHESTER RED WINGS -- Named Glenn Geffner director of communications.
Basketball National Basketball Association  NBA -- Denied the Phoenix Suns' protest of their Jan. 3 loss to San Antonio.
DETROIT PISTONS -- Announced that Dennis Rodman, forward, will miss three to six weeks with a torn right calf muscle.
INDIANA PACERS -- Placed LaSalle Thompson, forward, on the injured list.
LOS ANGELES CLIPPERS -- Placed Jaren Jackson, guard, on the injured list.
Signed Duane Washington, guard, to a 10-day contract.
SACRAMENTO KINGS -- Placed Marty Conlon, forward, on the injured list.
Activated Pete Chilcutt, forward-center, from the injured list.
Football National Football League  NEW YORK JETS -- Named Mo Forte running backs coach.
Hockey National Hockey League  NEW YORK RANGERS -- Sent Mike Richter, goaltender, to Binghamton of the American Hockey League on a conditioning assignment.
Called up Corey Hirsch, goaltender, from Binghamton.
Colonial Hockey League  FLINT BULLDOGS -- Waived Brian Bellefeville, left wing.
Horse racing  NEW JERSEY SPORTS AND EXPOSITION AUTHORITY -- Named Steven Schwartz director of thoroughbred media relations.
Soccer  National Professional Soccer League  CHICAGO POWER -- Promoted Gayle Marshall, treasurer, to vice president.
College
CINCINNATI -- Announced the resignation of Richard Skeel, baseball coach.
EDINBURG -- Named Tracie Garner women's basketball coach.
SOUTH CAROLINA -- Named John Gutekunst outside linebackers coach.
TENNESSEE -- Announced that Daryl Milson, forward, is leaving the men's basketball team for an indefinite period for personal reasons.
TEXAS-PAN AMERICAN -- Named Tracie Garner women's basketball coach.


Abe Lincoln vs. the Justice Department
One of America's largest medical companies, National Health Laboratories, agreed last month to pay the Government $110 million to settle a lawsuit for unnecessary medical tests billed to Medicaid and Medicare.
In July, General Electric agreed to pay a $59.5 million civil settlement stemming from a conspiracy between G.E. executives and an Israeli general to charge the U.S. for goods and services that were never provided.
In June, the successor to the Singer Corporation, the CAE-Link Corporation, agreed to pay $55.9 million for overbilling the Pentagon on more than $1 billion worth of contracts for flight simulators.
These tax dollars were restored to the Treasury not because of any Justice Department prosecutorial zeal but in spite of the department's efforts.
The cases were brought by courageous employees of the companies.
Using a modern version of a law drafted in 1863 by Abraham Lincoln to combat war profiteers, they sued their employers on behalf of the United States in return for a share of the Government's reward.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Consumer inflation was just 2.9 percent in 1992, the lowest annual rate in six years.
The so-called core rate of inflation, which excludes food and energy, fell to 3.3 percent, the slimmest rise since 1972.
Another report showed that industrial production moved up three-tenths of 1 percent in December.  [ Page 1. ]
Lower exports caused the trade deficit to widen by 5.1 percent in November.
The Commerce Department also said it had under-reported the nation's imports of Japanese cars and trucks by $1.84 billion over the last three years.  [ 44. ]


U.S. SENDS FLOTILLA TO PREVENT EXODUS FROM HAITI BY SEA
The Coast Guard has begun moving cutters and will deploy patrol boats and aircraft to the waters north of Haiti to block an expected wave of refugees seeking to reach the United States.
Administration officials said the deployment was ordered in consultation with aides to President-elect Bill Clinton.
It was intended, in part, to put teeth into Mr.
Clinton's announcement on Thursday that he would temporarily abandon a campaign pledge and continue President Bush's policy of returning Haitian boat people without providing them the opportunity to apply for political asylum.


HEAVY RAINS FLOOD BAJA CALIFORNIA
After more than a week of heavy rain and devastating floods that have killed at least 17 people and left almost 5,000 homeless, a new storm stood off the Pacific coast today threatened to plunge this battered city and its environs into further chaos and despair.
Since the heaviest rains began on Jan. 7, many houses have slid off hills, roads have been buried in mudslides and rock falls and people have been swept away in torrents of water, debris and mud.
No one knows how many are missing, although the authorities have received almost a hundred reports of missing people.


The Beat Goes On: Nets Outlast 76ers
The thing to remember when watching the Nets is not to try to make any kind of sane analysis of this team.
Like a yo-yo, they go up and down.
Unpredictable.
Poetic and sometimes ugly.
In their 110-105 overtime victory against Philadelphia tonight before 12,959 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena they were all of the above.
Most important, they were winners in a game they probably had no business winning.
A late rally did it for them.


New Lives Prompt Gifts to the Neediest
The headlines in the morning paper speak of grinding poverty in New York City, a battered national economy and crises in the Balkans, Iraq and Somalia.
Even so, you suddenly feel optimistic about the world because of the arrival of a newcomer to your family -- a crawling, babbling, miniature human being who has the power to make once-articulate adults speak gibberish.
A baby!


Bionaire reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Shuberts, Too, Offering Seat Locations by Phone
The Shubert Organization, Broadway's largest theater owner, has begun offering information on seat locations to customers who order tickets to its shows by telephone.
On Thursday, through its Tele-Charge system, the Shuberts began offering seat locations for shows in 10 of its theaters as well as in 3 shows at Jujamcyn Theaters.
They include "Cats," "Conversations With My Father," "Crazy for You," "Falsettos," "Five Guys Named Moe," "Guys and Dolls," "Jelly's Last Jam," "Les Miserables," "Miss Saigon," "The Phantom of the Opera," "Saint Joan," "The Sisters Rosensweig" and "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me."


Red Wings Rally to Win, 6-3


SCI Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


An Office on the Porch: No Rent, a Quick Commute and a Yearly Tax Savings
In 1980, on the sun porch of his house in Red Bank, N.J., George Bowden started a package importing business.
Besides saving money on rent and transportation, he has reduced his income taxes by taking home-office deductions allowed by Federal law.
Because he has no other place of business, the deductions are still allowed under this week's Supreme Court ruling on home offices.
Since the office is part of the house, certain household expenses - which would be incurred even without the office - are attributed to the company and are therefore partially deductible.
In effect, the law says that 10 percent of Mr.
Bowden's normal household operating costs are spent on the business because the busness occupies 10 percent of his house.


Summit Health reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


'92 Consumer Prices Rose 2.9%, The Lowest Inflation in Six Years
Consumer prices rose by 2.9 percent in 1992, the best performance in six years, as inflation decelerated in nearly every major category, the Labor Department reported today.
Even more impressive, various analysts said, was that the so-called core inflation rate, which excludes food and energy, eased to 3.3 percent.
This was the slimmest rise since 1972, when the economy was subject to price controls imposed by the Nixon Administration.


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Ballet; Marsalis's Wit and Anger Evoke Visions of America
"Jazz (Six Syncopated Movements)" is, true to the New York City Ballet's habit, a new work for the company that is named after its score.
The music is by Wynton Marsalis, one of contemporary jazz's most popular musicians, and it was written for Peter Martins, one of today's most prominent neo-classical choreographers.
The premiere of "Jazz," which the City Ballet presented on Thursday night at the New York State Theater was eagerly awaited for several reasons, not the least of which is the fabulous commissioned score that Mr.
Marsalis composed for Garth Fagan's 1991 modern-dance success, "Griot New York."


New Offerings for the Wealthy and Others
The Vanguard Group has introduced the Admiral series of four no-load mutual funds that invest in United States Treasury securities and are aimed at wealthy investors.
The series includes a money market fund and three funds that invest in short- , intermediate- and long-term Treasury securities.
Low annual expenses of 0.15 percent -- which increase the funds' yields -- are shaved by the funds' high minimum investment of $50,000.


MGIC Investment Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Henry Iba, 88, A Top Coach In Basketball
Henry (Hank) Iba, who won two national basketball championships at Oklahoma State during a 41-year college coaching career and guided three successive United States Olympic basketball teams, died yesterday at the Stillwater (Okla.) Medical Center.
He was 88.
Iba died at 1:30 A.M. of heart failure, said Susan Collins, vice president of marketing at the medical center.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 U.S. MAY ATTACK IRAQ AGAIN
U.S. forces were preparing again for action against Iraq, this time over its refusal to guarantee the security of U.N. weapons inspectors who fly into their country.
U.N. officials said the Iraqi Government was trying to intimidate the inspectors.  1


CONFERENCE CHAMPIONSHIPS Dolphins-Bills Theme: Miami Wants to Keep Place in Record Book
Big games develop big themes.
And the game Sunday between the Miami Dolphins and the Buffalo Bills for the American Football Conference championship -- with the survivor going to the Super Bowl -- has one of the most compelling motivators of all: pride.
"We've been the only team to get to the Super Bowl three straight years," said the Dolphins' legendary coach, Don Shula.
"It never happened before and it hasn't happened since."


Mafia Suspect Caught


Immigrants to Bhutan Pose Serious Threat
To the Editor:
"Fundamentalism in South Asia Isn't All Islam" (The Week in Review, Dec. 13) incorrectly implies there is religious fundamentalism in Bhutan, which is creating problems in the country and in South Asia.
Religion is not a factor in national politics in Bhutan.
The two main religions, Buddhism and Hinduism, which have the same roots and share many beliefs and gods, exist side by side in peace and harmony.


Jennifer Convertibles reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Cullen/Frost Bankers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Craig Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Richter's Downfall Continues
In a strong indication of just how tenuous Mike Richter's situation has become with the Rangers, the team sent the goaltender to the minor leagues yesterday for what was labeled a five-game conditioning stint.
Richter was not officially demoted, and the Rangers set a specific date -- Jan. 24 -- for his return.
But the decision to play Richter, once one of the Rangers' highest-profile players, in the minors for any stretch of time only highlights the frustration felt by the team's president, Neil Smith, and his coaching staff as they have watched Richter's play take a downward spiral this season.


Redlaw Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nets Win in Overtime, 110-105


Bush Makes Public Iran-Contra Diary
In a final effort to clear the stain of the Iran-contra scandal from his career, President Bush made public today a sheaf of personal ruminations about the affair, dictated as it unfolded six years ago.
It suggests that he was indeed unaware of crucial aspects of the episode.
The extraordinary stream-of-consciousness monologue, totaling 31 double-spaced pages, was excerpted from tape recordings Mr.
Bush made to document his emerging campaign for the Presidency.
The White House, which did not release the tapes themselves, said the excerpts included all the thoughts on the Iran-contra affair that Vice President Bush recorded at the height of the scandal in 1986 and 1987.  [ Excerpts, page 8. ] Alarm Over a 'Firestorm'
Mr.
Bush's private lawyers said that the judgment of relevance was theirs and that more detailed transcripts, as well as later ones, had been given to the independent counsel investigating the matter, Lawrence E. Walsh.
The lawyers said that nothing in those transcripts altered Mr.
Bush's basic account of his role in the affair.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Dr.
George Gero, a Manhattan psycho analyst who died on Monday, misstated his professional status.
He continued to practice until his death.


Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.'s Birthday Is Remembered in Washington


Lingering Questions About Child Abuse
Embarrassed by news stories documenting horrendous, sometimes fatal, lapses in child welfare services, the Dinkins administration now announces that it will hire 300 additional caseworkers.
That's an essential step toward protecting New York's most vulnerable children from abuse and neglect -- and sobering evidence of how unacceptably reactive child welfare policy has become.
Mayor David Dinkins set out to dedicate his administration to children.
But diminished resources and poor management at the Human Resources Administration, which has jurisdiction over abused and neglected children, have seriously undermined the Mayor's intentions.


A Rescue Operation for Congress
Women and abortion providers who need Federal legal protection from Operation Rescue's spiteful, violent blockades of abortion clinics will have to go to Congress.
The Supreme Court, by refusing to apply existing law against domestic terrorism, has made the trip necessary.
Fortunately, there is broad support in Congress and the incoming Clinton Administration for a protective new law.
Congress wrote expansive statutes after the Civil War to cope with white vigilantes who were terrorizing blacks and circumventing state protections for newly emancipated Americans.
It authorized civil lawsuits against those conspiring to deprive "any person or class of persons of the equal protection of the laws" or to prevent state authorities from safeguarding those rights.


Regency Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


International Electronics Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Fund-Raising in Mayor's Race Reaches Million-Dollar Pace
New York City's mayoral candidates kept up their fund-raising fever over the last six months, led by City Council President Andrew J. Stein, who took in $1.2 million in contributions, $200,000 of it from his parents.
Mayor David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani each raised just over $1 million each, according to financial reports released yesterday.
Mr.
Stein remains in the lead in the race for money, with just over $2 million in cash as of Monday.
Mr.
Giuliani had $1.4 million and the Mayor almost $1.1 million, although after they collect the matching public funds to which they are entitled, their tallies will be closer to Mr.
Stein's.


Burmese Military Keeps Grip on Power
To the Editor:
In "Burmese Make Their Way to Democracy" (letter, Dec. 26), Thein Tun, Myanmar's United Nations delegate, calls the National Convention scheduled for Jan. 9 a step toward democracy in Myanmar.
He also states that the General Assembly resolution on Myanmar has "little support among member states." These claims are difficult to uphold.


Bridge
Large numbers of enthusiasts made their way to the Rye Town Hilton in Port Chester, N.Y., this week for the Tri-State Regional Championships, undeterred by the bad weather that is traditional for this tournament.
Winners of events played Wednesday and Thursday were:
Stratified Open Pairs Flight A, David Ehler of Farmington, Conn., and Richard De Martino of Riverside, Conn.; Flight B and C, Judy Goulding of Manhattan and James Gleick of Brooklyn.


Religion Notes
The Rev. Mr. Inauguration
Presidents come and go, but the Rev. Billy Graham remains.


Q &amp; A
Funds, Open and Closed
What is the difference between a mutual fund, a closed-end fund and a unit trust?
MICHAEL GOLDSTEIN, MONROE, N.Y.
Mutual funds, also called open-end funds, are actively managed pools of securities owned by their shareholders.
"They are legally required to stand ready to redeem existing shares every business day at the shares' true per-share value, known as net asset value or N.A.V.," said Matthew P. Fink, president of the Investment Company Institute.


Hand-Feeding, a 34-Degree Home and Perfect Lighting Make for Fine Dining


Excerpts From the Portions of Bush's Diaries Released by the White House
Following are excerpts from the portions of President Bush's tape-recorded diary from Nov. 4, 1986, through Jan. 1, 1987, that were released today by the White House:
This is November 4, 1986, the beginning of what I hope will be an accurate diary, with at least five and maybe 15 minutes a day on observations about my run for the presidency in 1988. . . .


Review/Opera; New Met 'Meistersinger' Aims for Literalism
Something remarkable happened Thursday night during the third act of the Metropolitan Opera's new production of "Die Meistersinger von Nurnberg." Hans Sachs, a 16th-century cobbler and Mastersinger, was teaching the young aspirant Walther the rules of song.
But it seemed as if the entire cast, supported by James Levine's supple conducting, was attentive to his esthetic lessons.
There were beautifully structured arias but also exquisite nuances; freedom accompanied law.
One was tempted to paraphrase Sachs's acclaim for Walther: this came close to being a Masterscene.
There were many highlights throughout the performance, but that scene -- with its final quintet -- was the heart of this impressive, uncut "Meistersinger." Otto Schenk has again made a case for traditionally staged Wagner at the Met, following the composer's detailed directions.
In this case, the literalness made still more sense because Wagner violated his own principles for musical drama and used a realistic subject, not a mythical one, basing his story on the song contests once held by German guilds.


Environment Gets a Flurry Of Final Acts
The Bush Administration is ending its days in power with a series of striking decisions affecting national parks, forests, agriculture, land, industrial wastes and endangered species.
The decisions -- some supported by business interests, some by environmentalists -- make this the most active period of the Bush Presidency on natural resource issues.
Just this week, the United States Forest Service, a unit of the Department of Agriculture, said it would end clear-cutting on 5.3 million acres of national forest in the Sierra Nevada to save the habitat of the California spotted owl and head off a possible threat of its extinction.


First Bancorp of Ohio reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Braintree Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Turning Out the Lights on the Lanes
The balls still rumble down the floodlit lanes and the pins still thunder with each strike, but the sounds at Loyal Inn Bowling are a thin echo of earlier days.
"When I was a kid this place was wall-to-wall people," said Robert DiMicelli, a son of the owner of Loyal Inn, as he looked around the 48-lane bowling center where only four lanes were in use.
"It's a shame to see it go down like this."


Compucom Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BankNorth Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Slot Machines Are Delayed; Weicker's Deal Is Hailed
A technical glitch postponed the first coin-jangling, bell-ringing day of Connecticut's leap into legal slot-machine gambling, even as the repercussions of Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s deal clearing the way for the machines continued to clang and clatter in Hartford.
Officials at the Mashantucket Pequot Indian tribe's Foxwoods casino said that independent testing of the machines' on-board computers -- begun Wednesday after the agreement with Mr.
Weicker was signed -- had not been completed.
They said they hoped to have 75 to 100 machines operating by the end of the weekend, with 100 to 200 more coming on line every week through March 1.


Asbestos Settlement Is Proposed
In a proposal that may serve as a model for averting tens of thousands of personal-injury lawsuits involving asbestos and settling thousands of claims already pending, lawyers for injured workers and 20 defendant companies filed an agreement in Federal court here today that sets out a system for promptly processing and paying claims valued at over $2 billion.
Lawyers for both sides hailed the agreement, hammered out over the last year, as "historic" and union leaders also issued statements praising the settlement.


Premier Hears an Echo Of '47 in Bombay Riots
Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao, his voice breaking after a tour of riot-scarred Bombay, said today that the religious violence was reminiscent of the brutal Hindu-Muslim riots that accompanied the partition of the subcontinent in 1947.
"If this country forsakes the path of secularism, it will break," Mr.
Rao told a news conference.
Security officials did not allow the Prime Minister to step out of his bulletproof car during a rushed tour through the crowded neighborhoods that were battered and burned by the sectarian violence.
But he did meet riot victims at the hospital in central Bombay and try to comfort them.


Mets Reassured on Gooden
After consulting with Dwight Gooden, as well as with the St.
Petersburg doctors who treated him, the Mets were confident yesterday that the injuries the right-handed pitcher suffered in a car crash Thursday are not major and do not pose a threat to his playing status for 1993.
Gooden suffered bruises to his forehead and chest when his 1991 Ford Explorer collided with a mail storage box after he was forced off a road in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
Gooden was treated at a local hospital and spent a quiet night at home Thursday.


Destron/IDI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Health International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Philharmonic; Shostakovich 13th, With Yevtushenko
Literature, musical and otherwise, is full of works about suffering and redemption, among them many fictional, mythological and religious tales in which redemption is a certainty.
But in real life redemption is not guaranteed, as Kurt Masur, the New York Philharmonic and the Russian poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko reminded listeners on Thursday evening in an extraordinary program that will be repeated tonight and on Tuesday evening at Avery Fisher Hall.
There were two works on the program, and between them Mr.
Yevtushenko read three of his poems.
Bright Sheng's "H'un (Lacerations): In Memoriam 1966-76," is a recollection of the Chinese Cultural Revolution by a young composer who lived through it.
And Shostakovich's "Babi Yar" Symphony, a setting of five Yevtushenko poems, begins with an excoriation of anti-Semitism in Russia, using the 1941 Nazi massacre of Jews, Russians and Ukrainians at Babi Yar as a backdrop, and then paints a picture of the Soviet Union during the post-Stalinist thaw.


With Hammer's Help, Holyfield Is Returning
EVANDER HOLYFIELD, the former heavyweight champion, says he is ending his brief retirement and plans to fight again later this year.
Holyfield announced his retirement after losing the unified title to RIDDICK BOWE in November, changed his mind and then decided again to retire.


Property Values Fall in New York City
The assessed value of property in New York City has fallen for the third year in a row, a decline that will cost the city millions in property-tax revenues in the coming fiscal year, city officials said yesterday.
But revenues from other taxes are beginning to climb, officials said, as the city slowly begins to rise out of the depths of the recession.
The property-tax figures were released as the Dinkins administration worked on its budget for the fiscal year that begins July 1 and struggled to close a budget gap estimated at $1.6 billion.


He-Ro Group Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY POST PUBLISHER SAYS DEAL MAY BE DEAD
Peter S. Kalikow, the publisher of The New York Post, said that a deal with an investor that could have financially stabilized the newspaper appeared virtually dead.
Almost anything, he said, including a sale of a controlling interest in the newspaper, is now possible.
But he did not say The Post was for sale.
Page 25.
PROPERTY VALUES FALL FOR 3D YEAR
The assessed value of property in New York City has fallen for the third year in a row, a decline that will cost the city millions in property-tax revenues in the coming fiscal year, city officials said.
But revenues from other taxes are beginning to climb, they said.
Page 24.


Majkowski Has Surgery
Green Bay Packers quarterback DON MAJKOWSKI underwent surgery on his right shoulder for the second time in two years.
"He had some foreign matter in there and wanted it scoped and cleaned out," General Manager RON WOLF said of the quarterback's surgery on Thursday.


Philip Glass Plus Dance
Philip Glass will play his piano score for Molissa Fenley's dance work "Provenance Unknown" Sunday night at 7:30 at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).
Tickets are $20.
Information: (212) 242-0800.


Correction
An editing error altered the meaning of a Jan. 2 letter by C. Fred Bergsten about the National Economic Council.
That council, the writer intended to state, not the Council of Economic Advisers, has the role of coordinating the issues that make up economic policy.


3 Officers Hurt in Shootouts With Suspects in 2 Robberies
Three police officers were shot yesterday as they traded gunfire with suspects involved in two robbery attempts, one in Manhattan and one in Brooklyn, the police said.
All three officers were shot in the leg.
In the early afternoon, Police Officer Ralph Vitacco, 26, was responding to a radio call about a robbery at a Red Apple supermarket at 145th and Broadway, the police said, and arrived at the scene after other officers had already begun shooting at three suspects.


REPORT IS CRITICAL OF F.B.I. DIRECTOR
After a long investigation, the Justice Department has prepared a critical report on the administrative practices of William S. Sessions that could cloud his future as Director of the F.B.I., Bush Administration officials said today.
The report by the department's internal ethics unit, the Office of Professional Responsibility, was sent in recent days to Attorney General William P. Barr, who is said to have communicated his decision on disciplinary sanctions to Mr.
Sessions today, Mr.
Barr's last day in office.


Stop Balkanizing Macedonia
The Balkan war threatens to spread beyond Bosnia to neighboring Macedonia.
Serbian pressure on the ethnic Albanian majority in Kosovo is radicalizing their kin in newly independent Macedonia, destabilizing that fragile country and tempting its neighbors to intervene.
The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe sent a handful of observers to Macedonia last fall.
Now the U.N. is sending 700 more.
But even more are needed to secure Macedonia's borders with Serbia, Kosovo, Bulgaria, Albania and Greece and keep provocateurs and gun-runners from igniting an already incendiary situation.


Nicholls Fits In Quickly With the Devils
This morning, in his first practice with his new team, Bernie Nicholls took turns skating with different New Jersey players, as if to introduce himself.
But his Devils teammates had no trouble recognizing the flamboyant center.
He was the only one without a helmet, although he wears one in games, and there was no missing that telltale blond hair, which is shorter than it was in his days with the Rangers as Broadway Bernie.


CHRONICLE
LETTY COTTIN POGREBIN, the feminist writer, says there is very little she will not do for HILLARY CLINTON or for Jewish causes, so when LAUREL VLOCK, the producer and moderator of a cable television program called "Jewish Spectrum" asked her to be on a panel discussing Mrs.
Clinton, she agreed.
The taping on Wednesday turned out to be more than Ms.
Pogrebin, who was in the throes of preparing for the wedding tonight of her daughter Robin Pogrebin, had anticipated.


Contract Talks Did Not Stress Productivity Gains
After insisting for a year that the city would not grant raises unless the municipal unions paid for them through greater efficiency, the Dinkins administration never put forward a concrete list of productivity demands during the crucial bargaining that led to a settlement on Monday, labor negotiators said.
The leaders of some of the major unions involved in the talks said negotiators never reached the point of discussing specific proposals for work-rule changes or other union concessions.


October Surprise: Not Guilty
A House task force has diligently sifted a mountain of documents and questioned 230 people to determine whether the Reagan campaign conspired in 1980 to delay the release of American hostages in Iran and thus deprive President Jimmy Carter of a campaign boost.
It finds "no credible evidence" for so scandalous a deal.
The panel's majority rightly faults key Republican aides like Richard Allen and Robert McFarlane for meeting during the 1980 campaign in a Washington hotel with shadowy figures who claimed they could deliver hostages to the Reagan forces.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about the appointment of a new chief executive of the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation misidentified the Welshman who became the company's chief operating officer in May 1985.
He is Raymond J. Pritchard, the company's current chief executive.


Court Says Bush Administration Can Erase Files if Copies Are Kept
A Federal appeals panel said today that the Bush Administration could begin erasing White House and National Security computer files as long as it preserved identical electronic copies of the information it was destroying.
The ruling upheld the spirit of two court orders issued in the last eight days by Federal District Court Judge Charles R. Richey, while partly modifying them.


Moffat Commun reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Central Bancshares of the South reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cell Within Cell: Captive Girl's Tiny Cage
Even inside the dark, dank underground chamber where she was held for 16 days, Katie Beers was not free to move about.
Most of the time, the police revealed today, she stayed in a tiny, cramped wooden loft sealed by a bolted hatch.
It looked like a coffin suspended from the ceiling.


Guatemalan Chief Tries to Spur Peace Pact
Asserting that the guerrilla front is blocking a peace accord, President Jorge Serrano has proposed that the two sides try to resolve their differences in an intense 90-day period of negotiations and, if that fails, ask the United Nations to send forces into rebel zones.
In his state of the nation address to the Guatemalan Congress on Thursday, Mr.
Serrano said he was taking that new position because "the Guatemalan people want to see themselves free of this conflict."


U.S. Agent Says Two Players Had Large Amounts of Drugs
The Federal agent in charge of an investigation that resulted in the indictment of two National Football League players this week said today that thousands of units of anabolic steroids and human growth hormone were seized from New York Giants guard Eric Moore and Tampa Bay Buccaneers defensive end Mark Duckens.
Garfield Hammonds Jr., special agent in charge of the Atlanta office of the Drug Enforcement Administration, said the quantity of drugs seized led him to believe the drugs were intended for distribution, not personal use.
But Hammonds said there was no proof that the drugs were intended for other N.F.L. players.


F&amp;M National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Court to Weigh U.S. Power To Seize Criminals' Assets
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether the Government's use of its power to seize the property of drug dealers or other criminals can violate the Constitution if the value of the property far outweighs the severity of the offense.
The case is a potentially important test of this forfeiture concept at a time when the Federal Government is aggressively using its authority against small-time narcotics dealers as well as major criminal enterprises.


Immigrants to Bhutan Pose Serious Threat
To the Editor:
"Fundamentalism in South Asia Isn't All Islam" (The Week in Review, Dec. 13) incorrectly implies there is religious fundamentalism in Bhutan, which is creating problems in the country and in South Asia.
Religion is not a factor in national politics in Bhutan.
The two main religions, Buddhism and Hinduism, which have the same roots and share many beliefs and gods, exist side by side in peace and harmony.


John Nuveen Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lemieux's Comfort Is Close-Knit
The notion really took hold of him Monday during his 20-minute drive home to suburban Sewickley, Pa.
Mario Lemieux, the quiet giant of ice hockey, had just listened to the diagnosis from Dr.
Steven Jones at Allegheny General Hospital.
Lemieux could not be certain he was bigger, or stronger, than Hodgkin's disease.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.93
2.97
3.80
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.94
2.95
3.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.10
3.87
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.22
6.26
6.79
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.34
7.39
7.60
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.42
8.46
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.38
6.67
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Met-Coil Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Cowboys-Niners Figures to Be a Battle of Traction
The Candlestick Park grass surface has been resodded but remains wet.
George Toma, the National Football League's groundskeeping guru, was brought here this week to work on the field and he initially described it as the worst he had seen in more than 40 years of experience.
Toma needs cooperation from the weather, but he may not get it.
More rain is forecast for the N.F.C. championship game on Sunday between the Dallas Cowboys and the San Francisco 49ers, putting the condition of the field in peril.
Still, that doesn't mean the explosive offenses of both teams will be submerged.


Celanese Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: End of a Bumpy Road; Clinton Aides Wondering, 'Where's Our Honeymoon?'
After a campaign in which President-elect Bill Clinton was credited with skillfully dodging political trouble, his chief spokesman today found himself in the unusual position of acknowledging that the transition to the White House has been rougher than expected.
"Maybe all of us were a little bit surprised by how quickly this all comes upon you," said George Stephanopoulos, the communications director.
"The transition really isn't a transition all the time. You're immediately faced with all the difficulties, all the decisions that come with being in office." Relief at Transition's End
At his last scheduled briefing here before Mr.
Clinton is sworn into office Wednesday, Mr.
Stephanopoulos wearily said he was "relieved to have the transition end."


Dear David
Congratulations on bringing your late-night show to CBS.
But don't let Larry Tisch give you any of that $42 million over three years in CBS stock.
It has never returned to its 1987 high.
If Jack Welch at G.E. is stingier with you and other late night hosts on NBC, he's been far more generous to stock-holders over the years.
Even yesterday, G.E. was off just 1/4 while CBS fell 3 1/8


Bugel Keeps Job
Bill Bidwill, owner of the Phoenix Cardinals, announced yesterday that he was retaining Coach JOE BUGEL and General Manager LARRY WILSON for at least another season.
Wilson, who said his own agreement with Bidwill is "a daily contract," extended Bugel's contract through 1994.
But Bidwell told a news conference that unless the Cardinals have a winning season this fall, changes in the organization would reach all the way to Wilson's level.
Bugel, who had been in the last year of a four-year contract, has a 13-35 record in three years and finished 4-12 last season. (AP)


Immigrants to Bhutan Pose Serious Threat
To the Editor:
"Fundamentalism in South Asia Isn't All Islam" (The Week in Review, Dec. 13) incorrectly implies there is religious fundamentalism in Bhutan, which is creating problems in the country and in South Asia.
Religion is not a factor in national politics in Bhutan.
The two main religions, Buddhism and Hinduism, which have the same roots and share many beliefs and gods, exist side by side in peace and harmony.


Behind the Mutiny at Sunbeam-Oster
What is certain about Paul B. Kazarian, the recently deposed chairman, chief executive and president of the Sunbeam-Oster Company, is that he irritated and intimidated many of his managers.
And Mr.
Kazarian is the first to admit it.
"Am I unbelievably demanding? Yes," he said in an interview at his home here.
"Am I a perfectionist? No question."


A Ban on Gay-Rights Laws Is Put on Hold in Colorado
A state judge in Denver today blocked Colorado from enforcing an anti-gay rights measure until he can decide in a trial whether the law violates the Federal or State Constitution.
The judge said the law could pose "real, immediate and irreparable injury" to homosexuals.
The measure, approved in a referendum in November, would have barred any law that protects homosexuals from discrimination.
It has provoked a maelstrom in Colorado and prompted a boycott of the state by many tourists and organizations.
Some boycott supporters called for the protest to continue until the measure was overturned.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the State of the State Address given by Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey misidentified the minister who delivered the invocation.
She was the Rev.
Rochelle Hendricks, associate pastor of Grant Chapel Church in Trenton.
The Rev.
Ollice Bates of Mount Zion Baptist Church in Salem delivered a prayer earlier in the day at a voting session of the General Assembly.


Data Research Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jansko Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Bush Frees Ex-U.S. Agent In Manhattan
President Bush yesterday commuted the sentence of a former Federal immigration agent imprisoned for conducting illegal searches and filing false reports against Hispanic store owners in Washington Heights.
The order freeing the agent, Joseph Occhipinti, who had served eight months of 37-month prison sentence, put an end to a case that became something of a cause celebre among police officers and other law-enforcement officials, who viewed him as an aggressive agent who successfully rooted out drug dealers and illegal aliens in a crime-ridden neighborhood.
But to many in the community, Mr.
Occhipinti, 42, was just another overzealous official who invaded their lives with techniques of harassment.
He was convicted of violating the store owners' civil rights.


Italy Arrests Sicilian Mafia's Top Leader
The police said today that they had arrested Salvatore (Toto) Riina, the presumed head of the Sicilian Mafia, who has been sought by the police for more than 23 years as he fought a bloody path to the leadership of one of the world's most feared and effective organized crime gangs.
Seized by plainclothes agents at a roadblock here during Palermo's morning rush hour, Mr.
Riina, 62, was promptly incarcerated in the city's Ucciardone high-security prison.
Italian news reports said he was later transferred to a secret location.


Fifth Third Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chemfix Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Owners Are Avoiding The Arbitration Route
In advance of their full-scale effort to rid baseball of salary arbitration, the major league clubs have made such a strong effort to make it go away this year that an unusually low number of players filed for arbitration yesterday.
Acting on the last day of the filing period, 115 players submitted their names, making the total 116.
Jeff Huson of Texas filed last week, but he reached agreement with the Rangers the next day.


Central Mortgage Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Allied Warplanes Are Again Ready To Attack Iraqis
Two days after allied planes launched an air strike against Iraq, American forces were again prepared for action tonight, this time over Iraq's refusal to guarantee the security of United Nations inspectors who fly into their country.
And even if Iraq backs down, officials said, the Administration may order an attack aimed at some surface-to-air missile batteries that were missed in Wednesday's raid.


Rehabilitating a Shattered Credit Rating
Byron, a 40-year-old hospital administrator, is a textbook example of how to restore a tarnished credit rating.
He is nearing the end of a four-year effort to repay more than $30,000 in debts that accumulated after he lost his job in upstate New York.
The payments on those debts, which included an unpaid tuition bill, furniture loans and big credit card balances, were manageable as long as Byron was receiving a steady paycheck.
"But we became accustomed to living up to our income," he recalled, and once his $55,000-a-year job evaporated, Byron, his wife and their two teen-age daughters were in trouble. (To protect their privacy, the family members asked that their last name not be used.)


Majestic Contractors reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A front-page headline yesterday with an article about a judge's move to stop the Bush Administration from purging computer records described the judge's comments incorrectly.
The judge did not single out Iran-contra data.


Sports of The Times; Baseball Is Being Balkanized
THE words jumped off the page and spoke volumes about a level of frustration within the ranks of a significant arm of major league baseball: "In recent weeks, I have felt increasingly underutilized and out of the loop."
The sentence was written by baseball's deputy commissioner, Steve Greenberg, as part of the letter of resignation he tendered Wednesday.
And it sums up a feeling that has permeated parts of baseball's central government in the months after the forced resignation of Commissioner Fay Vincent.


Castle Energy Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Sammy Cahn, Word Weaver Of Tin Pan Alley, Dies at 79
Sammy Cahn, one of the last American songwriters to embody the scrappy can-do spirit of Tin Pan Alley, died yesterday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 79.
He had been hospitalized two-and-a-half weeks ago for congestive heart failure, said Ron Wise, a hospital spokesman.
A lyricist whose most important collaborators were the composers Jule Styne, Jimmy Van Heusen and Saul Chaplin, Mr.
Cahn wrote the words for dozens of songs that became hits, including "All the Way," "Day By Day," "Time After Time," and "Three Coins in the Fountain." The typical Cahn lyric was brashly assertive and often unabashedly sentimental.
"When somebody loves you, it's no good unless she loves you all the way," went his opening line for "All the Way," from the 1957 film "The Joker Is Wild." The song became a No. 1 hit for Frank Sinatra and won the year's Oscar.


Century Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Sammy Cahn, Word Weaver Of Tin Pan Alley, Dies at 79
Sammy Cahn, one of the last American songwriters to embody the scrappy can-do spirit of Tin Pan Alley, died yesterday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 79.
He had been hospitalized two-and-a-half weeks ago for congestive heart failure, said Ron Wise, a hospital spokesman.
A lyricist whose most important collaborators were the composers Jule Styne, Jimmy Van Heusen and Saul Chaplin, Mr.
Cahn wrote the words for dozens of songs that became hits, including "All the Way," "Day By Day," "Time After Time," and "Three Coins in the Fountain." The typical Cahn lyric was brashly assertive and often unabashedly sentimental.
"When somebody loves you, it's no good unless she loves you all the way," went his opening line for "All the Way," from the 1957 film "The Joker Is Wild." The song became a No. 1 hit for Frank Sinatra and won the year's Oscar.


KU Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Caldwell Partners International reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


FirsTier Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SEEQ Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


How the Supreme Court's Home-Office Ruling Affects Filers
The Supreme Court decision this week backing the Internal Revenue Service's rigorous interpretation of the law governing an office in the home will affect thousands of taxpayers as they file their 1992 returns.
The decision affirmed the I.R.S. practice of challenging those who do not meet the rules for home-office deductions stated in the Tax Reform Act of 1976.
By receiving the Supreme Court's imprimatur, the revenue service can continue to try to stem abuses, even though the court specifically noted that other cases would be determined by their own circumstances.
And the I.R.S. is expected to continue to regard a home-office deduction as a trigger for an audit.


Starbucks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


St. Patrick's Day Parade Threatened With Boycott
Some of the largest contingents in past St.
Patrick's Day parades may boycott this year's event over the inclusion of a gay group, leaders of Irish-American groups said yesterday, raising the specter that the march on Fifth Avenue could be a poorly attended embarrassment to its new sponsors.
Leaders of the United Irish Counties, the Emerald Societies and the Ancient Order of Hibernians -- groups that have been as much a part of the parade as wearing green -- have called for them to stay away.
"I believe if it stands as it is, we will boycott," said Peter Tuohy, president of the United Irish Counties, an umbrella group for 32 organizations whose members claim heritage from each of Ireland's counties.


Archer Daniels Midland reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eligibility Changes Set for Women
Delegates to the 87th National Collegiate Athletic Association overwhelmingly passed legislation this afternoon that opens the door for women who enrolled in college before 1981 and are now returning to compete in intercollegiate athletics.
The immediate beneficiary is Bonnie Frankel, a 48-year-old student whose eligibility had been exhausted under previous N.C.A.A. regulations that restricted intercollegiate competition to five years from a student's first date of enrollment.


Top German Doctor Admits SS Past
The president-elect of the World Medical Association has acknowledged that he was a member of the Nazi SS before World War II.
But Dr.
Hans Joachim Sewering, 76 years old, a leading figure in German medicine for many years, rejected accusations by opponents to his nomination that as a young physician during the war he had sent a 14-year-old tuberculosis victim to death as part of a Nazi euthanasia program.


Advantage Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Computer Research reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Cancer Treatment Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Review/Music; Frederica von Stade in a Song Recital
For a critic whose last concentrated dose of Frederica von Stade on the concert stage was a glitzy, made-for-television affair called "Flicka and Friends" in 1990, the prospect of her Carnegie recital on Thursday was a bit worrying.
But this evening of lieder, with Martin Katz accompanying on piano, proved altogether more restrained, as chaste as the white fairy-godmother dress Ms. von Stade wore for the first half. (If you must know, she changed to a black sheath.)
The program seemed wildy varied and eccentric at first glance: an Italian set (Respighi, Puccini, Pizzetti), songs by Richard Strauss and Schoenberg, a French set (Messiaen, Honegger, Satie, Poulenc), songs by Ginastera.
But unity was not a problem.
Ms. von Stade's expressive scope has limits, and she worked cannily within them, ranging chiefly between charming silliness and gentle sadness.


The War in the Balkans Continues With Tearful Farewells


Knicks Find Their Offense In Dallas
Losing to the Dallas Mavericks would have been a nightmare.
But the Knicks can rest easy.
Pulling away in the final period, New York extended Dallas's losing streak to 14 games with a 107-93 victory at Reunion Arena.
Playing the Mavericks did wonders for the Knicks' offense.
They broke the 100-point barrier for only the second time in nine games.
Five players reached double figures, led by John Starks's 18 points, and New York's ball movement improved.


A Kickboxer's Evolution Into a Two-Fisted Lawyer
Jean-Claude Van Damme's "Nowhere to Run," which opened at theaters here yesterday, means to celebrate the star's crossing over from kickboxing melodramas, for which he is known, to more or less straight action dramas.
The difference is not easily detected.
The square-jawed, stony-faced Belgian-born actor is still at his best with one foot in the air.
The story is a little bit more benign than those of earlier Van Damme movies.
Here he plays a misunderstood escaped convict who helps a pretty young widow (Rosanna Arquette) and her two small children save their farm from a vicious real-estate developer.
In addition to the various action and chase sequences, "Nowhere to Run" features first Ms.
Arquette and then Mr.
Van Damme in a discreet nude scene, and a growing father-son relationship between Mr.
Van Damme and Ms.
Arquette's son, played by Kieran Culkin, Macauley's younger brother.


Man Is Fatally Shot At Newark School
One teen-ager was fatally shot and another wounded today during a fight outside West Side High School, the police said.
Rajhan Bacon, 19 years old, died at University Hospital at 3:15 P.M. of a single gunshot that struck his heart, said Robin Preisler, a spokeswoman for the hospital.
The other victim, who the police identified as Reginald Richardson, 14, was shot in the left knee and is in stable condition, Ms.
Preisler said.


Nostalgia for Family Can't Undo Cutback Era; Love Conquers All
To the Editor:
David Popenoe may be correct that two-parent families are on the whole better (Op-Ed, Dec. 26), but as social scientists who study the family, we think his interpretation of the evidence is simplistic and may needlessly stigmatize children reared in families that don't meet the "Ozzie and Harriet" model.


Observer; Must Be Democrats
The Clinton Administration looks ready to hit the ground stumbling.
Let us count the omens: the Ron Brown lobbyists' bash, the Zoe Baird Peruvian maid oversight, the Bill Clinton hold-it-just-a-minute-now attitude on campaign promises to middle-class American taxpayers and impoverished Haitian refugees.
A government that can get into this many pickles before it even is a government promises plenty of refreshment for those of us who still miss Laurel and Hardy.


Custody Fight Intensifies As Girl Tells of Her Ordeal
A bitter fight for the custody of little Katie Beers intensified yesterday as the police released new details of her ordeal, including a videotape of the horrifying underground chamber where the 10-year-old Long Island girl was entombed for 16 days.
The girl was reported to have testified yesterday before a 23-member Suffolk County grand jury that began hearing kidnapping charges against the suspect, John Esposito, 43, who was being held on $500,000 bail.
It was unclear if other charges would be brought in the case, but officials said they were considering allegations of sexual abuse.


Rodman Is Out
DENNIS RODMAN, the National Basketball Association's leading rebounder, will be out of the Detroit Pistons' lineup for three to six weeks because of a torn right calf muscle.


Violinist's Debut
Christian Tetzlaff, a German violinist, is to make his New York City recital debut this evening at 8 o'clock at the 92d Street Y on Lexington Avenue, playing three sonatas for unaccompanied violin: Bach's No. 3 in C, Ysaye's No. 1 and Bartok's Sonata.
Tickets are $10.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Told to Lose Weight, Pavarotti Puts Off Met
Luciano Pavarotti has postponed concert performances at the Metropolitan Opera and has withdrawn from singing and directing commitments at the Opera Company of Philadelphia, it was announced yesterday, because his doctors have ordered him to undertake a two-month weight-loss program.
Robert B. Driver, the general director of the Opera Company of Philadelphia, in announcing Mr.
Pavarotti's withdrawal from the company's productions of Puccini's "Boheme" and Donizetti's "Favorita," said that he had been notified by the 57-year-old tenor's manager, Herbert H. Breslin, that Mr.
Pavarotti's doctors had advised him to cancel his performances in February and March.


Holiday on Monday
The anniversary of the birth of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., actually Jan. 15, will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Most closed.
PARKING Alternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION Regular pickups and recycling; street cleaning suspended.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Open.
TRANSPORTATION Subways, buses, Metro-North and Long Island Rail Road on regular weekday schedules.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Most closed.
SCHOOLS Most closed.
TRANSPORTATION N.J. Transit on holiday schedules. CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on regular weekday schedules.


Bugel Keeps Job
BILL BIDWILL, owner of the Phoenix Cardinals, announced yesterday that he was retaining Coach JOE BUGEL and General Manager LARRY WILSON for at least another season.


Nureyev Did Have AIDS, His Doctor Confirms
Michel Canesi, Rudolf Nureyev's doctor for the last nine years, announced today that the dancer and choreographer, who died in a suburban Paris hospital on Jan. 6, had had AIDS.
Although many people knew of Nureyev's illness, today's extensive interview in Le Figaro, the most widely read French national newspaper, was the first official confirmation that he had had the disease.


Falling Property-Tax Revenue
A drop in property values will cost New York City millions in lost tax revenues, though revenues from other taxes are starting to rise.
Page 24.


Sammy Cahn, Word Weaver Of Tin Pan Alley, Dies at 79
Sammy Cahn, one of the last American songwriters to embody the scrappy can-do spirit of Tin Pan Alley, died yesterday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 79.
He had been hospitalized two-and-a-half weeks ago for congestive heart failure, said Ron Wise, a hospital spokesman.
A lyricist whose most important collaborators were the composers Jule Styne, Jimmy Van Heusen and Saul Chaplin, Mr.
Cahn wrote the words for dozens of songs that became hits, including "All the Way," "Day By Day," "Time After Time," and "Three Coins in the Fountain." The typical Cahn lyric was brashly assertive and often unabashedly sentimental.
"When somebody loves you, it's no good unless she loves you all the way," went his opening line for "All the Way," from the 1957 film "The Joker Is Wild." The song became a No. 1 hit for Frank Sinatra and won the year's Oscar.


Learning Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Robert Henderson, 64, A Retired Stockbroker
Robert J. Henderson, a former stockbroker in New York City, died on Wednesday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 64 and lived in South Orange, N.J.
He died of cancer, said a son, Thaddeus R. Henderson, of Manhattan.


Magainin Pharmaceuticals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Criticare Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


From Ditka to Carroll? Bears Are Obviously Interested
Jets defensive coordinator Pete Carroll has reportedly been interviewed for the Bears head coaching job, which became vacant when Mike Ditka was fired on Jan. 5.
The Jets acknowledged yesterday that they had given the Bears permission to talk with Carroll, and The Chicago Sun-Times reported that Carroll was interviewed by the Bears on Thursday.
Bryan Harland, the Bears' director of public relations, wouldn't comment when questioned yesterday on Carroll's status.


QUOTATION OF THE DAY
Maybe all of us were a little bit surprised by how quickly this all comes upon you.
The transition really isn't a transition all the time.
You're immediately faced with all the difficulties, all the decisions that come with being in office. -- GEORGE STEPHANOPOULOS.  [ 7:1. ]


Central Fidelity Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


INSIDE
Colorado Rights Law Stayed
A judge barred Colorado from enforcing a measure against gay rights until a suit challenging its constitutionality is resolved.
Page 6.
Ruling on White House Files
A Federal appeals court said the Administration could erase its computer files as long as it preserved identical electronic copies.
Page 8.
Report on F.B.I.
Chief
The Justice Department's internal ethics unit has prepared a report that may cloud William S. Sessions's future as F.B.I.
Director.
Page 6.
Big Gain for Justice Nominee
Zoe Baird won the support of a pivotal Senate Republican, probably assuring her a smooth confirmation as Attorney General.
Page 7.
Rough Road to White House
The President-elect's chief spokesman acknowledged that the Clinton team's transition to power had been rockier than expected.
Page 7.


Jerusalem Journal; New Israeli Politics: Sex, Scandal and Sound Bites
The phrase by now may have become a cliche, but Israelis found themselves nonetheless transfixed today by sex, lies and videotape.
For a country that has been under a cloud of international condemnation for weeks because of its deportation of 415 Palestinians to Lebanon, a sex scandal swirling around Benjamin Netanyahu, a former Deputy Prime Minister and the front-runner to become the next leader of the opposition Likud Party, was almost a welcome diversion.


Annapaola Cancogni; Translator Was 48
Annapaola Cancogni, a teacher, writer and translator of French and Italian works into English, died on Wednesday at Mt.
Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 48 and lived in Manhattan.
She died of cancer, said Anne F. Garetta, her companion.


CFCF Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Odomes, a Standout for Bills, Is Accustomed to Shadows
On a team populated by characters who are larger than life with egos to match, Bills cornerback Nate Odomes is an anomaly.
He makes the type of plays that cause other defensive backs in the league to convulse into celebratory dance.
But he doesn't.
He could stand up in the Bills' locker room and complain about lack of respect for making the Pro Bowl for the fourth consecutive season as an alternate.
But he doesn't.


Corrections
The TV Weekend column yesterday gave an incorrect time for the program "Ute Lemper Sings Kurt Weill" on the Bravo cable channel.
It is to be shown tonight at 7, not at 9.


COMPANY BRIEFS
HALLIBURTON CO., Dallas, an oilfield company, signed a definitive agreement in the previously announced deal to buy the directional drilling systems division of Smith InternationalInc., Houston, for $240 million in stock.
RJR NABISCO HOLDINGS CORP.  is offering to pay $147.6 million for a 50 percent stake in Tabacalera S.A.'s Royal Brands food subsidiary, a spokesman for the Spanish company said.


New Leadership Emerging Among Technology Stocks
The surging stock prices of dozens of technology companies since October is a declaration by investors of a changing of the guard among companies dominating the world of computing.
The trend is toward companies that supply the means to improve office productivity, like Intel with its faster chips, and away from big mainframe and minicomputer makers like I.B.M. and Digital Equipment, Richard Whittington, a technology analyst at Gruntal, said.


Corrections
A listing in Weekend yesterday about events celebrating the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. misstated the date of "Let Freedom Ring," a program of student works at the Juilliard School at Lincoln Center.
It is to be held on Tuesday at 6 P.M., not today.


Blame Drugs, Not Guns
To the Editor:
You have it wrong in "The Slain Principal's Last Lesson" (editorial, Dec. 19), on the shooting of a Brooklyn school principal in housing-project crossfire.
These gun-slinging dropouts were fighting over drug turf.
If there was no drug problem, there would be no drug turf to fight over: therefore no guns necessary.


Profits Emerging From Rubble of 3 Failed Banks
The New Dartmouth Bank, created 15 months ago from the rubble of three failed New Hampshire savings banks, is for sale by its owners, who hope to collect three times their investment.
The revival of New Dartmouth, based in Manchester, N.H., is an illustration of how profitable banks can be if the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation assumes the burden of losses from bad loans.
It also shows how profits can grow when mergers of banks in the same area allow closing of branches, fewer computer systems and work-force reductions.


American Electric Power Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Southwest Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
GEORGE ELMER, a producer and a general manager who is the secretary of the League of Off-Broadway Theaters and Producers, will become the new managing director of the Circle in the Square Theater on Feb. 1.
He will replace ROBERT A. BUCKLEY, who has held the post since 1990 and who says it is time for him to "smell the flowers." The company, which was founded in 1951, has been experiencing financial difficulty and has postponed its season until April.


Bugel Keeps Job
Bill Bidwill, owner of the Phoenix Cardinals, announced yesterday that he was retaining Coach JOE BUGEL and General Manager LARRY WILSON for at least another season.
Wilson, who said his own agreement with Bidwill is "a daily contract," extended Bugel's contract through 1994.
But Bidwell told a news conference that unless the Cardinals have a winning season this fall, changes in the organization would reach all the way to Wilson's level.
Bugel, who had been in the last year of a four-year contract, has a 13-35 record in three years and finished 4-12 last season. (AP)


Heritage Federal Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An Alumnus in Space; Bronx Students Talk to Astronaut From Their School
Ebony Miranda got a chance to talk to an astronaut in outer space yesterday.
The 8-year-old from the South Bronx was more worried about making an extraterrestrial faux pas than about grilling Lieut.
Comdr.
Mario Runco Jr. on the principles of physics.
"I need to be relaxed," said Ebony, her hands fluttering as she sucked in a deep breath.
"I've got to talk in a mannered way. I've got to say 'yes,' not 'yeah,' and 'excuse me?' not 'what?' or 'duh?' "


Nostalgia for Family Can't Undo Cutback Era
To the Editor:
In "The Controversial Truth: Two-Parent Families Are Better" (Op-Ed, Dec. 26), David Popenoe portrays me as an antifamily extremist.
Quoting from "Brave New Families," my book, he misrepresents my conviction that nostalgia for an idealized 1950's situation-comedy image of the family has harmful effects on most, increasingly diverse, actual families.


2 Key Executives Resign From Salomon Brothers
Yesterday was a bad day for Salomon Brothers, the scandal-tinged firm that has been working to re-establish its footing on Wall Street.
Two important people in the revival efforts submitted resignations, both after the recent payment of annual bonuses.
Eric R. Rosenfeld, the co-head of fixed-income securities who took direct control of government trading operations in the wake of the Treasury bidding scandal in August 1991, said he was resigning "to do my own thing."


Foreman Is Maintaining
GEORGE FOREMAN stepped on the scale last night in Reno and looked neither trim nor particularly tubby, based on his own recent history.
In fact, he looked just right: 258 pounds for his scheduled 10-rounder tonight against PIERRE COETZER of South Africa at the Reno-Sparks Convention Center.


Critic's Notebook; Behind Perot's Folksiness, Few Folks
Like last season's star returning to the stage of his triumph, Ross Perot was back on the television circuit this week.
He started at his home away from home, "Larry King Live," where he and Mr.
King did the sort of soft-shoe that made such a hit in 1992.
They have become the Gallagher and Shean of the tube: "You're terrific, Mr. Perot!" "I'm perfection, Mr. King."
The sometime candidate was also featured on the networks' evening news and morning shows, where he announced that he was returning to the fray out of love for the American people (thereby setting a television record for the most mentions of the American people and love by one person in one week).
As he gave his hosts to understand that he was the vehicle of the American people's desires, he seemed to be laboring under the impression that he had won the election but for some reason somebody else was moving into the White House.


Energy Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


GenCorp reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Judge Ends Questioning Of Assault-Case Jurors
The judge in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial finished his private questioning of the jurors today and then invited lawyers to file motions next Tuesday based on his unusual two-day inquiry.
The trial's prosecutors and four defense lawyers all refused later to discuss the nature of any arguments they might make, including whether they would ask for a mistrial.


Nostalgia for Family Can't Undo Cutback Era; Ask the Children
To the Editor:
David Popenoe (Op-Ed, Dec. 26) puts the challenge squarely before the social scientists who, in their research and discussions of the effects upon children of nontraditional families, have perhaps omitted the most important member in their inquiries, the child.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Attorney General-Designate; A Top G.O.P. Senator Backs Nominee in a Storm
Senator Orrin G. Hatch, the ranking Republican on the Senate Judiciary Committee, today endorsed Attorney General-designate Zoe Baird, a move that probably insured her of a smooth confirmation.
Ms.
Baird's prospects were put in some doubt this week by disclosures that she had employed a Peruvian couple as a baby sitter and driver for nearly two years, beginning in the summer of 1990, while they lived in the country illegally.


How to Detect a Troubled Network
You can tell a network is in serious trouble when it is grateful to its stars for making fun of it.
This week, NBC became such a network.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Room at the Top; Bush Asks Hundreds to Quit the Day Clinton Starts
In a last-minute wrangle between the old and new Administrations, the White House has demanded the resignation of hundreds of senior Bush political appointees, partly in hopes that the Clinton team will be faced with an embarrassing inability to fill the jobs and run the Government.
Over the last three months, many of President Bush's appointees have offered to resign "at the pleasure of the President." Clinton officials say that in keeping with the customary practice of past transitions, they asked for all the political appointees to offer their resignations, which would then be accepted as replacements were ready.


BancFlorida Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Twitty Remains Ahead in Hawaii
Howard Twitty, continuing his attack on the par-5's, stayed two shots ahead of the field yesterday in the second round of the Hawaiian Open in Honolulu.
Twitty, who last won a tournament in 1980, reached the halfway point of the tournament at 131, or 13 under par.
More than half of his under-par total came on the par 5's.
Fred Funk, who scored his first tour triumph last year in Houston, closed with a 66 and was second at 133.
Paul Azinger was next at 135.
Bill Glasson, whose opening-round 65 left him in second place, dropped to fourth at 136 after a 71. (AP) SKIING Women's Downhill Won by a German  Katja Seizinger of Germany earned her first World Cup downhill victory of the season in Cortina d'Ampezzo, Italy, beating Carole Merle of France by .49 of a second yesterday.
Seizinger gotthe sixth World Cup victory of her career and took a commanding lead in the downhill standings with 290 points. (AP) TENNIS Sampras Survives Heat in Sydney Top-seeded Pete Sampras beat Amos Mansdorf, 6-3, 7-5, in the semifinals of the New South Wales Open in Sydney, Australia, and retreated to an air-conditioned room with an ice pack.
Thomas Muster took three cold showers after beating Omar Camporese of Italy, 6-4, 6-3, 7-6 (8-6), in the other semifinal.
The temperature on the artificial surface soared to 104 degrees.
Fourth-seeded Jennifer Capriati sped past Pam Shriver, 6-0, 6-1, in a women's quarterfinal.
Top-seeded Gabriela Sabatini, Capriati's next opponent, advanced, 7-5, 6-3, over Barbara Rittner of Germany. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD Ben Johnson Beaten in Hamilton Games  Bruny Surin set a Canadian indoor record in the 50-meter dash with a time of in 5.67 seconds to edge American Jon Drummond and fellow Canadian Ben Johnson at the Hamilton Indoor Games in Ontario.
Drummond was timed in 5.68 and Johnson in 5.73.
Johnson's 1991 time of 5.74 seconds had been the Canadian record.
American Debbi Lawrence set a world record in the women's 1,500-meter race walk with a time of 5:53.41, lowering the mark of 5:54.31 she set last year in the same meet. (AP)


Split Threatens Lebanon's Biggest Christian Party
Lebanese Christians, already divided and weakened as a political force, were shaken further today when their largest and oldest party faced the prospect of breaking up into two feuding factions.
In what political commentators here described as the worst crisis in the group's 56-year history, the Phalange Party Politburo dismissed two-thirds of its district leaders Thursday night.


Stryker Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Brokers Who Call Cold And Follow Hot Scripts
THE first call is a warm-up.
"Hello, is this Mr. Joe Smith? Joe, this is Sally Script with Wannamakabuck Investment Bankers in New York. Joe . . . (pause) before I go any further, I want you to relax. I'm not calling to sell you anything today.
"My firm has been quite successful in its recommendations. In fact our last issue sold out in only ----! In fact, I'm finding it quite easy to open new accounts because of them."


Man Seems to Reject Baboon Liver
The world's second recipient of a baboon liver has not regained consciousness since the transplant operation last Sunday and appears to be rejecting the organ, his doctors at the University of Pittsburgh said yesterday.
The patient, a 62-year-old man, remains in critical condition after surgical removal of his spleen on Thursday.
The step was aimed at countering the rejection, Dr.
John J. Fung, the head of the transplant team, said in an interview.


First Alabama Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yeltsin Offers Guarantees if Kiev Backs Arms Pact
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia said today that he had offered Ukraine security guarantees against nuclear or conventional attack that would come into effect after Kiev's Parliament ratifies the first strategic arms reduction treaty and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
The offer came in a meeting with the Ukrainian President, Leonid M. Kravchuk, who has promised that Ukraine will become a non-nuclear state within seven years, disposing of the 176 strategic nuclear missiles and other nuclear weapons it inherited after the breakup of the Soviet Union.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The Democratic National Committee; New Party Chairman Is Planning to Look Beyond Washington
In naming David C. Wilhelm, a 36-year-old political operative, to run the Democratic National Committee, President-elect Bill Clinton is signaling his intention to use the party to reach beyond the political confines of Washington.
Mr.
Wilhelm, an affable Midwesterner who has spent the last year working the phones and stroking the egos of influential Democrats around the country as Mr.
Clinton's campaign manager, likes that just fine.


First Bancorp (Vincensse, Ind.) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Big Insurer's Failure: Questions and Answers
MORE than 700,000 customers of the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company, the largest life insurer ever to fail in the United States, are awaiting a New Jersey court decision on a rehabilitation plan.
Although the plan could change, here are some preliminary answers to questions frequently asked by Mutual Benefit's vexed customers:
Q.
If I die, will the death benefit on my life insurance be paid?


Post Publisher Says Deal to Aid Paper Is Virtually Dead
Peter S. Kalikow, the publisher of The New York Post, said yesterday that a deal with an investor that could have stabilized the newspaper financially appeared virtually dead.
Therefore, he said, almost anything -- including a sale of a controlling interest in the newspaper -- is now possible.
But The Post publisher, whose extensive New York City real-estate business is in bankruptcy, declined to say The Post is for sale.


Reverse Play For Orangeman
To the Sports Editor:
The article concerning the Syracuse University victory in the Fiesta Bowl (The Times, Jan. 2) football game repeatedly misstated an Orange player's name by rendering it in reversed form (last name first, first name last).
I am speaking of the player who ran 100 yards for a touchdown, Kirby Dar Dar.


Not a Convenience, but a Need
"$68.50! That drives me crazy!" Henrietta, Dorothy, Yvette, Pearl, Gertrude and Sylvia are all on the line, peppering a government administrator with questions about New York State's prescription drug program for the elderly.
For the ladies patched into this conference call, getting the ear of a bureaucrat on the telephone is more than a convenience.
This educational party line, sustained by donations to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, is a lifeline for impoverished, infirm seniors who might otherwise never receive the help they need.


Montreal's Party
To the Editor: As a Cajun who vaguely remembers my patois, I am aware that distinct cultures in North America are best appreciated after they have been leveled.
Anyone planning to visit Quebec would be well-rewarded for advance research.
Yes, gird yourself for the French-only road signs.
But with preparation, visitors will discover a vibrant culture that has produced art that is unparalleled in the other provinces, where road signs are in English.


Susan Parrott, Horace Crary Jr.
Mr. and Mrs Thomas A. Parrott of Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Sheffield Parrott to Horace Ingraham Crary Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Crary of New Canaan, Conn.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Parrott is a senior manager in the client-services division of Sotheby's in New York.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father, now retired, was a senior official in the Central Intelligence Agency.


A la Carte; Memorable Dining at Reasonable Prices
LAST year economy-minded diners flocked to low-cost neighborhood eating places with few frills and bargain-basement prices.
The following 10 restaurants are especially memorable for outstanding food, and for dinner prices that ranged between $10 and $20.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
126.10
125.40
124.45
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6475
1.6355
1.5925
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.2813
1.2823
1.1505
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.5315
1.5415
1.7960
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Top-Notch Tables; Beverley Hills, Calif.
Matsuhisa, a fairly small storefront restaurant on the edge of Beverly Hills, makes up for the simplicity of its setting with a roster of dishes of stunning complexity.
Although Los Angeles, like most major American cities, has its share of Japanese restaurants with sushi bars, the 70-seat Matsuhisa is in a class by itself.
The decor is clean and plain, with glass-topped tables, simple black chairs and only a few Japanese touches.
Two closely-spaced typed pages of menu are followed by nearly 30 indexed pages explaining each dish.
Forget familiar sushi and tempura; order a beer or some sake and explore what is likely to be undiscovered territory.
The accommodating staff can guide the decision-making.


Taking Advantage of Venison's Low Fat
"MEAT of Kings Going Cheap to the Masses." That was a recent headline in The Times of London.
In England, wild venison -- free-range and organic -- costs less than dog food.
It was the only bargain I found when I was in London over the Christmas holidays.
I spent less than $5 for a boneless venison roast big enough to serve six people, and venison medallions were cheaper than hamburger in New York.
Just about everything else in London costs more than twice what it does in New York.
Wild Scottish venison is now so plentiful it is almost valueless. (As anyone who has a house in the country knows, deer breed like rabbits, and in the absence of such natural enemies as wolves, their numbers continue to expand at an extraordinarily high rate.) In Britain, wild venison is sold in supermarkets as boneless joints, roasts and steaks as well as diced and marinated and in prepared meals.
In the United States, however, venision remains a very small part of the market, although it is showing up more and more on restaurant menus, and prices are still comparatively high.


Freed Agent Vows to Seek Vindication
Joseph Occhipinti, the former Federal immigration agent who was released from prison on Friday by President Bush, yesterday began what he called the "second phase" of his campaign to win exoneration.
He did so even as merchants and others in Washington Heights reacted with dismay and bitterness that Mr.
Occhipinti, who had been convicted for violating the civil rights of neighborhood store owners by conducting illegal searches, was now free.
Mr.
Occhipinti said that he planned to return to the streets of upper Manhattan to personally seek out the evidence he said would demonstrate that he had been framed.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Beyond the Confetti; Capital Plans Party, but Reality Awaits
With a ringing of bells and a trademark bus tour, Bill Clinton and Al Gore ride into Washington on Sunday for a celebration they hope will recreate the magic of their campaign and obscure the muddle of their transition.
After leaving Little Rock, Ark., this evening to fly to Charlottesville, Va., Mr.
Clinton will rise Sunday morning for a church service and then rumble into Washington by bus caravan, following the route Thomas Jefferson took by carriage 192 years ago from his home, Monticello.
No Dilution of Themes
On paper, the inauguration will be a salute to Mr.
Clinton's favorite themes and political techniques -- a televised fanfare for the common man played by a mob of celebrities.
There will be bows to ethnic diversity, music from rock to rap, an entourage of certified little people and balls for Italians, animal lovers, police chiefs, homosexuals, Hispanic-Americans and the homeless.


JAN. 10-16: Crime or Custom?; French Court Jails Mother For Girls' Ritual Mutilation
A Gambian mother living in Paris was sentenced last week to a year in jail and a four-year suspended term for arranging for the mutilation of her two baby daughters' genitals, in an African custom known as "female circumcision." The case sparked debates over whether prosecution is the right way to address a centuries-old tradition practiced in more than 20 African nations.
The sentence, the first of its kind in Western Europe, was intended by prosecutors as a warning to hundreds of thousands of African immigrants in France.
A decade of efforts by health workers has failed to curb the custom.


Paris on a Budget
To the Editor: I have several times been tempted to write in praise of the Grand Hotel St.-Michel in Paris.
What kept me from doing it was selfishness; I didn't want the hotel overbooked next time I wrote for a reservation.
Imagine my surprise to see the writer of the budget Paris article was unhappy with the hotel.


Eleanor M. Waud, Glenn Bert Dorr 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
Cornelius B. Waud of Lake Forest, Ill., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Eleanor Morrison Waud, to Glenn Bert Dorr 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dorr Jr. of Simsbury, Conn.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Waud, 26, graduated cum laude from Middlebury College and received a law degree from Suffolk University.
She is to join the Chicago law firm of Gardner, Carton &amp; Douglas in May as an associate.
Her father is a group president with Illinois Tool Works Inc., an engineering conglomerate in Chicago founded by the prospective bride's great grandfather the late Byron L. Smith.


A Rare Oasis of Enjoyment Suffers a Moment of Doubt
HANGING upside down with her appendages wedged between giant black rubber bands, Astrid Hulse of Wading River called to her son.
"I don't think I'm going to make it to the top, Chet," she said.
Although parents hate to disappoint their children, there is only so much a 40-year-old mother can do when trapped like a bug in an 18-foot-high web of squiggly rubber.
"We had fun anyway," Mrs.
Hulse said as she and her son Chestin Henry, 19, exited the Mini-Web, an attraction at the Space Plex Amusement Park in Nesconset.


Holiday Tomorrow
The anniversary of the birth of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., actually Jan. 15, will be observed tomorrow.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Most closed.
PARKING Alternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION Regular pickups and recycling; street cleaning suspended.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Open.
TRANSPORTATION Subways, buses, Metro-North and Long Island Rail Road on regular weekday schedules.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Most closed.
SCHOOLS Most closed.
TRANSPORTATION N.J. Transit on holiday schedules.  CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on regular weekday schedules.


Scenic Byway Links the Past To the Present
AS Route 169 goes north through the Taftville section of Norwich, the road is lined with old brick mill buildings and wood-frame tenement houses with small yards.
But after it crosses the bridge over the Shetucket River, long stretches of Route 169 are lined by woodlands, forest, and fields with ponds and cattle and horses.
The houses are big, testimonials to the time when large families were necessary to run the family farm.
Many still have barns with rusting pickup trucks parked outside.
At the Shetucket River, the state highway begins a 35-mile run to the Massachusetts border, twisting and turning like a snake as it winds north.


BEST SELLERS: January 17, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
7
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) After being accused of murdering her employer, a woman tells of killing her husband almost 30 years earlier and of her life ever since.
2
5
45
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
3
11
20
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
4
10
14
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
5
2
9
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.50.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
6
8
9
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter, unearths scandals in the military.
7
12
23
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
8
4
13
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $24.) Lestat embarks on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
9
3
11
MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) While researching the lives of his ancestors, an American journalist learns about the history of the land south of the border. (LP)
10
1
TERMINAL, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $21.95.) A medical researcher's pursuit of a treatment for cancer and a nurse's pursuit of him have extraordinary consequences.
11
9
12
MOSTLY HARMLESS, by Douglas Adams. (Harmony, $20.) In the fifth volume of the "Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" series, a survivor tries to cope with new predicaments.
12
6
14
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) The fortunes of a businesswoman are imperiled by secrets from her past. (LP)
13
15
28
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
14
7
27
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
15
1
A CUP OF CHRISTMAS TEA, by Tom Hegg. (Waldman House, $10.95.) Verses, illustrated by Warren Hanson.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
18
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
5
23
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
3
2
15
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general.
4
7
17
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
5
4
31
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
6
3
20
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
7
8
6
JFK: Reckless Youth, by Nigel Hamilton. (Random House, $30.) The first 29 years of the 35th President.
8
10
11
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life and achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
9
6
13
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the co-host of the television show "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."
10
14
20
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
11
9
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
12
31
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
13
6
THE CREATORS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random House, $30.) Three thousand years in the history of religion, philosophy, literature and the arts, told through the lives of those who made it.
14
6
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $20.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
15 *
1
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE . . .
AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Random House, $25.) The war in Vietnam as experienced by two battalions during a crucial three-day battle in 1965.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
6
CREATING LOVE, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $23.) Ways to establish healthy relationships with other people.
2
1
27
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
3
3
17
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $12.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
16
THE MEASURE OF OUR SUCCESS, by Marian Wright Edelman. (Beacon, $15.) The head of the Children's Defense Fund offers rules to live by for her own children and others'.
5
5
16
THE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE. (Houghton Mifflin, $39.95.) The third edition.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
PAST IMPERFECT: French Intellectuals, 1944-1956, by Tony Judt. (University of California, $30.) Mr.
Judt, a professor of European studies at New York University, argues forthrightly that Sartre and his generation obstinately refused to get anything right.
THE PASSION OF MICHEL FOUCAULT, by James Miller. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Neither a biography nor a survey but a narrative analysis of Foucault's quest to transcend the constructed realities of life through extreme sexual experiences.
FRAUD, by Anita Brookner. (Random House, $21.) A novel that explores relationships between aged parents and adult children, returning repeatedly to ask: when does love become destructive?
SOLITUDE, by Victor Catala (Caterina Albert i Paradis). (Readers International, cloth, $19.95; paper, $11.95.) Guaranteed a long obscurity by its first publication in Catalan under a pseudonym in 1905, this overtly feminist novel sets a lowland peasant girl against a threatening mountain landscape and society.
THE LAND CALLED HOLY: Palestine in Christian History and Thought, by Robert L. Wilken. (Yale University, $35.) A professional historian's examination of the Holy Land during the six Christian-dominated centuries before the coming of Islam.
MANUSCRIPTS DON'T BURN.
Mikhail Bulgakov: A Life in Letters and Diaries, by J. A. E. Curtis. (Overlook, $25.) These moving records reveal how, despite the Soviet Government's vicious attacks, the author of "The Master and Margarita" managed to write and die as he wished.
THE ISLAND: Three Tales, by Gustaw Herling. (Viking, $20.) Stories by a Polish writer, unified by one theme: the persistence of life in the face of pain, humiliation and extremes of solitude.


The Talk of the North Bronx; Irish Voice Wide Passions Over the St. Patrick's Day Parade
As a soft snow fell over the North Bronx, Patrick McKnight lamented the Irish community's preoccupation with a celebration turning sour with controversy.
"Shouldn't we be more concerned about getting the English out of Ireland than getting the homosexuals out of the St. Patrick's Day parade?" Mr.
McKnight asked as he sipped coffee at the Cafe An Beal Bocht in Riverdale.


JAN. 10-16: Ross Returns; Just When Clinton Thought It Was Safe to Bask . . .
Ross Perot, who briefly upstaged Bill Clinton during the Democratic convention when he withdrew from the Presidential race -- only to re-enter it in the fall -- was stealing thunder again on the eve of the inauguration.
Mr.
Perot was a fixture on the chat shows last week, saying that he intended "to create a counter-pressure" to the new Administration.
Retooling his campaign organization, United We Stand, America, as a grassroots lobbying group, Mr.
Perot said that for $15, citizens could sign up to encourage Mr.
Clinton to "do the right thing" on the deficit and other issues.
His group said that more than 250,000 calls were made to a toll-free telephone number within 12 hours after Mr.
Perot announced the membership drive.


The New Adminstration: Ray of Light in a Darkened Tunnel?
Political Winter
One Square Mile Gallery, 316 Sea Cliff Avenue, Sea Cliff.
Weekends, noon to 5 P.M.
Through Jan. 31.


Krasdale Galleries Celebrate the Bronx and Brooklyn, Too
UNDER review this week are three exhibitions, each with a different attitude.
Two are staged by Krasdale Foods, one at the company's gallery in White Plains, the other at its headquarters in Hunts Point, the Bronx.
The third is a display of black-and-white photographs at the Gordon Parks Gallery, also in the Bronx.
The exhibition in the White Plains Gallery of Krasdale Foods is a show of Bronx solidarity, which in a sense begins with its curators, Sigmund Balka and Susan Hoeltzel.
Mr.
Balka is the general counsel for Krasdale, which has its headquarters in the Bronx at Hunts Point, and Ms.
Hoeltzel is acting director of the Lehman College Art Gallery.
All but two of the artists come from the Bronx, and Jacob Friedlander, to whom the show pays tribute, was born there, attended the High School of Science there and last year died there.


Sound Bytes; Taking Tandy Down the Splitsville Road
The Tandy Corporation, a $5 billion electronics and retailing giant based in Fort Worth, last week became the latest big computer company to split up.
Tandy's chief executive, John Roach, a bluff-talking Texan hired by Tandy in 1967 to help it install its first corporate data processing systems, will now concentrate on the company's retail operations, including nearly 5,000 company-owned Radio Shack stores.
Tandy's computer and electronics manufacturing operations, including its Grid Systems subsidiary, will be spun off as TE Electronics Inc.
Question: Why split up?


Results Plus
FIGURE SKATING Russian Dancers Win European Title Maya Usova and Aleksandr Zhulin of Russia scored two perfect marks for artistic impression as they won a battle of the blues and captured the ice dance title as the European championships ended yesterday in Helsinki, Finland.
Oksana Gritschuk and Yevgeny Platov, another Russian couple, finished second as the top two pairs offered different interpretations of the blues for their final free dance, worth 50 percent of the final score.
Local favorites Susanna Rahkamo and Petri Kokko of Finland took third, for their country's first international figure-skating medal in 60 years. (AP) SKIING Heinzer of Switzerland Takes Downhill World champion Franz Heinzer of Switzerland captured his second World Cup downhill victory of the season yesterday, winning on the difficult, winding Kandahar course in St.
Anton, Austria.
Peter Runggaldier of Italy finished second.
The race in St.
Anton replaced the Kitzbuhel downhill, which was canceled because of lack of snow. (AP)


Gail Eilene Paley and Samuel Fox
Mr. and Mrs.
Pierce Paley of Harrison, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Gail Eilene Paley to Dr.
Samuel Fox, a son of Zelda Etskovitz of Wynnewood, Pa., and the late Dr.
Ronald A. Fox.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Paley, 24, teaches kindergarten at the West Side Montessori School in New York.
She graduated from Skidmore College and received a master's degree in early-childhood and elementary education from New York University.
Her father is of counsel, in White Plains, to the New York law firm of Hall, Dickler, Lawler, Kent &amp; Friedman.


Ms. Feldstein, Christopher Rile
Elizabeth Anne Feldstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Feldstein of New York, was married last evening to Christopher William Rile, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Rile of Philadelphia.
Rabbi Charles Lippman officiated at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
The Rev.
Robert Burke, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Rile, 24, is a legislative aide in the Washington office of Senator Charles S. Robb, Democrat of Virginia.
She and her husband graduated from Franklin and Marshall College.
Her father is the chairman of Richfel Associates, an investment firm in New York.


Adjournment Is Peaceful, But Wait Till Next Year
The National Collegiate Athletic Association adjourned its 87th convention here today after four days of meetings that will probably best be remembered as the calm before the storm.
While no major reforms were passed or overturned, subtle battle lines were drawn for what is expected to be an intense legislative confrontation next year over whether women should receive a larger share of college athletic budgets.


Tsongas's Cancer: A Cautionary Tale  These are the days when Paul E. Tsongas had hoped to be moving into the White House. Instead, he is once again battling cancer.


CRIME
James W. Hall knows a place, which he describes with affectionate horror in HARD AGROUND (Delacorte, $22), where lazy treasure seekers will fork over $500 for a dubious map to a sunken ship laden with 17th-century Mayan gold.
In the avaricious climate of this place, a serious scavenger could just as easily save the 500 bucks and get more reliable information through theft and murder.
The author calls this degraded place Miami, and he mourns its physical and moral wreckage with splenetic, comic rage.
Hap Tyler, the driven hero of Mr.
Hall's fourth imaginative crime novel, sees himself as representing "the insipid, watered-down, failure-prone" genetic strain of an illustrious ancestor who was one of Florida's first land developers.
When Hap's brother, an archeologist who has the inside track on that lost ship, is murdered by ruthless booty hunters, Hap bravely launches himself on a wild crusade to avenge his brother and to save their ancestral home from inventively wicked characters.
Mr.
Hall, whose earlier, moodier novels were set in the environmentally fragile Florida Keys, has lightened his imagistic style and found a lode of flashier inspiration on the glittery Gold Coast.
Although poetic lyricism fades in this bright setting, it's the right place for the vivid characters and their bold adventures.


Top-Notch Tables; Teipei, Taiwan
In Taiwan, there is an unpretentious restaurant, Ting Tai Fung, that specializes in dumplings and simple foods, what the Chinese call "small eats." In the front of the restaurant, in a tiny work area with large billowing steamers , the cooks can be seen rolling out the dough to stuff the dumplings.
Seating about 30 people on each of four floors, the place is sparkling clean, its cafe atmosphere enhanced by bright fluorescent lights and lots of clatter.
There is no English menu.
However, the Chinese menu is presented in a list with numbers that never change.
One favorite of mine was No. 2, chicken soup, in which the famous Chinese black chicken (a type of poultry with black skin) is blanched and slowly steamed with ginger and scallions inside a casserole for hours until the broth is rich and clear.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE NOISE FROM THE ZOO And Other Stories.
By Janice Elliott.
Hodder &amp; Stoughton/Trafalgar Square, $23.95.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 27 about the actress Jamie Lee Curtis referred incorrectly to the movie in which the character Jason appeared.
It was "Friday the 13th," not "Halloween."


At Work; A Populist Cowboy for the Airwaves
Is Jim Hightower selling out?
He has never been a make-a-million-bucks/C.E.O.-by-40 sort of career aspirant.
He has been a Washington political op, a journalist, a progressive activist.
From 1983 until 1991, he was the Texas Commissioner of Agriculture.
He has had enough freedom, influence and access to power to make the frugal life style activism imposes worthwhile.
Mr.
Hightower, however, is about to shift into one of the hot careers of late-20th century, fin de siecle American culture, and, no, he is not joining the warrior crew at "American Gladiators." In February, assuming negotiations now under way come together, Mr.
Hightower will become a radio commentator, providing a populist voice in a medium now heavily weighted toward the right and beyond.


Transit for Disabled Is a Civil Right
We are pleased that you covered the story of the Suffolk County Legislature's churlish action in seeking a waiver from fulfilling the whole intent of the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (A.D.A.) with respect to paratransit However, "Suffolk Opposing Buses for Disabled"  [ Dec. 13 ]  failed to address the civil rights necessity of paratransit to persons with disabilities.
The A.D.A. describes the civil rights of such persons in many areas of public life, and one of these rights is the right to use public transportation.
Just as the average citizen assumes that good public roads and public transportation are a necessity for everyday living, so also does the person with disabilities who has been unable to utilize public transportation assume that he or she should be able to get around in public.
It is not a matter of charity, as the Suffolk legislators seem to believe.
It is a matter of civil rights, of fair access to the whole of public life.


Miriam Popp, Peter Seeley
Miriam Rita Popp, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George Popp of Peekskill, N.Y., was married yesterday to Peter George Seeley, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George P. Seeley of Isle of Palms, S.C.
The Rev.
John J. Hunter performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Transfiguration in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Ms.
Popp, who is 32, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Notre Dame and received a law degree from Boston College and a master's degree in environmental law from Pace University at White Plains.


INSIDE
Justice Nominee Pays Fine
Attorney General-designate Zoe Baird and her husband have paid a $2,900 fine to the Government for employing a Peruvian couple living in the United States illegally.
Page 22.
F.B.I.
Chief Under Fire
A Justice Department inquiry has concluded that William S. Sessions engaged in deceitful practices involving his personal travel.
Page 16.
Arizona Holiday
After years of resisting a holiday for the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., Arizona is preparing to honor him -- and mend its image.
Page 16.


Gracious in Victory
He may not be on deck for the next America's Cup defense, in 1995, but BILL KOCH, who won the cup with America  last year, says his America
Foundation, which paid for the 1992 defense, will help finance the United States yachting team for the 1994 Olympics.
Koch said he would decide in about six months whether he would seek to defend the America's Cup in 1995. (AP)


'Ivan the Terrible' Ruling Is Expected by May
A Federal judge says he expects to complete an inquiry by May into accusations that the Justice Department's Nazi-hunters obstructed justice and withheld evidence in the John Demjanjuk case.
The judge, Thomas A. Wiseman, of Federal District Court here, spoke at the close of two days of testimony by two former Government lawyers.
Both defended their work on the case and said they had never doubted that Mr.
Demjanjuk was "Ivan the Terrible," the sadistic guard who ran the gas chambers at the Treblinka death camp in Poland in 1942 and 1943.


Mutual Funds; Closed-End Losses Overseas
CLOSED-END funds that invest overseas were nothing to brag about in 1992.
Sixteen new issues came to market and every single one lost money.
Foreign equity funds lost 18 percent on average. while foreign bond funds went down 11.5 percent.
The reasons for the dismal performances ranged from market dislocations to political upheaval and scandal to civil unrest -- currency problems, the Danes' negative vote on the Maastricht treaty on European economic and financial unity, the impeachment of Brazilian President Fernando Collor de Mello and riots in India, Thailand and Korea.


Corrections
A report in the Dining Out column on Dec. 27 misstated the credit-card policy of Vespa in Great Neck.
It accepts Visa and MasterCard.


Incremental Pay Increases Recommended for State's Judges
A commission formed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has recommended that state judges at all levels receive incremental raises over the next two years to compensate for a salary freeze that has lasted for five years.
The commission suggested that the state spend $24 million from April 1993 through October 1994 to raise salaries for the 1,175 judges in the state system.
That is less than the amount that was requested by the state's Office of Court Administration, which asked for $22 million just for the fiscal year that begins on April 1.


Personal Touch Marks Large Gifts to Neediest Cases
Few people make a habit of writing personal checks for $20,000, but B. Mark Smith took the experience in stride.
As a bond trader, he spends his days juggling million-dollar deals amid the kind of claustrophobic frenzy generated when dozens of Type A personalities gather in the same room to haggle over prices and yields.
But the check Mr.
Smith sent to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund did carry some poignancy for him, for it reminded him of the shock he felt two years ago when he was unexpectedly laid off from his job.
Though he was quickly hired by another firm, he said he would never forget that sense of humiliation.


Destructive Storms And Tax Dollars
A storm came by and wrecked the coastline, and how quickly our officials are getting ready to spend our tax dollars.
They're going to put everything back together better than ever.
Of course, they also say this was a once-in-a-lifetime storm and won't be repeated for a long time.
What won't be said is that all these rebuilders of beaches and boardwalks are perpetrating the old Tax-Dollars-Fix-Everything Fraud.


Making VCR's Hear
WHAT: For the person who has everything, but can't figure out how to use it: a machine that translates desire into action.
Tell it to turn on the television.
It's on!
Tell it to record "The Simpsons." It will!
Tell it to "zap" the commercials.
They're history!
WHY: Even the technologically impaired should be able to experience the thrill of taping their favorite television programs.
Sadly, this pleasure is denied many: Michael Bissonnette, chairman of Voice Powered Technology, the maker of the VCR Voice Programmer, estimated that 8 out of 10 VCR-owners can't program them.
"I can't," he insisted.
"Really I can't."


'Calm Before the Storm' at the Tax Division
IT was quiet last Monday in the mailroom of the State Division of Taxation's Mill Hill processing center in downtown Trenton.
"The calm before the storm," said James A. DiEleuterio Jr., the assistant director of processing and administration for the division.


Buttonholes To Go
WHEN you're in Melvin Reich's beat-up shop and just sort of gazing at the people lined up, you see a lot of clothing that seems to have nothing in common but actually does.
The other afternoon there was an indigo dress, an ocher pair of pants, a woman's bright-orange coat that you had to wonder who would wear, a lime shirt and a tiny lavender sweater that was probably for someone no more than about 3.
Try to get into any of these items and it would be awkward.
They were without buttonholes.
That alone was why they were here.
"C'mon, move it up," Mr.
Reich said.
"You're looking awfully nice today. How you feeling?"


Top-Notch Tables; Llandewi Skirrid, Wales
Traveling takes it out of you, so there are convincing arguments that a destination restaurant should be in a place that is carpeted and swagged -- a gastronomic temple or country house-hotel.
But these places are all about escapism, and if you have one shot at Britain, you might not wish to escape it.
To brush up against its cheeriest face, I would make a beeline for the Walnut Tree Inn at Llandewi Skirrid, near Abergavenny in Gwent, Wales.
It has all the joyous bustle of a pub, and food that has both guts and finesse.


Surprise! When You Talk As President, People Listen
MORE than almost any other mortal, the President of the United States has to watch what he says.
Each word is amplified, each sentence analyzed for nuance, by politicians and diplomats and journalists, and everything is remembered.
Lives are often at stake, to say nothing of billions of dollars.
The White House is neither a seminar nor talk show, not a place where new ideas can be publicly floated, chewed over and then, perhaps, discarded.
Or to put it another way, Washington is neither Little Rock nor Oxford, as Bill Clinton discovered with a vengeance last week.


A Press Lord Without a Rosebud
MURDOCH
By William Shawcross. Illustrated. 492 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.


Public Stages; Inaugurals
Some months after my mother had been killed in a car crash, I found myself in the dark, cramped confines of a storage room in an industrial suburb of Washington.
Outside it was one of those humid, blazingly sunny days when the capital, deserted by its vacationing lawmakers, can still seem like the sleepy provincial Southern town of the Eisenhower 50's of my childhood.
But this dank cell in northern Virginia, in a low, windowless building full of identical padlocked rooms with plywood walls and concrete floors, belonged not to a quaint old Washington but to the anonymous American sprawl of the Reagan-Bush 80's.
The storage room looked just like the one where the first dismembered corpse is found in "The Silence of the Lambs."
The only remains I found, however, were those of my youth.
My mother had deposited my childhood things here in a couple of battered trunks when she had moved out of our old house a few years back.
Now, unexpectedly, some of her youthful belongings had been brought here too, a consequence of her swift and violent death.
Our childhoods lay side by side in an opaque gloom that the fluorescent bulb above could hardly dispel.


POSTINGS: Housing and Commerce; Seeds of Change on 6th Ave.
The announcement last week that the four largest flower wholesalers were pulling up roots from the traditional Flower District on the Avenue of the Americas was only part of an economic development story that promises dramatic change in the area.
At the same time, a rezoning measure was beginning its journey through the municipal land-use review procedure.
It would change the zoning along the avenue between 24th and 31st Streets from manufacturing to commercial and residential.
Under the rezoning, buildings could be constructed with 10 times as much floor area as their lot size.


Julia L. Glade, Jonathan Bender
Dr.
Julia Lynne Glade, a daughter of Joan G. de Pontet of Washington and Dr.
Philip R. Glade of Miami, was married last evening to Jonathan Kirk Bender, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen H. Bender of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Rabbi Shlomo Balter performed the ceremony in the Rainbow Suites at the Rainbow Room in New York.
Dr.
Glade Bender, 26, is a resident in pediatrics at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Yale University, she summa cum laude.
She received her medical degree from the University of Pennsylvania.


The Broken Wing Award of '92
To the Editor:
I read with interest "The Winners and (Many) Losers of '92" (Dec. 27) and I believe that one award was omitted:


Who Would Miss County's 'Fat Cats'?
"County Employees Return to the Fold"  [ Dec. 6 ]  paints a happy picture without the true background and consequences behind the rehiring of the 250 Nassau County employees.
The county in its effort to maintain a semblance of fiscal responsibility while sinking ever deeper into the muddy sea of deficit laid off low-salaried employees, leaving the Public Works Department and the Assessor and Comptroller's departments short of workers.
The ironic and cruel part of the fact is that the "fat cat" political appointees who do little if any work continue in their overpaid and relatively useless status continue to occupy the county payroll.
Getting rid of them would have no effect on the running of the county's affairs, and their inflated compensations returned to the county's coffers would have eliminated the need for many of the layoffs.
ALAN PALL New Hyde Park


Try a Little Tenderness
To the Editor:
May I take you to task on one point in the otherwise excellent article entitled "No Pigeons Were Killed (or Even Annoyed)"  [ Dec. 13 ] , which pointed out the humane treatment of the 500 pigeons that figured in the plot line of "Home Alone 2," as well as the similar care afforded animals in other recent films.
Far from being a code of working terms that "human actors might envy," the voluntary guidelines established by the American Humane Association for the use of animals in movies merely set minimum standards for the care and housing of these unpaid performers.


Queens Man Confesses to Slaying Mother
A Queens man was held by the police last night after confessing to the murder of his mother on Thursday, the police said.
The man, Samuel Rodriguez, 32, went to Woodhull Medical Center about 4:30 P.M. yesterday to seek treatment for chest pains, and in the course of an examination told hospital staff that he had killed his mother three days earlier, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.


Profile/Don Tyson; Mr. Chicken Goes to Washington
When Ross Perot heaped scorn on Arkansas last fall as a state of low-tech chicken-pluckers, it was Don Tyson who should have been offended more than Bill Clinton.
Low-tech?
Hardly.
Mr.
Tyson is known around the rolling green pastures here in northwest Arkansas as Mr.
Chicken, or Super Chicken, and that is just fine with the puckish, high-energy chairman of Tyson Foods Inc.
Plucking chickens, and selling them 3,000 ways, has made Mr.
Tyson very nearly a billionaire -- a number sure to get Mr.
Perot's attention.


Edward Klaris and Robin Pogrebin
Robin Pogrebin, a staff reporter at The New York Observer, was married yesterday evening to Edward J. Klaris, an associate at the New York law firm of Lankenau Kovner &amp; Kurtz Rabbi Kenneth Klaristenfeld, the bridegroom's uncle, performed the ceremony at the Mohonk Mountain House in New Paltz, N.Y.
Ms.
Pogrebin, who is 27, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Bert Pogrebin and Letty Cottin Pogrebin of New York.
Her father is the senior partner of Rains &amp; Pogrebin, a law firm in Mineola, L.I.
Her mother is a founding editor of Ms. magazine and an author in New York.


Reaffirm Our Commitment to World's Children
To the Editor:
Now that the hearts of many Americans have been touched by the devastating images of starving children in Somalia, the release of Unicef's "State of the World's Children 1993" report is a timely reminder of the plight of children around the globe.
Approximately 35,000 children worldwide die each day from largely preventable disease and malnutrition.
Almost 60 percent of these 13 million annual deaths are caused by just three diseases -- pneumonia, diarrhea and measles -- which can all be prevented or treated at very low cost.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE CABIN Reminiscence and Diversions. By David Mamet. Turtle Bay, $20.


Traveling on Your Stomach
I MOVE around a lot.
Always have, maybe because as a kid I found it easy to think of places considerably more entertaining than the one I lived in, which was Akron, Ohio.
For a career I chose journalism, a line of work that promised limitless travel, and I stayed with writing, which entails hitting the road a lot, when a lot of my contemporaries graduated to editing, which doesn't.
I travel for pleasure, too, and I mix the two, sometimes in proportions that cause eyebrows to be raised among my more single-minded colleagues.
During my only extended assignment to Poland, for example, I drove all night to Cracow to see Leonardo da Vinci's quizzical young woman with an ermine, and I once persuaded my mullah/ minder in Teheran to let me visit Persepolis between gunfights.


JAN. 10-16: More Reagan-Era Fallout; On the Way Out, Republicans Scramble To Shape Their Legacy
As the Clintons started moving to Washington last week, the White House, Congress and the Federal courts remained eerily preoccupied with the fallout from the Iran-Contra affair and other foreign policy scandals from the Reagan years.
On Friday, Mr.
Bush made public a 31-page transcript of his personal ruminations, which he taped as the Iran-Contra scandal began to unravel in 1986.


Bows and Curtsies
The School of American Ballet honors a grande dame and a corporate angel.


Jennifer Lowry, Ernest Ruehl Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Lowry of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Balch Lowry to Ernest Henry Ruehl Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ruehl of Orinda, Calif.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lowry, 25, is the manager of financial planning for Tec Magik Inc., an entertainment software company in Redwood City, Calif.
She graduated from Hamilton College.
Her father, now retired, was the chairman and the chief executive of the U.S.
Plywood Corporation in Wilton, Conn.


Corrections
An article on the Technology page last Sunday, about ways to offset the greenhouse effect, misstated the nationality of a forestry company being subsidized to spare commercially worthless trees when it cuts the more valuable species.
The company is Malaysian, not Indonesian.


Rights Center Draws Visitors In Birmingham
A new center in Birmingham, Ala., built to honor those who fought for the civil rights of African Americans has drawn visitors in numbers that "far exceeded" expectations since it opened on Nov. 16, according to a spokesman, David Kirkwood.
Mr.
Kirkwood said 37,470 people had visited the center, the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, through Dec. 31.
So far visitors have come from 44 states and 13 countries, he added.
The institute, financed in a part by a bond issue in Birmingham, is housed in a modern brick building with a two-story rotunda that serves as its entrance.
The $12 million cost of construction was paid for by the city of Birmingham.


In Bosnia, Britain Shows No Lagging
To the Editor:
"What Kind of Peace for Bosnia?" (editorial, Jan. 12) speaks of the United States need to galvanize its "lagging allies." So far as
this
ally is concerned, we have by far the largest military contingent in the most difficult and dangerous part of Bosnia.
Its members have been fired on and have returned fire.
We lost a British soldier killed in Bosnia today.


Klan Law Can't Stop Blockades
The pattern became familiar over the last 12 years: The Supreme Court speaks, often accepting the White House position on a hot-button case involving civil rights or abortion, and the spotlight then shifts to Capitol Hill for a Congressional response.
Last week it happened again, in a case that combined abortion and civil rights.
The Court ruled, 6 to 3, that a Reconstruction-era civil rights law known as the Ku Klux Klan Act does not give Federal judges jurisdiction to bar anti-abortion protesters from blockading abortion clinics.


Nothing Is the Best Thing for Plants at Rest
JANUARY is a fine time to take it easy when caring for house plants.
Even though the plants may not appear to be resting, many of them are.
And pushing them too much is not a good thing.
Watering could be a problem.
So could overfertilization.
The lesson of the rest period was learned rather abruptly about a year ago.
A handsome clivia plant refused to bloom.
It was old enough by horticultural standards and should have flowered easily, but coddling and caring were of no avail.
Blooms were a special goal, for this particular plant was believed to be a yellow-flowering clivia, which is a rather exciting color break from the usual orange-red.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Justice Department; Nominee Pays Fine for Hiring of Illegal Aliens
The Immigration and Naturalization Service sought and received payment of a $2,900 fine today from the Attorney General-designate, Zoe Baird, and her husband for employing a Peruvian couple living in the country illegally.
The hiring of the illegal aliens as baby sitter and driver, as well as the failure to pay Social Security taxes for them, has proven embarrassing to Ms.
Baird, who as Attorney General would be in charge of enforcing immigration policy.
Thus far, however, the Republicans on the Senate Judiciary Committee have not pressed the matter.


Smith to Give It a Shot
Miami Heat point guard STEVE SMITH expects to play for the first time this season on Wednesday at home against the Philadelphia 76ers.
Smith is recovering from two operations on his right knee in the past 10 months.
The most recent was Oct. 17, to repair cartilage damage.


Holding Lead, Serbs in Bosnia Look to End Fighting
For the Serbian nationalist leaders who make their temporary capital in this mountain town just outside of Sarajevo, the war with Bosnia's Muslims and Croats appears distant, save for the booms of mortar fire that echo through the valleys.
The Serbian forces would like to end the fighting that has lasted for 10 months because of the advantages they hold.
Among these are the occupation of two-thirds of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the name of Serbs, who account for less than a third of the population of 4.4 million, and Muslim losses of at least 150,000 dead or missing.


Prodding the Pace of City Work
After years of debate over how to get more work from the city's labor force, Mayor David N. Dinkins seemed to have scored a major victory last February when city officials obtained what they described as a significant concession from the sanitation workers union.
Because New Yorkers had begun recycling, the daily load for many sanitation workers had been drastically reduced, allowing some to finish the work of their eight-hour shifts in as little as four hours.
The city and the union agreed that within a month they would extend collection routes in a sample district.
And within a year, they pledged, all the routes in the city would be redrawn.


On Sunday; The Things People Do With Makeup
Members of Cosmetic Executive Women gather at the Diane Young Skin Care Center on East 57th Street in Manhattan before departing for their monthly outing.
The salon's busy (it has 12 beauty therapists, 6 of them estheticians), yet it's a discreet locale.
"We don't make V.I.P.'s wait," says Diane Young, the owner.
"The secretary calls ahead, we greet them at the door and take them right to our locked treatment rooms."
Waiting to embark on their January outing, the two dozen women speculated about who'd be doing Hillary Clinton's wardrobe.
They studied the Camilla Parker-Bowles transcripts and marveled at Prince Charles's lighter side.
They caught up.
"You got married!" said one.
"That's a big rock."
"Thanks," said Ellen Breslow.


Mother Is Charged With Deserting Baby
A woman was arrested in Brooklyn yesterday for leaving her two-year-old son home unattended, the police said.
The woman, Kathy Gibson, 24, was charged with endangering the welfare of a minor, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.
About 3 P.M., police officers responded to a call that an baby was in distress in an apartment at 955 Rutland Road in East Flatbush.
They found the child alone, unclothed and crying, and described the apartment as dirty and in disarray, Sergeant Mohrmann said.
It was unclear how long the boy had been unattended.


N.H.L. Again Loses Another of Star Class
Gil Stein, the outgoing president of the National Hockey League, watched the talented rookie Eric Lindros join a tangle of bodies during a Flyers game in November and wrench his knee.
Last year, Stein worried that competition in the Canada Cup would aggravate Wayne Gretzky's back condition, and it did.
On Friday, Stein was on hand in Pittsburgh to witness another major setback to the National Hockey League: Mario Lemieux of the Penguins, the league's leading scorer and one of its few marquee names, outlined a recovery plan from Hodgkin's disease that would require at least six to eight weeks before he could return to action.


Seton Hall Is Pitt's Latest Upset Victim
Pitt's basketball team may not be ranked in the top 25, but the Panthers certainly know how to beat teams that are.
The Panthers did it to U.C.L.A. last month and to Connecticut last Tuesday, and tonight they defeated seventh-ranked Seton Hall, 76-73, in the cacophonous confines of tiny Fitzgerald Field House.


If Kennedy's Musical Was 'Camelot,' What's Clinton's?
EACH evening from December to December, of all the images that linger of America's last boy-king, none is more enduring than the notion of John F. Kennedy's thousand days as "Camelot." It was a conceit graven in the national consciousness by his widow the week after his murder, when she recalled to Life magazine how he loved to listen to the hit Broadway album late at night.
As envisioned in the show's libretto (by the President's Harvard classmate Alan Jay Lerner) King Arthur's court was a place where young men of honor would use might only for right, and would "Talk! Discuss! Make laws! Plan improvements!"


Before Abbott
To the Sports Editor:
Ira Berkow is wrong in stating ("A Most Extraordinary Fella," The Times, Dec. 25) that Jim Abbott, recently acquired by the Yankees from the California Angels, is "the first and only one-handed pitcher in baseball history."


The Seeds Of Temptation
MAYBE I'm getting jaded, but I don't get that warm, cozy feeling anymore when the seed catalogues come pouring in.
I feel uneasy, a little guilty.
Oh, sure, I curl up by the fire with my cat and a ton of seductive glossies just like a lot of you, and I end up ordering too many seeds and perennials, too.
But there are plants outdoors sending messages through the frosted windows.
The seeds from last summer, stuck in a box upstairs (I know, I'm supposed to put them in sealed containers in the refrigerator's vegetable bin, but do you?), are communicating through the floorboards.


Judge Blocks Expanded List Of Defendants at Dump Site
A Federal judge in New Haven has blocked an attempt by a group of companies who disposed of hazardous waste at a Connecticut site to bring more than 1,000 homeowners and small businesses into the litigation over who will pay for a cleanup there.
The decision represents a sharp departure from the way courts have been handling lawsuits over who will pay for cleanups under the Superfund program that deals with abandoned waste sites.
If the judge's reasoning stands, both the Federal Government and major industrial producers of waste may have to rethink their legal strategies. 'For Common Sense'
"For the first time, a judge has stood up for common sense and the small people," said Mark Mininberg, a New Haven lawyer who represented the small businesses and homeowners whose waste was taken to the Laurel Park dump site.
The site is in Naugatuck, which is near Waterbury.


Some Baseball Salaries Really Do Decline
Then there is the other side of the dollar.
Not every player, free agent or otherwise, who has signed a contract this winter has received Barry Bonds's $43.75 million or Cecil Fielder's $36 million or Fielder's $10 million signing bonus or David Cone's $9 million signing bonus or Ken Griffey's $24 million at the age of 23.


Kids' Museum On Cape Cod
A children's museum in Falmouth, Mass., the first on Cape Cod, has been opened in temporary quarters by a nonprofit organization of parents and other local residents who plan to move it to a larger home in 1994.
The Cape Cod Children's Museum, which opened last month and will remain open year round, contains hands-on, interactive exhibits designed for ages 1 to 10.
A harborside exhibit has pier, boat, foul weather gear and life presevers, and there's a pirates' den with climbing loft, a pretend office with computers and make-believe operating room and construction area.
With further grants and fund-raising efforts, the organizers plan an enlarged museum representing a traditional Cape Cod village with child-size houses, grocery and fire station, and with an American Indian exhibit.


Streetscapes: 200 East 84th Street; A Middle-Aged Frump Gets A Belated Soupcon of Glamour
THIS is a revolution not of bullets, but of blueprints.
The insurgents are a new generation of architects and co-op owners in New York who look back at the 1960's as an architectural wasteland.
One of the most radical of these revolutionists' alterations is just now being completed at the southeast corner of 84th Street and Third Avenue at a cost of $500,000.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
GLASNOST CONCERTS
When the Bronx Arts Ensemble started its "Glasnost in the Bronx" concerts two years ago, featuring Russian and American chamber music in collaboration with the Leningrad Chamber Orchestra, it did not anticipate the breakup of the Soviet Union.


It's Never Fair to Just Blame the Weather
THE world still thinks of famine the way that Malthus did, as Mother Nature's revenge on hapless humanity.
In fact, famine is anything but what the dour English economist called "nature's last most dreadful resource." As in Somalia, it is often a man-made disaster, an avoidable economic and political catastrophe.
The kind of famine that struck there -- created by clan warfare, not by crop shortages or endemic poverty -- is the rule, not the exception, according to several economists who have studied famines in Africa, Asia and Europe.


Nothing Good About Hunting
To the Sports Editor:
Robert F. Jones admits in his first sentence ("Subtracting the Hunt and Adding Recklessness," The Times, Jan. 3), "I've been a deer hunter now for 46 years, but at the close of this past season, I seriously considered giving up the game for good." First of all, to give up the game for good is a positive move, since there is nothing good about hunting and giving it up would be for the good.
But this is surely not what he meant.


Suspect in Brooklyn Slaying Kills Himself
A suspect in the shooting death of a man outside a Brooklyn social club fatally shot himself yesterday morning after police cornered him in a schoolyard, the police said.
The man was taken to Kings County Medical Center, where he died, the police said.
He shot himself in the head while hiding in the schoolyard of the Board of Education's Headquarters for special education, at 801 Park Place, said Albert W. O'Leary, a transit police spokesman.


A Romantic Whose Pact Was Divine
When a visitor spoke with Nathan Milstein more than a decade ago, the violinist conversed exactly as he played.
He was animated, compelling, humane and completely relaxed.
When he discussed music, he talked not about effect and technique but about structure and meaning.
Standing at the piano, he made it sing like his own familiar stringed instrument.
He played parts of Tchaikovsky's Violin Concerto, arguing that its lines are often mistakenly forced to weave "like a drunkard." He shaped the opening phrases of Bach's First Solo Violin Sonata, offering commentary on the suspenseful narrative.
He was humming, gesturing in the air, always referring back to the music.
He also talked about painting and politics, about improvisation and religion.
And he recalled how he and Vladimir Horowitz played together throughout the Soviet hinterlands in the 1920's; a Communist Party official dubbed them the "Children of the Soviet Revolution."


Rachel Siegel, Andrew Collens
Avrom and Janet Siegel of Prairie Village, Kan., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter, Rachel Deborah Siegel, and Charles Andrew Collens, the son of Susan Perrotti of New Rochelle, N.Y., and Dr.
Richard Collens of Katonah, N.Y.
Miss Siegel, 26, teaches the second grade at Public School 207 in Manhattan.
She graduated from the State University at Plattsburgh, N.Y., and received a master's degree in early childhood education from the College of New Rochelle.
Her father, who is retired, was a social studies teacher at New Rochelle High School.
Her mother, also retired, taught home economics at the Albert Leonard Middle School in New Rochelle.


Data Update
*4*MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Nov. 92
Oct. 92
Nov. 91
Nation
$ 102,900
103,400
$ 97,900
Northeast
137,800
135,800
138,300
Midwest
82,300
82,400
78,100
South
92,000
91,700
87,200
West
137,900
142,500
138,800
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.28
8.38
8.42
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.37
5.38
6.04
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.15
8.23
8.32
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.23
5.31
5.84
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.16
8.25
8.29
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.97
5.07
5.90
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.30
8.36
8.46
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.88
5.95
6.48
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.60
3.62
4.06
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.49
7.49
8.43
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


How Hotels Are Making Ends Meet
In the lobbies and at the checkout desks of hotels and inns throughout Westchester, the effects of hard times are being measured in vacancy signs and empty rooms -- as the hotel industry, like so many other businesses in the county, feels the grip of a recession that won't let go.
And as it does for most businesses these days, the battle for survival keeps getting tougher.
"We're hurting," said Bruce J. Gorelick, general manager of the Westchester Marriott Hotel in Tarrytown, "and we're falling all over ourselves to get customers."


RWANDA'S ARISTOCRATIC GUERRILLAS
The comparison of Tutsi and Hutu physical characteristics in Alex Shoumatoff's article "Rwanda's Aristocratic Guerrillas" (Dec. 13) is reminiscent of the skewed and biased 19th-century fields of study of phrenology and ethnocraniology.
As a Ugandan living in America, I find Shoumatoff's need to "distinguish  [ the Tutsi ]  from other black Africans" because of "their refined, Ethiopian features" a rather vulgar and shallow analysis.


Sectarian Violence Revives in India


Talking: Graffiti; Curbing Urban Blight
A GROWING number of New York City co-ops and condominiums are being hit with an onslaught of graffiti.
Both interior and exterior walls have become tempting targets for the ancient scourge.
The pavement outside is occasionally being spray-painted or marked up, too.
The issue has grown so troublesome that for the first time this fall a workshop on the topic was held at the annual conference of the Council of New York Cooperatives.


In the Region: Connecticut; Snug New Harbor for Maritime Industry
IT has been a gradual process -- a tanker company here and a ships' brokerage there quietly moving out of New York City into the suburbs for more than a decade.
Mostly small companies, they are not missed.
But as the exodus continues it is now estimated that more than half the maritime industry has left the city.


When the Arms Dealer Turns Policeman
To the Editor:
"Peace on Earth, by Posse" (editorial, Dec. 28), goes some way toward touching on the moral points to be considered when contemplating military intervention.
But moral posturing is to no avail if the root causes of armed conflicts are not addressed.
And we must start with our own house: the United States needs a foreign policy that acknowledges our role as the world's major arms supplier.


PROBLEMS WE THOUGHT WE SOLVED
While creating a world-class department of pediatrics at Boston City Hospital, academic researchers from Harvard have spent more than $38 million this year to study the effects of poverty on the growth and development of children: 135 research papers and 47 abstracts detailing how poverty is bad for children were published ("Tackling Problems We Thought We Solved," by Perri Klass, Dec. 13).
Since no one is operating on the assumption that deprived children are thriving, couldn't this money have been spent providing direct services?


Buses, Bells and Balls: An Inaugural Guide
The inaugural festivities that begin today will be a salute to Bill Clinton's favorite themes and political techniques, with bows to ethnic diversity, rock music and rap music, an entourage of ordinary Americans and even a saxophone tribute to the President-elect.
Here is a five-day guide.
Official Events...
TODAY
8 A.M.: President-elect Bill Clinton and inaugural entourage attend religious service in Charlottesville, Va., tour Thomas Jefferson's Monticello and begin bus trip to Washington.


Earth Needs Change to Survive, Study Says
Despite growing interest in the fate of the planet, nothing short of sharp changes in government policies and people's attitudes will rescue the earth's ailing ecosystems from destruction, a report from the Worldwatch Institute says.
In the institute's annual report on the state of the world, Lester R. Brown, president of the Washington-based environmental research group, is not without hope.
Indeed, Mr.
Brown notes that there were more journalists at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in June than there were participants in a similar conference in Stockholm 20 years earlier.
But he warns that the strides made in Rio were not nearly long or swift enough to save the earth.


Giving Masterpieces Their Just Rewards
The balcony overlooking Richard Morris Hunt's great hall at the Metropolitan Museum of Art has visibly brightened in recent months as the redesigned vitrines have been filled with a fresh assortment of Oriental art.
For the first time in more than 25 years, the display cases encircling the space and flanking Hunt's splendid staircase have been gutted and rebuilt to present a stylistic history of Chinese ceramics, along with masterpieces in jade, cloisonne, enamel and lacquer.
Thanks to new fiber-optic footlights and quartz floodlights, the ambiance has gone from dingy to crisp.
The brilliant colors, subtle patterns and carved detailing on the 500 or so objects are more clearly revealed.
And most items are exhibited a foot higher than before, bringing everything closer to eye level.
As a result, the revamped arrangements succeed in looking sparser, even though the number of pieces is the same.


Quilt Discovery Days: And Now for the Payoff
THE culmination of a statewide program that has involved hundreds of New Jerseyans over five years in the search for and documentation of more than 2,000 quilts is on view at the Morris Museum here -- 35 works in which a history of life in the state is stitched together with threads, not words.
As part of the Heritage Quilt Project of New Jersey, which began in the summer of 1988, 32 Quilt Discovery Days were held throughout the state.
Members of local historical societies, museum staffs and quilting groups, and numerous volunteers, examined and documented quilts made in this state or brought here before 1950.


From Homely to Hot
So here it is at last: a fashion symbol for women in the 1990's.
Move over, power suit.
Apron, step forward.
The apron?
The apron!
References to this homely relic appeared in the spring ready-to-wear shows from Paris to New York.
And if it wasn't the apron, it was its dowdy relative, the housedress.


Top-Notch Tables; Montefollonico, Italy
In Italy, a memorable meal with a great wine in a hidden medieval village surrounded by rolling green hills isn't a detour -- it's a way of life.
Nevertheless, some places stand out.
One such that I especially love is La Chiusa, in the hamlet of Montefollonico (province of Siena), just outside Montepulciano, the famous Tuscan wine town.
The owner, Umberto Lucherini, acts as host and sommelier, but the servers are women, unusual for Italy, as is the chef, Mr.
Lucherino's wife and co-owner, Dania Masotti.
In a large converted farmhouse, La Chiusa is an elegant establishment, seating 40 to 50 people, with a tasteful rusticity in the form of brick, beams and a great wooden bottle-filled island in the middle of the spacious dining room.
Local women move a little cart from table to table, making by hand the evening's pici, a spaghettilike Tuscan pasta, as well as other kinds of pasta.


Wall Street; The Latest Free Agents: Brokers
THE messy divorce between Corporate America and its workers hasn't gone unnoticed by the nation's stockbrokers.
Cropping up under a bevy of names you've never heard of is a growing number of brokers who call themselves independent contractors -- brokers who work almost entirely for themselves.
The popularity of working for a no-namer like MFI Investments isn't exactly threatening behemoths like Merrill Lynch.
But the Merrill Lynches of the world can't ignore the trend either.
In a poll of its broker-readers in the fall, Financial Planning on Wall Street magazine discovered that 54 percent of its 450 respondents were willing to pack their Rolodexes and hang their own shingle, abandoning their name-brand affiliation.


An Easy Man to Crowd
DANIEL BOONE
The Life and Legend of an American Pioneer.
By John Mack Faragher.
Illustrated. 429 pp.
New York:  Henry Holt &amp; Company. $27.50.


My Fellow Americans . . .; People People
On Wednesday, Bill Clinton will be inaugurated President of the United States.
On Thursday, news outlets will analyze, at length, his inaugural address.
On Friday, nobody will remember a word of it -- only that it was long.
Such is the common fate of oratory in the age of the sound bite.
It need not be.
The New York Times Book Review cannot command the services of such a skilled and durable inaugural speech writer as Abraham Lincoln; but what it can do, it does.
It has asked five wise, distinguished, politically au courant writers to compose short, pithy, memorable inaugural addresses for Mr.
Clinton, who is invited to adopt any one or any combination of the five.
If Mr.
Clinton's inaugural address cannot live in memory, perhaps infamy will do.


Cordelia Hodges, Henry Tilghman
Mr. and Mrs.
Fletcher Hodges 3d of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Cordelia Ritchie Hodges to Henry Richardson Tilghman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas S. Tilghman of Trumbull, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Hodges, 28, is a lawyer at Multnomah Defenders Inc., a legal concern in Portland, Ore.
She graduated from Kenyon College and received her law degree from Lewis and Clark University, where her fiance is a third-year law student.
Her father is the president of Hodges Capital Management, an investment management firm in New York.


Katie's Ordeal: Seeking Friendship, Finding 16 Days of Terror
Katie Beers's voyage through the trapdoors of a man's twisted mind began as a lonely girl's dream outing: a birthday shopping expedition for the kinds of things her family never bought her, followed by a trip to the video arcade.
But John Esposito, the man who the police said would become her jailer, added a bonus gift to the Barbie workout tape and a troll doll Katie had chosen: a Home Alone 2 Super-Nintendo video game.
"It was an offer no 10-year-old could refuse," said Detective Lieut.
Dominick Varrone of the Suffolk County police.
The trip to the video arcade never happened.


Conversations/Lou Reed; Rock's Grim New York Poet Brings His Wild Side to an Inaugural Show
IN what may be the oddest booking of the year, the godfather of punk rock is scheduled to play an inaugural ball.
"I didn't think I was the first name that sprang to mind," Lou Reed said drily in a telephone interview the other day.
Mr.
Reed has sung, with some sympathy, about junkies, transvestites, hustlers and psychotics; with the Velvet Underground in the 1960's, he created shrieking, assaultive pre-punk rock that savaged the optimism of flower power.
In the 1970's, leading his own bands, he would perform "Heroin" while pretending to tie off his arm and inject the drug.
More recently, he has made albums about urban chaos ("New York"), about his early sponsor Andy Warhol ("Songs for 'Drella") and about the age of AIDS ("Magic and Loss").


So, You Wanna Be a Director?
In recent years, the Sundance Film Festival has earned a reputation as the point of entry for independent film makers in search of a distributor.
In fact, Sundance, which begins on Thursday, is more like the industry's Triple-A league, the last stop before the call comes from Hollywood.
In the post-studio era, the first stop, more likely than not, is film school, where hundreds of would-be directors churn out thousands of films every year.
Most show occasional flashes of near-competence, but the best make the jump to prestigious foreign festivals or Sundance, which will show 23 student films this year among the 48 in its short-film category.
The film-school output is prodigious.
Students at New York University alone make anywhere from 3,000 to 7,000 short movies a year.
The other powerhouse film programs -- at the University of Southern California, the University of California at Los Angeles, Columbia University and the American Film Institute in Los Angeles -- kick in their share as well, not to mention the dozens of smaller graduate programs scattered across the country, most of which require that students direct a short thesis film to earn a master's degree.


Florio Strives To Be Phoenix of '93 Politics
Two and a half years after he angered virtually the entire state by pushing a record $2.8 billion tax increase through the Legislature, Gov.
Jim Florio has risen from the political dead.
Even his severest critics say he will be tough to beat in November.
The Governor's bleak poll ratings began to thaw last August, and Mr.
Florio, a scrappy Brooklyn street kid who went on to become a Navy middleweight and is now a cerebral policy expert with the charisma of a flow chart, has a fighting chance for re-election 10 months from now.


On the Slopes


Good Reason for Baseball's Antitrust Exemption
To the Sports Editor:
Baseball club owners have been drawing much fire lately, in many different areas.
I will address the Dave Anderson column of Dec. 13, in which he discussed the antitrust exemption granted to organized baseball by the Supreme Court in the Federal Baseball case of May 1922.
Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. wrote the unanimous opinion in that case, which simply affirmed the opinion of the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia.


Moscow's Just Delightful This Time Of Year
Victims of wanderlust, take note.
Two months ago, Now Voyager, an air courier agency in Manhattan, added relatively inexpensive round-trip flights to Moscow, St.
Petersburg, Prague, Budapest and Warsaw to its list of offerings.


Tech Notes; In Pagers, Too, Small Is Beautiful
SVELTE is an attribute for pagers, as well as people.
Earlier this month, the paging products division of Motorola Inc. showed its new model, the Confidant, that is the length and width of a credit card and only a quarter-inch thick -- a far cry from the bulky boxes of the past.
Several technological advances enabled the company to make the pager so small.
First, the device is powered by a new type of battery that combines zinc and air in a flat "coin" cell, rather than the much larger AA- and AAA-size alkalines used by most other pagers.
Second, said Frank H. Lloyd, corporate vice president and general manager of the division based in Boynton Beach, Fla., the Confidant incorporates a smaller antenna than usual, which occupies most of the pager's backside, allowing the pager to work in any position.
Most pager antennas need to stand upright.
In addition, smarter and smaller chips were used, he said.


Taking Advantage of Venison's Low Fat
"MEAT of Kings Going Cheap to the Masses." That was a recent headline in The Times of London.
In England, wild venison -- free-range and organic -- costs less than dog food.
It was the only bargain I found when I was in London over the Christmas holidays.
I spent less than $5 for a boneless venison roast big enough to serve six people, and venison medallions were cheaper than hamburger in New York.
Just about everything else in London costs more than twice what it does in New York.
Wild Scottish venison is now so plentiful it is almost valueless. (As anyone who has a house in the country knows, deer breed like rabbits, and in the absence of such natural enemies as wolves, their numbers continue to expand at an extraordinarily high rate.) In Britain, wild venison is sold in supermarkets as boneless joints, roasts and steaks as well as diced and marinated and in prepared meals.
In the United States, however, venision remains a very small part of the market, although it is showing up more and more on restaurant menus, and prices are still comparatively high.


Daria Pace, David Lamb
Daria Kathryn Pace, a marketing consultant in the food industry in New York, was married yesterday to David Robinson Lamb, a landscape architect in Greenvale, L.I.
The Rev.
Christopher Brown, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Grace Church in New York.
Mrs.
Lamb graduated from the University of Chicago.
She is a daughter of Sophie Pace Petretti of Stony Brook, L.I., and the late Thaddeus Pace.
Her mother is a senior administrator for the County of Suffolk in Hauppauge, L.I.


The New Administration: Ray of Light in a Darkened Tunnel?
Political Winter


His Dreams Are Always In Black and White
Martin Tupper's mind is submerged in television imagery.
Viewers may not see him watch much television, but the thoughts of the main character in HBO's sitcom "Dream On" are regularly illustrated with snippets from the programs he absorbed as a child, as if key synapses to his brain had been hot-wired to a 1950's cathode-ray tube.
The gimmick -- having old bits of video interrupt events in the life of an ordinary, sex-obsessed book editor -- works like this: Tupper (Brian Benben) is angry because a childhood friend publicly confessed that his first sexual experience was with Tupper.
We see a standard shot of Tupper looking in dismay at his friend.
Then we see a character in a moth-eaten black-and-white film asking, "Do you think dynamite would stop him?" Then we quickly return to Tupper.


The New Administration: Ray of Light in a Darkened Tunnel?
Political Winter


For Tighter Shower Heads and Faucets
SHOWER-FIXTURE woes include dripping, water flowing from the bathtub spout while the shower is operating and uneven or obstructed spraying.
Except when parts are recessed behind tiled walls, most repairs are easy.
Dripping when the shower is off signals a problem in the faucets or faucet, if the shower has just one.
Repairing those is similar to repairing leaky faucets in sinks or lavatories.


Top-Notch Tables; Freinsheim, Germany
Freinsheim, in the Rhineland Palatinate (Rheinland-Pfalz in German), a dry sunny wine region near the border with Alsace, was devasted by French troops in 1689.
But out of the ruins rose a fairytale village that retains all its 17th-century charm.
Behind the meticulously preserved Baroque facade of one of the most beautiful of the buildings built at that time, at 29 Hauptstrasse (Main Street), is the new and delightful Luther Hotel and Restaurant, which was awarded a Michelin star in 1991.
The house and its outbuildings were first restored in 1769, the date carved in the lintel over the front door.
They were refurbished most recently between 1988 and 1991, after the owner deeded the house to the town with the proviso that it be put to some public use.
Since Freinsheim is on the popular Weinstrasse, or wine highway, from Bockenheim in the north to the French border at Wissembourg in the south, the town fathers chose to convert it into an exquisite small hotel and restaurant.


IN SHORT: FICTION
PEACHY By Fredrica Wagman. Soho, $18.95.


And the Bloat Award Goes to . . .
To the Editor:
Leaving aside why Ethan Podell would want to work in a medium that he believes "acts upon people essentially as a depressant and an anesthetic," the description he provides of the BBC is wrong on several counts (and I am not a BBC employee, although I was many years ago).
Mr.
Podell wrote in part:


The Inaugural Festivities, Live and on Tape
TODAY  8 A.M., CNN and C-Span: Mr. Clinton's visit to Monticello.
10:50 A.M. - 12:30 P.M., C-Span: Mr. Clinton stops at a Baptist Church in Culpeper, Va.
5-6 P.M., C-Span: Mr. Clinton's remarks at the Lincoln Memorial.
6 P.M., C-Span: "Bells for Hope" ceremony.
Mr.
Clinton crosses the Potomac and rings a replica of the Liberty Bell in Arlington Cemetery.
Also on CNN, starting at 6:15.
8-10 P.M., HBO: "An American Reunion: New Beginnings, Renewed Hope." The Clintons are serenaded at the Lincoln Memorial by Kathleen Battle, Ruben Blades, L.L.
Cool J., Yo-Yo Ma and many others. (Taped.) TUESDAY  3-4 P.M., The Disney Channel: "The Presidential Inaugural Celebration for Children." The Clintons and Gores join Mr.
Rogers and the Muppets for a performance at the Kennedy Center. (Taped; repeated at 6 P.M.)
5 -- 6 P.M. , The Disney Channel.
"Presidential Inaugural Celebration for Youth." The Clintons and Gores join Boyz II Men and the Joffrey Ballet at the Kennedy Center. (Taped; repeated at 7 P.M.) WEDNESDAY All the major networks, including PBS, will carry live coverage of the inauguration and inaugural parade starting at 10 A.M.
Fox's coverage begins at 11:30.
5:30 -- 6 P.M. CNN. Live reporting from inaugural festivities.
10 -- 11 P.M., CNN. Live from an Inaugural Ball.
10 -- 11 P.M., NBC. Live from various Inaugural balls.
11 P.M., Fox. The Inaugural Ball.


Sprucing Up the Site of a Collective National Drama
Parks, playgrounds, outdoor sculptures: the Battery Park City Authority, the state agency created to develop 92 acres of landfill at the tip of Manhattan, has plied New York with so many spectacular gifts that it is natural to harbor suspicions about the agency's motives.
What have they got to feel guilty about?
Nothing at all.
Still, at a time of dwindling government support for affordable housing, there is something acutely imbalanced about the lavish amenities bestowed on what is, after all, a publicly sponsored luxury housing development.
Never was that imbalance more evident than in the 1986 proposal by the artist Jennifer Bartlett for a walled garden compound at Battery Park City's southern tip.
Frivolously conceived, maddeningly indifferent to its waterfront location, the project was abandoned in 1991 after strong opposition from community residents and parks advocates.


CHALLENGE TO THE FAITHFUL
Alan Cowell's report on the Vatican serves it well ("Challenge to the Faithful," Dec. 27).
So, too, does the photograph by Livio Anticolo, which casts an intense golden hue from gilded ceiling to inlaid marble floor.
Even the bishops' chasubles are gold-threaded.
But it is the figure of the Pope, a ghostly presence caught in motion and blurred into transparency, that sums up the current Vatican state of affairs.
Cowell serves his subject well, in that the central name in Christianity is used but once and then only in reference to a doctrinal conceit -- that an exclusively male priesthood rests on "the theological grounds that Jesus chose only male apostles."


Perspectives: Westchester Co-ops; Financing Buildings in Rent Law's Shadow
SINCE Robin Tansey became president of the co-op at 2035 Central Park Avenue here, there have been changes.
Mrs.
Tansey set up a workout room in the building and a small playground outside.
She redid the laundry room and had the building painted.
But the biggest change of all, the one most important for the future of this 70-unit, five-story, 60's-ish building, is one the occupants cannot witness.
The East New York Savings Bank has agreed to refinance the mortgage on the building, coming due in 1994, on terms that won't raise the co-op's debt payments or raid its reserve fund.
This was made possible in part by the willingness and ability of a conversion sponsor, who still owns two-thirds of the apartments, to guarantee part of the loan.


Paris on a Budget
To the Editor: It was delightful to read about Raymond J. Blair and his "Paris on a Pared-Down Budget" (Nov. 22).
My wife, Eleanor, and I enjoyed a 35th wedding anniversary trip to Paris in July 1992.
Our accommodations were less expensive but we saw as much, if not more, of Paris and France in a 10-day stay.
We looked for the cheapest accommodations and came up with the Formule 1 motels. (They are owned by Accor, the company that owns Motel 6 in the United States.) Their rooms rent for less than $25 a night and have space for three.
The room includes a color TV and corner sink.
The showers and toilets are down the hall but it beats camping out.


Mark Ansorge and Deborah Landau
Deborah Landau, the daughter of Dr.
Daniel Lipschutz and Susan Lipschutz of Ann Arbor, Mich., was married last evening to Mark Ansorge, the son of Harry Ansorge of New York and the late Eleanor W. Ansorge.
Cantor Rebecca Garfein performed the ceremony at the Manhattan Penthouse in New York.
Ms.
Landau, who is 25, is keeping her name.
She graduated with distinction from Stanford University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in English from Columbia University.
She is a doctoral candidate in English at Brown University.


Alison Newman, Leo Winter 3d
Alison Stacy Newman, a daughter of Leonard and Ruth Newman of Saddle River, N.J., was married last evening to Leo Winter 3d, the son of Maureen Blitman of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Dr.
Winter Jr. of Manalapan, Fla.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnik performed the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
Mrs.
Winter, 31, is an associate in the law firm of Bachner, Tally, Polevoy &amp; Misher in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from New York University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Diagnostic Retrieval Systems in Oakland, N.J.


Bonus Money Is Based on Bills' Play, Not Kelly's
In recent days, a big story out of Buffalo suggested that if Jim Kelly started the American Football Conference title game against the Dolphins on Sunday and won, he would receive a $200,000 bonus.
The story was intriguing because Kelly had missed the last two playoff games with injuries, and it led some to wonder if Kelly would insist on starting just to earn the bonus.


Hold the Tofu
KITCHEN
By Banana Yoshimoto.
Translated by Megan Backus. 152 pp.
New York:  Grove Press. $14.95.


No Headline
When I come home I feel like I'm entering a jail, and psychologically I am.
When I came to this country in 1934, you could sleep on the fire escape or in the park and nobody took anything from you.
Now, you sleep in your own home and anything can happen.
PEDRO PAGAN,  a 71-year-old Bronx resident.  [ 1:1. ]


JAN. 10-16: Sicilian Mafia Chief Arrested; A 20-Year Hunt Ends At a Roadblock in Palermo
On Friday, the reputed chief of the Sicilian mafia, accompanied only by an unarmed bodyguard, stopped at a roadblock in Palermo's morning rush hour traffic.
When scores of police surrounded his Citroen sedan to arrest him, Salvatore (Toto) Riina reportedly said: "Gentlemen, you are making a big mistake."


Kelly and Marino Race the Clock
Any discussion of successful active quarterbacks in the National Football League invariably leads to the mention of Buffalo's Jim Kelly and Miami's Dan Marino.
Talk about the best group of quarterbacks ever to enter the league at one time and the class of 1983, in which six quarterbacks were taken in the first round, is at the top of the list.
Marino and Kelly are members of that group, as are John Elway of Denver, Ken O'Brien of the Jets, Tony Eason, who was selected by New England, and Todd Blackledge, who was chosen by Kansas City.


Taking Advantage of Venison's Low Fat
"MEAT of Kings Going Cheap to the Masses." That was a recent headline in The Times of London.
In England, wild venison -- free-range and organic -- costs less than dog food.
It was the only bargain I found when I was in London over the Christmas holidays.
I spent less than $5 for a boneless venison roast big enough to serve six people, and venison medallions were cheaper than hamburger in New York.
Just about everything else in London costs more than twice what it does in New York.
Wild Scottish venison is now so plentiful it is almost valueless. (As anyone who has a house in the country knows, deer breed like rabbits, and in the absence of such natural enemies as wolves, their numbers continue to expand at an extraordinarily high rate.) In Britain, wild venison is sold in supermarkets as boneless joints, roasts and steaks as well as diced and marinated and in prepared meals.
In the United States, however, venision remains a very small part of the market, although it is showing up more and more on restaurant menus, and prices are still comparatively high.


Scholar's Death Remains a Mystery
Shortly after 1 P.M. on May 21, 1991, a shot rang out on the third floor of the University of Chicago Divinity School.
A few minutes later, the police found the body of Ioan Culianu, a 41-year-old religion instructor, slumped over in a locked stall in the men's room.
That a well-liked teacher could be shot to death in the center of one of the world's most prestigious campuses at midday was troubling enough.
But in the year and a half since, no arrests have been made, and the passage of time has given rise to an abundance of theories to explain Mr.
Culianu's death.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  A FURTHER TEST WITH IRAQ


JAN. 10-16: Captive Girl Freed; The Abuse of Katie Beers, The Stuff of Talk Shows
When Katie Beers emerged from the dank bunker where she had been confined for 16 days, much of it chained by the neck, she found herself at the center of a media frenzy and a bitter custody dispute between her mother, godmother and Suffolk County child welfare officials.
The 10-year-old girl was freed Wednesday after John Esposito, 43, a Long Island contractor, led police to a soundproof dungeon beneath his garage.
Mr.
Esposito had wept as he reported her missing on Dec. 28.
He was charged with kidnapping and may also face sexual abuse charges.


Paris on a Budget
To the Editor: I have no doubt that Mr.
Blair has made many trips to Europe, but we have some additional ideas on how to travel to Paris cheaply.
For many older couples his experience would have been a disaster.
First, it would have been wiser to celebrate their anniversary a few weeks later and travel on a regular airline with decent food, fixed schedules, several hundred dollars in savings and maybe even an upgrade after a friendly word at check-in.


Debra Zausner, Clifford Weinstein
April wedding plans have been announced by Paul and Rita Zausner of New York, for their daughter, Debra Ruth Zausner, and Dr.
Clifford Jay Weinstein, a son of Robert and Edith Weinstein of Woodmere, L.I.
Ms.
Zausner is an account executive at Emmerling Post, an advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father, a retired pharmacist, was the owner of the Adelphi Drug Store in Brooklyn.
Her mother is a realtor in Manhattan.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Tuning Up for Jan. 20
EUGENE BRUSILOFF of Great Neck has not missed a Presidential inauguration since Harry S. Truman's.
Mr.
Brusiloff isn't a politician.
He is a musician.
Through coincidence, and perseverance, his trombone playing has welcomed every new President for 44 years.


No Miami Dynasty
To the Sports Editor:
It was refreshing to see the final New York Times computer ranking of college football teams let the numbers do the talking and reflect what actually happened on the playing field on Jan. 1:
1. Alabama
2. Notre Dame
3. Florida State
4. Miami
5. Michigan DON SCHMIDT Plainfield, N.J.


For Haitians, Cruelty and Hope
Candidate Bill Clinton rightly denounced George Bush for his "cruel policy of returning Haitian refugees to a brutal dictatorship without an asylum hearing." Now he intends, at least initially, to enforce the same "direct return" policy himself.
That's an unconscionable about-face.
More encouragingly, Mr.
Clinton has also been working hard to clinch a political agreement between Haiti's exiled President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and the soldiers who ousted him 16 months ago.
A political settlement would be the best long-term answer to the refugee problem.
But "direct return" is a repellent short-term answer.


NOTES
The challenge of casting the screen version of "The Flintstones" is nearing completion.
The producers are talking with Catherine O'Hara, the mother in the "Home Alone" movies, about taking the role of Wilma Flintstone.
And Rosie O'Donnell, right, who appeared in "A League of Their Own," is being considered for Betty Rubble.
Weekly Variety reported in its Jan. 11 issue that John Goodman would play Fred Flintstone and that Rick Moranis would play Barney Rubble.


A Singing Affirmation Of the Varieties of Love
"FALSETTOS," William Finn's all-sung affirmation of "a tight-knit family" redefined, has made a dent on Broadway, as a significant-other kind of musical hit.
But let it not be forgotten that the inspired pairing of "March of the Falsettos" and "Falsettoland," originally produced nine years apart Off Broadway, was, first off, a Hartford Stage event in 1991.
With changes in cast and director, the show became a Broadway event a year later.
Now, the prize-winning musical, still running in New York, returns to Connecticut, at the Rich Forum in Stamford, in an edition made to tour.


Q and A
Extra Condo Assessments Question: I bought a one-bedroom condominium in 1985 for $187,000.
The monthly maintenance charges were $350, but they have now risen to $598.
In 1990 and 1991, a 13th-month assessment was made to defray rising costs.
In 1992, two extra months of charges were again requested as special assessments.
I have been paying the regular maintenance of $598 on time but have been unable to meet the last two assessments, totaling $1,169.00.
I have recently been asked to pay these arrears and my suspicion is that yet another 13th assessment will be requested soon.
The regular maintenance also goes up every January.
Can you tell me whether these assessments are legal?
Am I obligated to pay them? . . .
M.
Williams, Manhattan Answer: Yes.
Common charges, according to Richard Siegler, a Manhattan lawyer, are generally imposed by the board of managers to defray the operations of the condominium, and they are borne by everybody in proportion to their interest in the condominium.
He said the common charges could be changed as often as necessary to insure that the expenses were paid.
They can be added to the regular monthly assessment or tacked on as a special assessment.


I Say 'Cuisine,' You Say 'Cucina'; Italian Cooking Is Personal, Generous, Unbridled. I Love It
IS it a coincidence that Gertrude Stein lived in Paris when she considered the rose?
A quenelle is a quenelle is a quenelle, after all.
And the same can be said for most components of the classic French culinary repertory.
The precise and static nature of French cooking has made it the pet of epicures and a handy social arbiter, as well.
Since a quenelle is a quenelle, experience and education can hone the palate to discern between the good and the bad.
And discriminating taste implies certain things about a person's position in the world.
In America, "French" means "the best," whether used to modify "laundry," "chic" or "cuisine."


Afghanistan, Always Riven, Is Breaking Into Ethnic Parts
In a country riven by ethnic, religious and linguistic conflicts, Afghanistan's unity has always been precariously forged.
Now, with the appearance of powerful regional leaders and the enfeeblement of the Government in Kabul, the partitioning of the country into three autonomous territories is becoming a fact of life.
The disintegration of the country is evident in this northern city, where a former militia leader backed by two of Afghanistan's many ethnic groups controls the nation's strongest military force and is establishing virtually a separate state.
The Uzbeks and Tajiks who support him make up about one-third of Afghanistan's 16.5 million people.
Competition for Influence
A second region, in the south and the east, is inhabited mainly by Pathans, who form nearly half of the country's population and who have traditionally dominated Afghan politics.
That area includes the capital, Kabul.


Virginia Penniman, Francis Bowden 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Dawson Penniman of Easton, Pa., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Virginia Dawson Penniman and Francis Joseph Bowden 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bowden Jr. of Villanova, Pa.
Miss Penniman, 26, is the human resources director at the Rutherford Financial Corporation, a securities brokerage in Philadelphia.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father, who is retired, was the director of arbitration at the Bethlehem Steel Corporation in Bethlehem, Pa.
Her mother, Eleanor Penniman, is the president general of the Colonial Dames of America in New York.


The Face Is Familiar: It's Bill Clinton's
FOR collectors of political coins, two designs are already being offered to commemorate the inauguration of Bill Clinton, now just three days away.
Bowers &amp; Merena Inc. of Wolfeboro, N.H., is selling a three-piece set of bronze, silver and gold Clinton Inaugural Medals for $925, plus $4.50 for shipping.
The silver and bronze medals can be bought separately ($175 for the silver or $35 for the bronze, with a $3.50 shipping charge for each order).


JAN. 10-16: 'Last Personal Wish'; Punished No More, Honecker Leaves Germany
Erich Honecker, architect of the Berlin wall and leader of East Germany for 18 years, was whisked from a German prison to freedom last week.
Judges had ruled that because of Mr.
Honecker's advanced cancer, his right to "human dignity" was being violated by continued imprisonment.
After his fall from power in 1989, Mr.
Honecker, 80, was forced back to Berlin for a trial, which began in November.
He was charged in connection with killings at the wall, but he was also a symbol of the injustices of the East German state.


When You're 2-30, Attempt a 3
Throughout this basketball season, Derek Harper has been offered condolences.
He is not sick.
He is not injured.
Harper is the object of sympathy because he plays for the hapless Dallas Mavericks.
"You appreciate what people say for the moment, but they're not with me all the time, they're not here to go through this," said Harper, before the Mavericks' record plummeted to 2-29 with Friday's 107-93 loss to the Knicks and then to 2-30 after a 106-91 loss in Denver tonight.
"I'm the one that's in this, along with my teammates. Even though gestures are appreciated, you have to be in it to know what it's like.


Recent Sales
East Haddam, Conn.  $128,350
68 Colchester Turnpike  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 7-year-old raised ranch; fireplace in living room, formal dining room, carpeted floors, 1 acre; taxes $1,531.
Orange, Conn.  $145,000
171 New Haven Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 53-year-old cape cod; small starter home, level lot, 1-car garage, 0.66 acre; taxes $2,558.
Harwinton, Conn.  $170,000
91 Hill Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 39-year-old ranch; scenic views, fireplace in living room, country kitchen, 2 acres; taxes 2,919.
Millwood, N.Y.  $220,000
391 Saw Mill River Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; living room, dining room, eat-in kitchen, front porch, deck, cottage; taxes $5,319.
Mount Kisco, N.Y.  $285,000
23 Peck Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 31-year-old ranch; fireplace, living room, dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $6,018.
North Salem, N.Y.  $350,000
Vails Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old contemporary ranch; fireplace, dining area, playroom, workroom, 3.5 acres; taxes $9,251.
OTHER AREAS Hillsdale, N.J  $310,000
73 Wermus Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, c/a, porch, family room with fireplace; taxes $6,511.
Lindenhurst, L.I.  $145,000
160 43d Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 100- by 100-foot lot; taxes $4,000.
Oyster Bay Cove, L.I.  $1.275 million
35 Coves Run  5-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; pool, 2 acres; taxes $24,000.


Japanese Debate Taboo Topic of Military's Role
Breaking a taboo that has lasted more than four decades, leaders of Japan's ruling party have begun to talk openly about revising the country's Constitution, hinting that the first change would be an amendment permitting Japanese armed forces to take part in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Last week, leaders of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party approved a proposal by Hiroshi Mitsuzuka, who heads the largest faction in the party, to establish a committee to draft the first changes to the so-called Peace Constitution since it was imposed by the American occupation authorities in 1947.
Mr.
Mitsuzuka did not say what specific changes he had in mind.


Madonna's Best Role Remains Madonna
No one doubts that Madonna is a marketing genius, so how did she overlook the most obvious tie-in to her new movie?
Right next to the popcorn counter at each theater showing "Body of Evidence," she should have put a little stand selling handcuffs, candles, belts and other playthings inspired by the film's on-the-edge (but cautiously R-rated) sex scenes.
The Sex 'R Us concession is a wasted opportunity, but then movies are still the weak link in Madonna's otherwise flawlessly planned career.
As a suspense film, in which Madonna is accused of killing a rich older man using sex and drugs as the murder weapons -- too much for his weak, diseased heart -- it is possibly one of the worst ever made.
But as a tongue-in-cheek Madonna movie, it's a hoot.


Testing Time, and Anxiety Is High
While many 13-year-olds have been focused on video games and the music of Nirvana, Sabrina Berger has spent the last five months pondering life after eighth grade.
It has meant an endless march of cram sessions with two tutors, afternoons with an acting coach and weekends poring over applications to eight New York City high schools.
One recent Saturday, she fretted her way through a nerve-racking vocal and drama audition at La Guardia High School of the Arts.
But that was nothing compared with the anxiety she felt when she saw the throng of more than 2,000 other grim-faced students who showed up to compete against her in citywide admissions tests for Stuyvesant High School.


Data Bank/January 17, 1993


Laura Bramley and Robert Duguay
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Bramley of Honolulu have announced the engagement of their daughter, Laura Laird Bramley, to Lieut.
Robert Stephen Duguay, U.S.N., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Duguay of Waverly, Pa.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Bramley, 23, is a teacher at the Assets School in Honolulu.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina, where she received a master's degree in literary studies.
Her father is a special agent with the Federal Bureau of Investigation in Honolulu.
Her mother, Betty Gene (Be Ge) Bramley, is the vice president of New Tech Imaging, a printing and graphics company there.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Jan. 2  MANHATTAN  Gramercy Park Area  $225,000
21 East 22d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 950-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, 11-ft. ceilings, north exposure; maintenance $925, 50% tax-deductible (Brokers: Corcoran Group-Eychner Associates)  TriBeCa  $285,000
258 Broadway  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; 24-hr. doorman, eat-in kitchen, laundry room, 12-ft. ceilings, East River view; maintenance $1,173, 63% tax-deductible (Broker: Halstead Property Co.)  Upper East Side  $1.35 million
965 Fifth Avenue (77th St.)  2-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, maid's room, dining room, windowed eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 2 exposures, Central Park view (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side  $295,000
105 West 72d Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. prewar condo; dining room, decorative fireplace, 11 1/2-ft. ceilings; common charge $385, taxes $4,000 (Broker: West Side Properties)  West Side  $640,000
41 Central Park West (64th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, fireplace, balcony, 2 exposures, Central Park view; maintenance $1,162, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  BRONX  Parkchester  $245,000
1311 Pugsley Avenue  2-family detached brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, hospitality suite in finished basement, 25-by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Marland Real Estate)  Riverdale  $580,000
4435 Douglas Avenue  (Hayden-on-the-Hudson)  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 2,970-sq.-ft. postwar co-op in a 3-story town house; dining area, eat-in kitchen, den, family room, 2 fireplaces; common charge $788, taxes $5,500 (Broker: Trebach Realty)  BROOKLYN  Cobble Hill  $220,000
59 Wyckoff Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,900-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; eat-in kitchen, recreation room, fireplace, private rear garden; maintenance $359, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Cobble Heights Realty)  Flatlands  $145,000
1512 East 45th Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached, frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $850 (Broker: Century 21/Homefront)  Park Slope  $460,000
589 4th Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family, 3-story limestone house; dining room, study, leaded-glass windows, original parquet floors, mahogany details; 17.6- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,953 (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Realty Group)  QUEENS  Forest Hills Gardens  $637,500
114 Puritan Avenue  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, detached one-family center-hall brick colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, solarium, finished basement, 2-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,900 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  Rego Park  $192,000
86-11 66th Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family attached town house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,300 (Broker: Kingdom Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  New Springville  $173,000
126 Mulberry Avenue  2-family semi-attached, frame house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, eat-in kitchen in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; full basement, dual heating system, 50- by 100-ft lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)  Travis  $115,000
108 Cannon Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace 1-car garage, 68- by 70-ft. lot; taxes $770 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)


For Now, Harmony Tops Board Agenda
After heated debate, the Board of Legislators last week appointed two Republicans to fill vacant Board seats that had been held by Democrats.
The party-line vote appeared to end the promise of bipartisanship that had been fostered by the Republican Board chairman, Stephen P.  Tenore during the last legislative session.
The vote came after an hour of bitter exchanges in which Democrats accused Republicans of disregarding voter preference and failing to keep their pledge to choose at least one Democrat.
The Republican majority denied both claims, called their opponents disorganized and despite Democratic opposition elected the New Castle Town Supervisor, Mark S. Tulis, and Pearl C. Quarles, president of the Westchester Black Women's Political Caucus, to fill the empty seats.


A Fictional First Lady As Hollywood Sees Her
Hollywood has its own answer to how a First Lady should dress.
In "Dave," a romantic comedy to be released by Warner Brothers in June, Sigourney Weaver plays the conservatively dressed wife of the President of the United States.
Her screen husband is Kevin Kline, who dies and is replaced by a look-alike, also played by Mr.
Kline.


Q and A
Midnight Sun Marathon
Q.
I am interested in running in the Midnight Sun Marathon in Nansivik, Canada.
Could you provide information, including travel and lodging? -- Gary Eisendorf, Forest Hills, Queens


Travel Light and Carry a Big Envelope
MILAN, Italy, is on sale this month at Now Voyager -- just $199 for a round-trip ticket.
Moscow and St.
Petersburg are now $359, but a couple of weeks ago, they, too, could have been had for $199.
And last-minute specials at this air-courier agency can make trans-Atlantic travel cheaper than a new suitcase.
"Brussels still open for tonight?" Julie Weinberg, the owner, asked her staff one day last week.
"Sell it for $99."


Housing Projects Aim To Retain Workers
A lack of affordable housing has begun affecting even the affluent in Westchester County, as many of the workers who provide necessary public services are forced to leave the area for communities where real estate is still within the reach of working families.
Town workers say they are no longer available for midnight calls; they have moved north, to Putnam and Dutchess Counties.
Volunteer fire and ambulance officials say their response time suffers because members cannot afford to live nearby.
And teachers facing long commutes are curtailing after-school activities.


Westport Cafe Indulges Fans of Italian Food
THE statewide mania for Italian restaurants has hit Westport.
The latest to open is Cafe Christina, which is ensconced in the old Westport Library premises facing Main Street.
It is hard to think the space was ever a library, so thorough has been the transformation of the 1908 building into a reminder of Italy.
Three dining areas each have sponge-painted walls that evoke the color and texture of Pompeii.
The walls of the area near the main entrance are mustard yellow; the middle dining space has soft seagreen walls with a mural of a meadow full of flowers, and the inner room (our favorite) has Pompeian rose-red walls with painted garlands of fruit bedecking the upper borders.
In the center dining area is a rusticated sandstone floor; the floors in the other areas are wood.
Comfortable wicker chairs and petite pots of dried flowers on each table add to the low-key charm.


SUNY Adds Performances of 'Rosie'
"Children must have the best," Christopher Beach, director of the Performing Arts Center at the State University of New York at Purchase, said last September at a meeting of the center's volunteer workers.
Mr.


What the U.S. Can Learn From Angola's Loser
IF the African fates have any sense of irony, Jonas Savimbi, the Angolan rebel leader and America's erstwhile guerrilla darling, may pass into history at about the same time as the Bush Administration.
Mr.
Savimbi was apparently on the run last week, driven from his headquarters in Huambo, lacking future sources of ammunition and fuel, with his followers showing signs of division and his enemies bent on eliminating him.
He seemed destined, in the estimation of his former patrons in Washington and Pretoria, to sink into military oblivion or at best -- if there are diplomatic miracles -- to be tamed into the role of political opposition leader.


What Kind of Abortions Do We Want?
THE WORST OF TIMES
By Patricia G. Miller. 328 pp.
New York: Aaron Asher Books/ HarperCollins Publishers. $22.
ABORTION RITES
A Social History of Abortion in America.
By Marvin Olasky. 318 pp.
Wheaton, Ill.: Crossway Books.
Cloth, $25.
Paper, $13.95.
A WOMAN'S BOOK OF CHOICES
Abortion, Menstrual Extraction, RU-486.
By Rebecca Chalker and Carol Downer.
Illustrated. 271 pp.
New York: Four Walls Eight Windows.
Paper, $13.95.


Laura Whitman, Paul Provost
July wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Whitman Jr. of Mill Neck, L.I., for their daughter, Laura Bowne Whitman, and Paul Raymond Provost, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Pierre E. Provost 4th of Westwood, Mass.
Miss Whitman, 25, is the cataloguer in the Chinese painting department at Sotheby's in New York.
She graduated from Williams College and received a master's degree in East Asian studies from Yale University.
Her father is the chairman of the Middleby Corporation, a manufacturer of restaurant equipment in New York.


Correction
An article last Sunday about types of jeans described Mike Medavoy, a movie executive pictured in Entertainment Weekly, incorrectly.
He remains the chairman of Tri-Star Pictures; he has not been relieved of his duties.


The Executive Life; Hollywood Is Taken To Task by Its Women
WHILE there is some evidence that Hollywood's women executives are making great strides up the corporate ladder, many of them say they still have far to go to break through the glass ceiling.
The women are angered that they are not getting more of the highest entertainment industry jobs, that no women have cracked the top tiers of the major talent agencies, that women continue to be paid less than their male counterparts.
Some blame the close-knit "boys' club" for holding women back; others fault women themselves.


Recent Sales
Levittown  $125,000
59 Woodcock Lane  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 43-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, patio, 60- by 100-foot lot; taxes $3,500.
Lindenhurst  $145,000
160 43d Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 100- by 100-foot lot; taxes $4,000.
Oyster Bay Cove  $1.275 million
35 Coves Run  5-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; fireplace, master bedroom suite with sitting room, pool, 2 acres; taxes $24,000.
Syosset  $238,000
9 Greenvale Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old split level; 2 fireplaces, finished basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $5,200.
Westbury  $125,000
28 College Lane  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 43-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, fireplace, family room; taxes $3,700.
Williston Park  $225,000
7 Lipton Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, family room, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,900.
OTHER AREAS Harwinton, Conn.  $170,000
91 Hill Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 39-year-old ranch; scenic views, fireplace in living room, country kitchen, 2 acres; taxes $2,919.
Millwood, N.Y.  $220,000
391 Saw Mill River Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; living room, dining room, eat-in kitchen, front porch, deck, cottage; taxes $5,319.
Hillsdale, N.J  $310,000
73 Wermus Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, c/a, porch, family room with fireplace; taxes $6,511.


If It's a Saturday, It Must Be Election Day
PEOPLE who see advertisements proclaiming a special election in the 29th State Senate District on Jan. 23 may think they include a typographical error.
After all, Jan. 23 is next Saturday, and state elections are always on a Tuesday.
But there is no error.
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. has signed the writs of election to set up what several officials say will be the first ever weekend election for candidates for the General Assembly.


Vermont's Day Of Snowshoeing
Snowshoes will be provided free of charge to participants in the first Snowshoeing Festival in Waterbury in north-central Vermont, to be held all day Saturday.
The headquarters of the Green Mountain Club off Route 100 will be the departure point for snowshoeing hikes and demonstrations led by Bill Osgood, a member of the club, and Carl Heilman, a snowshoeing expert.
The club maintains the Long Trail, in the Green Mountains between Massachusetts and the Canadian border.
Events are designed to introduce the sport to newcomers and appeal to experienced trekkers.


Said Ditka to Ryan: You're Applying, Too?
MIKE DITKA, the former Chicago Bears coach, has spoken to New England officials about taking over as coach of the Patriots, and so has his onetime assistant, BUDDY RYAN.
According to The Boston Globe, the two are among several prospects who either have been or will be interviewed as possible replacements for DICK MacPHERSON, who, like Ditka, was fired after the 1992 regular season ended.
Others to be interviewed later, the paper said, are BILL PARCELLS, the former Giants coach, and RAY RHODES, the defensive coordinator of the Green Bay Packers.
The Globe, citing unidentified sources, said that the talks with Ditka and Ryan had been general and that neither had been offered the job.
Ryan, a former defensive coordinator for the Bears under Ditka, was dismissed as head coach of the Philadelphia Eagles two years ago. (AP)


Longwood Goes Latin
A steamy bit of South America is flourishing in southeastern Pennsylvania with the opening of a new Cascade Garden by the Brazilian landscape designer Roberto Burle Marx at Longwood Gardens.
The garden, scheduled to open last week, features tropical plants, especially bromeliads, set amid cascading streams in a greenhouse roughly 40 by 50 feet at the western end of the 3.5-acre conservatory complex.
The project was a collaboration between Mr.
Burle Marx and Conrad Hamerman, a landscape architect in Philadelphia.
Bromeliads, which include such plants as pineapples and Spanish moss, absorb moisture through hairlike scales covering their leaves.
In the Cascade Garden, fog emitters spray mists to maintain 80 percent humidity; 3,000 feet of heating cable wound through the beds and in the walls and structural columns keep the plants' roots above 60 degrees.
The designers were inspired by the runnels of water that trickle down tropical mountainsides, Mr.
Hamerman said, but he noted the garden was "an abstraction of nature, not an imitation." Steel columns and other structural elements of the greenhouse, which was built in 1958, played a big role in the garden's design, which has a strong vertical sweep.
Some 35 tons of Pennsylvania mica from local quarries were used in the stonework.


On the Trail


The BBC: Rich Mix At Modest Cost
To the Editor:
I can only hope that Ethan J. Podell's remarks about quality television in the Letters column  [ "The BBC Is Not a Panacea," Jan. 3 ]  were written at least partly tongue in cheek.
But his comments about the quality of the British Broadcasting Corporation's programming and the level of its production costs are simply not true.
BBC Television's rich mix of drama, documentary, news and sports won 170 awards last year, including the prestigious Golden Rose of Montreux, Prix Italia and prime-time Emmys.


Advice on the Schools From the Experts: Students
Zaire Graham worries that she may fail her music course at a Manhattan public high school when exam time comes.
She says she sits studiously in class but cannot make sense out of the scratchy music playing on the old phonograph in the classroom.
The 17-year-old student says she complained to teachers at the High School of the Fashion Industries, but they in turn pointed fingers at the budget handlers who allot funds for new equipment.
Ms.
Graham still cannot hear the music, and she was one of hundreds of students who had a word or two for educators at a daylong conference yesterday whose theme, according to the organizers, was "School Like It Oughta Be."


Update; 10 Rutgers Students Guilty In Campus Building Takeover
Ten Rutgers University students who took part in the takeover of a campus building last spring have been found guilty of disorderly conduct and simple assault.
Judge Terril Brenner of Middlesex County Municipal Court found the students guilty on Wednesday, fined them from $300 to $600 and gave them suspended jail terms and one year of probation.


How to Create Jobs in a Changed Workplace
To the Editor:
In "New Jobs Depend on Fast Economic Growth, Experts Say" (Business Day, Dec. 29), you convincingly present the main difference between today's economic recovery and those of the past: growth in gross domestic product, with much less than normal employment growth.
Unfortunately, this problem is of a much longer term than you indicate and reflects in a fundamental way structural changes that result from the application of modern workplace technologies.
Many organizations are redesigning the way they do work because of the programmability, versatility, high capacity and speed of computer and telecommunications technologies.
Productivity improvement may have been stimulated by foreign competition and a prolonged recession, but the changes are designed not only to boost productivity in output but also to perform all tasks within the business more efficiently.
As gross domestic product increases, the new systems and procedures permit greater levels of output with little additional hiring.


Technology; Coming This Year: Talkback TV
TELEVISION, contrary to its reputation as passive or mind-deadening, provokes some people to activity -- playing along with "Jeopardy" or shouting opinions to errant politicians, for example.
Later this year, these sideline participants will have a chance to see how they stack up against others as interactive TV becomes available to viewers nationwide, thanks to newly available technologies.


83d Time is Charm
The girls' team at Natchez Trinity High School of Mississippi snapped an 82-game losing streak when ANNA BLAND hit a desperation 3-pointer at the buzzer Friday night to give the Lady Saints a 42-39 victory over Amite School.
Trinity, 1-22 this season, had last won Jan. 20, 1990, beating Coast Episcopal of Biloxi 36-28.
CALLIE JAMES, a ninth-grader when Trinity won its last game three years ago, scored a team-high 10 points.


Seeking Security, Many Retreat Behind Bars and Razor Wire
With iron, mesh and razor-sharp coils, Pedro Pagan has made himself a prisoner of his fears.
In a Sisyphean struggle for security against the thieves who repeatedly break into his home in the Tremont section of the Bronx, Mr.
Pagan has shunned his neighbors and fenced himself behind window gratings and wrought-iron gates backed by wire mesh and topped by gleaming coils of razor ribbon.
For good measure, a clump of razor ribbon lies on the second-floor balcony, just in case invaders try to jump over from the fire escape of an adjoining building.


Spirit of '98 Bound for Alaska
Alaska Sightseeing/Cruise West has bought its sixth ship, the Victorian Empress, renamed the Spirit of '98, and will start operating it on seven-day cruises along Alaska's Inside Passage in the spring.
The company, which runs cruises and tours in Alaska and the Pacific Northwest, has bought a new vessel each year for the past five years, said Richard West, president.
A copy of a vintage steamboat, the 96-ton Spirit of '98 is 192 feet long, has 49 cabins (all outside) and is now the largest of the Seattle-based company's fleet of mini cruise ships.
It lacks floor shows and casinos, the company says, but offers close-up viewing of glaciers, fjords and whales.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Friday
Dec. housing starts, millions, annual rate
1.24
1.24
Dec. housing permits, millions, annual rates
1.12
1.13
Sunday: Opening of four-day National Retail Federation Convention and Expo featuring more than 200 suppliers of products and services to the industry in New York  Monday: Martin Luther King holiday  Wednesday: Presidential inauguration  Thursday: Federal Reserve Board releases its beige book of economic conditions


Milton Frank, 73, Dies; An Ex-Envoy to Nepal
Milton Frank, a former Ambassador to Nepal, died Wednesday at the Medical Center of the University of California at Los Angeles.
He was 73.
The cause of death was cancer, said Adelphi University, where Mr.
Frank was the chief aide to the president, Peter Diamandopoulos.


If Jefferson Only Had a Bus
The 120-mile bus route from Monticello to Washington retraces Thomas Jefferson's horse-drawn passage to his own inauguration in 1801, although the dirt roads he used have long since been replaced by highways.
The Clinton caravan begins at in the foothills of the Blue Ridge mountains at Monticello, Jefferson's house outside Charlottesville.
The tour then veers northeast through the old hamlets of Riva, Ruckersville, Merrimac and Opal, the route the Confederate and Union armies marched back and forth in the Civil War.


World Markets; After Collor, Hope Filters Into Brazil
EMERGING markets by definition involve high risk, and for good reason Brazil has long been considered among the riskiest.
In the first six months of 1992, the markets rose almost 65 percent, only to plunge in the second half, wiping out all their gains as the country passed through its most critical political crisis in decades, the resignation and conviction in a Senate impeachment trial of former President Fernando Collor de Mello on charges that he received millions of dollars from an influence peddling ring.


Catherine Birkhahn, R. K. Snyderman
Catherine Weisel Birkhahn, a former remedial math teacher in Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Dr.
Reuven Kenneth Snyderman, a retired plastic surgeon in Princeton, N.J.
Rabbi Eric Wisnia performed the ceremony at Constitution Hill, a mansion in Princeton.
Mrs.
Snyderman had until recently been the supervisor of remedial programs at the Hamilton Avenue Elementary School in Greenwich.
She graduated from New York University.
She is the daughter of Therice Weisel of New York and the late Edward Weisel.
The bride was widowed, as was the bridegroom.


Cameron Stracher, Christine Pakkala
Michael Pakkala of Lewiston, Idaho, has announced the engagement of his daughter Christine Lynn Pakkala to Cameron Altman Stracher, a son of Dr.
Alfred Stracher and Dr.
Dorothy Stracher of Roslyn, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Pakkala, 26, graduated from the University of Idaho.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in poetry at the University of Iowa.
Her father, now retired, was a machinist with the Potlatch Corporation, a lumber company in Lewiston.
Her late mother, Rita R. Pakkala, was an English teacher at Lapwai (Idaho) High School.


Some Gift Greenspan's Given Us
To the Editor:
The article might have been more properly titled "Greenspan's Gift to Bank Stockholders." As I understand it, banks borrow much of their operating funds from the Federal Government, at a rate kept low by Mr.
Greenspan supposedly to encourage bank lending.
But the banks can turn this money around and buy Treasury bonds paying 5 percent or even 7 percent.
Let's call this outright gift to the banks what it is -- a bailout. (This also creates a voodoo market for Treasury securities, since the Government is, in effect, lending money to purchase its own bonds.)


BENEFITS
Harlem Tribute to King MONDAY -- The 11th annual Harlem Salute to the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. will be held at the Salem United Methodist Church, 2190 Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard at 129th Street starting at 4 P.M.
The gospel singers Delois Barrett Campbell and the Barrett Sisters, the United Negro College Fund Choir and the 100-voice Gospel Mass Choir of New York City will be among the performers.
The concert will benefit the Harlem School of the Arts, the United Negro College Fund and the Martin Luther King Jr.
Center in Atlanta.
Tickets $15, from (212) 678-2700.


Some Gift Greenspan's Given Us
To the Editor:
Regarding "Greenspan's Gift to the Nation: No Bank Crisis" (Market Watch, Dec. 20), Alan Greenspan, like Paul Volker before him, is a banker's man -- not the "whatever is good for the overall economy fellow." And, of course, there is a whole difference.
While banks pay 2.7 percent interest (plus or minus) to depositors, they charge 8 percent, 9 percent, 10 percent interest and more for secured loans and 23 percent and more (including interest, annual "membership" fee, dealer's charges and "late charges") on credit cards.


Special Education Can Save Money
In reference to "Suffolk Opposing Buses for Disabled"  [ Dec. 13 ] , it is necessary to respond to the ill-informed crass remark attributed to the Deputy Presiding Officer of the Legislature, Joseph Rizzo.
In what was a general criticism of federally mandated programs and their cost, Mr.
Rizzo singled out the preschool programs for the handicapped, stating that "if a kid holds a pencil the wrong way, he is considered handicapped."


A Force, Then and Now
To the Editor:
When mentioning Fritz Lang and Adolf Hitler in the same article  [ "Fritz Lang's Dr. Mabuse Stalks the Screen Again," Jan. 3 ] , one has to give recognition to Lang's 1924 film "Metropolis," an unintended prediction of the rise of the Nazi leader.
It was a viewing of this film that sent Joseph Goebbels, Hitler's propaganda minister, to inquire about Lang's availability to run the Nazi film program.


Ethics Inquiry Cites Misdeeds By F.B.I. Chief
A Justice Department ethics inquiry has found that William S. Sessions, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, engaged in a "sham arrangement" to avoid paying taxes on the unofficial use of his Government limousine, Administration officials said today.
They also said he had refused to cooperate with an investigation into whether he received special treatment on his home mortgage.
The departing Attorney General, William P. Barr, also concluded that Mr.
Sessions had used his F.B.I. plane for personal trips, sometimes adding on brief Government meetings to make it appear that the trips were intended for legitimate business.
Mr.
Barr directed Mr.
Sessions to repay the Government for at least three trips, the officials said.


Taking Advantage of Venison's Low Fat
"MEAT of Kings Going Cheap to the Masses." That was a recent headline in The Times of London.
In England, wild venison -- free-range and organic -- costs less than dog food.
It was the only bargain I found when I was in London over the Christmas holidays.
I spent less than $5 for a boneless venison roast big enough to serve six people, and venison medallions were cheaper than hamburger in New York.
Just about everything else in London costs more than twice what it does in New York.
Wild Scottish venison is now so plentiful it is almost valueless. (As anyone who has a house in the country knows, deer breed like rabbits, and in the absence of such natural enemies as wolves, their numbers continue to expand at an extraordinarily high rate.) In Britain, wild venison is sold in supermarkets as boneless joints, roasts and steaks as well as diced and marinated and in prepared meals.
In the United States, however, venision remains a very small part of the market, although it is showing up more and more on restaurant menus, and prices are still comparatively high.


New Magazines Add Visions of Photography
IN 1952, when Carl Mydans was a staff photographer at Life magazine, he was sent to England to shoot pictures for an article on coal mining.
Although Life's founder, Henry Luce, is said to have spawned the idea for the story and photographs, they never ran in the magazine.
This month, Mr.
Mydans, 85, who is a photographer at Time magazine, will finally see his pictures published, in Outtakes Magazine, one of two new photography publications that are available in the United States.
The other magazine, from Poland, is Fotographia 6x9.


Alicia Glekas, Robert Everett
Alicia Helen Glekas, a daughter of Barbara Alafoginis of Washington and Dr.
Louis J. Glekas of Falls Church, Va., was married yesterday to Robert Sloane Everett, a son of Mary M. Everett of Wellesley, Mass., and Addison L. Everett Jr. of Manlius, N.Y.
The Rev.
John T. Tavlarides performed the ceremony at the Greek Orthodox Cathedral in Washington.
Mrs.
Everett, 26, graduated from the University of Virginia.
She is a third-year law student at Georgetown University.
Her father is a dentist in Falls Church.


Clan Feuds, an Old Problem, Are Still Threatening Chinese
The memory of clan warfare comes back suddenly to Mai Bingsong, and his eyes widen as if he can once again hear the gunshots that exploded around him 74 years ago when he was a small, frightened child.
"A lot of people died then," said the 83-year-old Mr.
Mai, his head rolled back as he grasped at images from the past.
"Nothing since has been as terrible as that. Not the Japanese, not the Cultural Revolution."


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: His Long Goodbye; Clinton Wraps Up a Fond Farewell to Little Rock
Goodbyes are not easy for Bill Clinton, a man whose rise to the White House was built on making friends, not parting with them.
So it was fitting that for his last farewell to his native Arkansas, the President-elect today turned his regular jog into a whirlwind meet-and-greet.
He even spotted some new faces.
Mr.
Clinton spent his final hours not in sober reflection but squeezing in nostalgic stops at old haunts like the Y.M.C.A.
Missing from his jogging route was his usual stop at McDonald's, but he dropped by there the other day for one last decaffeinated coffee.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The Old Order; A Power Couple, Suddenly Powerless
Together they make more than $200,000 a year, he as the chief negotiator on textile matters at the Commerce Department, she as a high political appointee at Treasury.
They are the quintessential Reagan boomer couple, with a first home in a town house on Capitol Hill, now with a "real" house in the upscale suburb of McLean, Va.
Thanks to the Federal Government, that bloated bureaucracy Republicans so like to lambaste, Ronald Sorini and Desiree Tucker-Sorini, both in their mid-30's, have never been without a job on the public payroll for over 10 years.


A Table Fit for an Afghan Tribal Chief
SAY goodbye to the Colonel and hello to an Afghan adventure.
The former Kentucky Fried Chicken franchise on Sunrise Highway in Massapequa Park is now the Afghan Samovar restaurant.
Once inside, diners are hard pressed to see any evidence of the fast-food origins.
The restaurant is a tiny gem sparkling with candlelight, white tablecloths, Oriental rugs and plush banquettes.
Color photographs of Afghanistan, brass and copper plates, woven baskets and Afghan posters dot the walls.


Business Diary/January 10-15
THE ECONOMY
The Middle-Class Tax Cut Gets the Almost-Silent Treatment


Top-Notch Tables; Teotitlan del Valle, Mexico
When I start thinking Mexican food, I think in terms of an eight-hour flight, changing planes in Mexico City and gliding into Oaxaca at midday, in time for lunch.
I'm not a Mexican food fanatic.
But I've eaten meals in Oaxaca, the Spanish colonial oasis surrounded by the Sierra Madre del Sur, in which the country's complicated culture has been perfectly distilled, meals that explained Mexico's history, meals that made me appreciate the tortilla.


Ceramic Dish Makers Agree to Curb Use of Lead
Ten leading manufacturers of ceramic dishes have agreed to reduce the amount of lead in their products and use a warning label to alert consumers to china patterns that pose health hazards.
Those agreements were announced Friday as part of a $2 million settlement of a lawsuit by the California Attorney General, Daniel E. Lungren, and the Environmental Defense Fund under the state's toxic control law.
It is the largest settlement under the law, Proposition 65, since it was passed in 1986.


A Sack Full of Opinion and Perplexity
LIKE Santa Claus, I get letters.
Unlike Santa, I don't make house calls.
But the ideas keep coming and I'm happy to pass them along: Dear Sir,


Top-Notch Tables; Rhinebeck, New York
The Hudson River Valley is dotted with dozens of picturesque country inns, many of which offer an expansive array of rustic charms along with pallid food that can make vacationers long for the city.
One exception is the Beekman Arms Hotel in Rhinebeck, which dates to 1766 and holds claim to being the oldest continuously operated hostelry in the United States.
Rhinebeck, midway between Manhattan and Albany, is a historic river town known for its architecture, antiques and a vintage airplane museum called the Aerodrome that stages mock dogfights on weekends in the summer.


Clinton Ready to Act on 2 Abortion Regulations
In his first days in office, President-elect Bill Clinton intends to sign executive orders to lift the rule prohibiting abortion counseling in federally financed clinics and allowing Americans to import the French abortion drug RU-486.
Aides to the President-elect said Mr.
Clinton was being urged to take the actions on Friday, the 20th anniversary of the 1973 Supreme Court decision that made abortion a constitutional right.


Foreign Affairs; Iraq Balancing Iran?
George Bush's policy toward Iraq was faulty because it always left Saddam with the initiative.
Bill Clinton's could be worse if he is seriously thinking about trying to convert Saddam into a "good guy" and revive the idea of Iraq as a counterweight to Iran.
Iraqi diplomats are peddling that idea again -- to increasingly receptive audiences.
But it is as flawed today as ever, even with mounting threats from Iran.
Iraq cannot counterbalance Iran unless Baghdad once again arises as the monster that challenged the world to war two years ago.


Redmen Overcome Miami's Hurdle
As long as Constantin Popa, Miami's elongated center, was in place under either basket, St.
John's had problems yesterday against the Hurricanes in their game at Alumni Hall.
But Popa, the 7-foot-3-inch center from Bucharest, Romania, fouled out with 7 minutes to play, and life for the Redmen became easier once that imposing disruption was off the floor.
They managed to win the game, 78-74, and move into a tie for first place in the Big East Conference with Seton Hall, which lost to Pitt last night.


The Rediscovery of All Things Spanish Turns Up an Opera
Though Spain has produced many of the finest singers of this century, no Spanish opera has found its way into the repertory of the world beyond the Pyrenees.
But last year everything Spanish was being discovered, and Placido Domingo persuaded Deutsche Grammophon to record "El Gato Montes," one of the most popular works in the genre (435 776-2; two CD's).
Mr.
Domingo and Deutsche Grammophon have made a great point of saying that this floridly colored, sublimely tuneful piece is a "real" opera.
But it is also firmly in the tradition of the zarzuela, the Spanish form of the operetta, which flourished in the music halls of Barcelona and Valencia at the turn of the century.


Return to Gilligan's Island
The adventures of television's most hapless shipmates ended 25 years ago.
Sequels had them rescued, only to maroon them again, turning the beach they once called home into a mini-Club Med.
No matter.
Thanks to syndication and a theme song as annoying as it is impossible to forget, Gilligan and company -- re-enacted here in all their glory -- will be stranded forever in paradise, dressing from bottomless suitcases packed for "a three-hour tour."


Top-Notch Tables; Osaka, Japan
The original Kitcho in Osaka (there are now half a dozen in Tokyo, Kyoto and elsewhere under the same ownership) remains the mecca of kaiseki, the sort of picture-food with which Japanese tycoons follow the seasonal productions of nature without having to inspect her at first hand.
The Yuki family keeps a staunchly old-fashioned house, its threshold stone always sprinkled and gleaming in welcome, a pile of salt by the door to signal hospitality inside.
In four of their restaurants -- two in Osaka, one in Kyoto and one in Tokyo -- a recommendation or introduction is essential, whether for foreigners or Japanese, before one of the exquisite (and enormous) tatami-floored rooms is made available.
But then the theater of Japanese hospitality takes over as waitresses in black kimonos bring a succession of works of art to be demolished.


Finally, a Bottoming Out?
APARTMENT prices in New York City fell, for the most part, in 1992, but the overall rate of decline appeared to be smaller than in the last two years.
There was a small increase in average prices for large, high-end properties in prime neighborhoods, but a steep drop among studios and one-bedroom co-ops, most condominiums and units in marginal areas.
The easing in the overall rate of decline may indicate, according to many local brokers, that the plunge in prices that began in 1988 may have bottomed out.
To be sure, this isn't the first time that brokers have heralded the end of the city's residential real estate recession.
In the early months of 1991 and 1992, many of them predicted, incorrectly, that prices had reached their nadir and would soon rise.


I Say 'Cuisine,' You Say 'Cucina'; No Doubt About It, French Cooking Is Routinely Superior
EATING in Italy changed my life, but if anyone ever holds a gun to my head, I want one last meal in France.
Almost everything I've eaten in France, whether calf's liver ordered in jet-lagged confusion or pig's feet chosen after careful consideration, has made me stop and marvel: This is like nothing I've ever tasted before.


Jacalyn Levine, Andrew Blume
Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley P. Levine of West Newton, Mass., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Jacalyn Ruth Levine and Andrew Charles Blume, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ralph S. Blume of New York.
Miss Levine, 26, is a saleswoman in the bookstore of the Harvard University Art Museums in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated from Bennington College and is a master's degree candidate in library science at Simmons College.
Her father is a pharmacist in Newton, Mass.
Her mother, Frances Levine, is a medical administrator in West Newton, Mass.


Susan H. Berger, Stuart J. Ellman
Dr. and Mrs.
William Berger of Wilmington, Del., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Hope Berger to Stuart Jay Ellman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Ellman of Cedar Grove, N.J.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Berger, 24, is a reporter at Money magazine in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from Wesleyan University.
Her father is the chief of head and neck surgery at the Wilmington Veterans Affairs Medical Center and is an associate professor of otolaryngology at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia.


Gene Therapy For Blood Diseases
Thousands suffering with sickle cell disease and related blood disorders got heartening news last week as researchers reported promising, early results with a form of gene therapy.
Dr.
Susan P. Perrine of Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute in Oakland, Calif., and colleagues elsewhere reported preliminary, but dramatic, results using a natural fatty acid called arginine butyrate to treat three patients with sickle cell anemia and three with beta thalassemia.


Linked


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on page 3 of the Travel section today, about frequent flier awards, misstates the offer by American Airlines to its Aadvantage members for flying 16 segments or 24,000 miles by April 2.
It is one round-trip coach ticket, not two, for Europe, Latin America, Japan or Hawaii.


George Herbert Walker Bush: A Premature Historical Verdict
From "The Historians' Guide to American History," published 2008.
BUSH, GEORGE (HERBERT WALKER) (b. June 12, 1924, Milton, Mass.) 41st President of the United States (1989 to 1993)


Why Shouldn't Chelsea Clinton Have Best Education Possible?
To the Editor:
Re "Choosing a School for Chelsea" (editorial, Jan. 7): The squall over Chelsea Clinton's school choice reminds me of an incident in 1956, when I was a young reporter in Nashville.
That October, Charles Johnson, a distinguished sociologist who was president of Fisk University, died.
I was assigned to cover his funeral, which was attended by top black leaders, including Thurgood Marshall and Roy Wilkins, then the leading officers in the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.


Why Shouldn't Chelsea Clinton Have Best Education Possible?; Let All Parents Choose
To the Editor:
Bill and Hillary Clinton, in their choice of a private school for their daughter, Chelsea, are in conflict with the President-elect's public opposition to choice programs that allow publicly funded education to take place at independent schools.
Nevertheless, the Clintons are to be admired for their courage in placing their daughter's interests first.


POSTINGS: A Landmark Restored; Where T.R.'s Staff Sweated
The restoration of the Moore Building in Oyster Bay, L.I., which housed Theodore Roosevelt's summer White House staff, has just about been completed.
Work, which began in April after a storm damaged the home a few months earlier, included reconstructing cornices, restoring dormers and replacing, matching, customizing and cutting slates for the roof.
The brick on the outside of the home was also repointed, and the paint on the outside was removed to show the original brick -- rose-red on the first floor and white on the second.


CHRISTMAS OBSERVED
What a treat -- to have not one, but seven featured pieces, all written for the Christmas season.
ANTHONY WALKER
Washington


Mining Veins of Vocal Gold To Build Choral Splendors
Robert Shaw has been the most important choral director in the United States for the better part of five decades, but that description misses the nature of his contribution.
Choral singing is still the most prevalent form of community music-making, and Mr.
Shaw made a revolution in it.
The "how" of his revolution -- the technique of it -- is one of the things he has been teaching in his annual choral seminars at Carnegie Hall, the third of which culminates this afternoon in a performance of the Berlioz Requiem there.
The historical place of Mr.
Shaw and his revolution is within the 20th-century tradition of refining, elaborating and reconsidering the reproduction of music.
Over the last 100 years, orchestral disciplinarians have achieved unimagined levels of precision, unanimity and nuance; brilliant players have cultivated new technical possibilities (and solo careers) on instruments that were not previously the province of virtuosity; educators have assimilated sophisticated psychological and physiological insights into the science of teaching.


SILENCE OF THE FROGS
Acid rain, ozone-layer disintegration and earth warming aside, could the frogs also be endangered merely from the invasion of their habitat by the many humans studying them ("Silence of the Frogs," by Emily Yoffe, Dec. 13)?
Could contamination from our environment or stress caused by our being there be enough to change the delicate balance of the frog's immune system and ecosystem?


Fat Cat, Dead Cat -- What's the Tax Target?
To the Editor:
"The Coming Shift in Estate Taxes" (Dec. 20) adds emphasis to an unexpected generation-gap issue.
It seems that Bill Clinton and his fellow baby-boomers didn't just have a fat-cat tax policy in mind; they secretly harbored a dead-cat policy.
Not only do they appear likely to raise the maximum estate tax from 55 percent to 70 percent, some even want to reduce the lifetime exclusion from $600,000 to $200,000 and to eliminate completely the capital gain forgiveness at death.


The Real Challenge of the Deficit Is Deciding How to Live With It
BILL CLINTON'S inclination to emphasize reducing the budget deficit, even at the risk of breaking campaign promises, might lead one to think that he has at last seen the light.
But when it comes to the deficit, there is no light.
If how to deal with it were a multiple-choice question, the possible correct answers would fill this page.
Mr.
Clinton and his team focused last week on deficit-cutting because the latest Government figures had projected that the deficit would rise again, reaching $327 billion this year.
Their reaction suggested that fighting deficits is a response to true economic principle.
But dealing with deficits is not a matter of truth.
It is a matter of judgments about how Americans should live, now and in the future.


SURFACING
DRINK --
Evian vending machines
:
Can bottled water be dispensed like soda without dispensing with its status, too?
After a year of successful test marketing, Evian is placing machines in health clubs, on college campuses and in beach-side commercial strips.
ACCESSORIES --
Hotel perfumes
:
It's those small touches. . . .
The Sheraton Tel Aviv Hotel has introduced its own perfume line, called Flame.
CLUBS --
Straight nights:
Several hot gay mega-clubs in the chic South Beach section of Miami Beach may have found a way to become even hotter: by promoting nights for straight people.


'Spine,' Drama of a Divided Family
LATE, too late, in "Spine," at the George Street Playhouse, Claire, her rage out of control, takes a hammer to a locked bedroom door.
Her husband, Mike, has withdrawn behind it, first polishing shoes, then staring into a void.
Outside, their 11-year-old boy, Christy -- unseen to the audience -- lies dying of a degenerative spinal disease.
The family, including teen-age siblings, Mike Jr. and Lois, is enduring an assortment of aching, complicated reactions that can be compressed into an all-too-convenient buzzword: denial.


Clinton's Musical Taste Stops in the Carter Era
There has been a lot of loud talk this week about Bill Clinton slip-sliding away from his campaign promises.
But on one major issue, he has drawn a line in the sand: His taste in pop culture.
When asked the other day what slogan he would have on his desk in the Oval Office, the President-elect made it clear that the buck stopped in 1977.
His sign, he said, would read: "Don't Stop Thinking About Tomorrow."


Go Chase Yourself, Sir!
BREAKING THE TIES THAT BIND
Popular Stories of the New Woman, 1915-1930.
Edited by Maureen Honey.
Illustrated. 339 pp.
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. $24.95.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Dec. 27 about the High Tatra mountains in the former Czechoslovakia misstated the range's height at its highest point.
It is 8,710 feet.


Uncertain Trumpet at Defense
Les Aspin, Bill Clinton's choice for Defense Secretary, is trying to wriggle out of another Clinton campaign commitment.
He told senators at his confirmation hearing that the Bush Administration's projected defense budget underestimated the costs of buying new weapons and overestimated savings by cost-cutting.
He implied that Mr.
Clinton cannot live up to his pledge to cut $60 billion out of Mr.
Bush's five-year defense budget of $1.42 trillion.
That implication is wrong.
It was no secret that the Bush program would exceed the Bush budget.
Even so, Mr.
Clinton, with Mr.
Aspin's help, can prudently cut deeper -- and perhaps even exceed his target.


Fears That Simmer Under Crisp Facades
BEING a yuppie involves more than disposable income, parties and chic restaurants, at least according to the young urban professionals in Richard Greenberg's "Eastern Standard."
Now at the Studio Theater in Lindenhurst through Feb. 6, the politically correct characters struggle with issues of today like AIDS, homelessness and personal relationships.


Foreman Finishes Coetzer In Eighth
He is 44 years old and looking for a shot at the fall television schedule, but George Foreman keeps fighting.
Why not?
The money is good.
Foreman, who promised last year that he wouldn't fight past 1992, is still at it.
Tonight, hoping to get one more chance to fight for the heavyweight championship, he scored an eighth-round knockout of Pierre Coetzer at the Reno-Sparks Convention Center.


Montreal's Party
To the Editor: No doubt that every Quebecois and many Canadians who read Martin Mann's letter (Nov. 22) complaining about the lack of bilingual road signs in Montreal jumped right out of their chairs, not so much because of the ignorance the letter displays, as to the fact that the Travel section would print it.
To set things straight: in Canada, only federal services and institutions are bilingual.
The only province to be officially bilingual is New Brunswick.
Quebec is officially a French-speaking province, and all other provinces are English-speaking.
English-speaking provinces do not, as a general rule, put up road signs in French, or even in both languages.
I doubt that Mr.
Mann would expect English road signs in France or French ones in the United Kingdom, or Italian signs in Germany, although they are all neighbors.


'JFK: Reckless Youth'
To the Editor:
As an early and longtime friend of John F. Kennedy's, I offer these comments having read the Op-Ed piece in The New York Times of Dec. 3 written by members of the Kennedy family, criticizing "JFK: Reckless Youth."


Nothing Is the Best Thing for Plants at Rest
JANUARY is a fine time to take it easy when caring for house plants.
Even though the plants may not appear to be resting, many of them are.
And pushing them too much is not a good thing.
Watering could be a problem.
So could overfertilization.
The lesson of the rest period was learned rather abruptly about a year ago.
A handsome clivia plant refused to bloom.
It was old enough by horticultural standards and should have flowered easily, but coddling and caring were of no avail.
Blooms were a special goal, for this particular plant was believed to be a yellow-flowering clivia, which is a rather exciting color break from the usual orange-red.


Concert Royalty


Nothing Is the Best Thing for Plants at Rest
JANUARY is a fine time to take it easy when caring for house plants.
Even though the plants may not appear to be resting, many of them are.
And pushing them too much is not a good thing.
Watering could be a problem.
So could overfertilization.
The lesson of the rest period was learned rather abruptly about a year ago.
A handsome clivia plant refused to bloom.
It was old enough by horticultural standards and should have flowered easily, but coddling and caring were of no avail.
Blooms were a special goal, for this particular plant was believed to be a yellow-flowering clivia, which is a rather exciting color break from the usual orange-red.


Two Teams Just Made for Showdown
The San Francisco 49ers own the National Football League's highest-ranked offense.
The Dallas Cowboys feature the league's top-ranked defense.
No team has scored more than 16 points against San Francisco in the 49ers' last nine post-season games.
Six of the 11 Cowboys offensive starters are Pro Bowl players.


In 'Bollywood,' Women Are Wronged or Revered
Shabana Azmi shook her head at the memory, her cheeks reddening in anger.
"This director showed me a script about a woman who was an ugly duckling -- she was dark-complexioned. She is forcibly married to this guy, but he leaves her for a light-skinned woman. Then the ugly duckling is adopted by the light-skinned woman. In the end, both women fall at the feet of the man. The director was giving me the part of the ugly duckling. I said, of course, I will not do the film.
"That's one of the problems with popular movies here," she continued.
"Women are not treated as sex objects. They are treated as mindless objects, which is worse."


Computer Route To Brochures
A new electronic bulletin board service allows anyone with a computer and modem to scan a data base of more than 9,000 free maps and travel brochures and booklets.
The service, Worldwide Brochures, is offered by Travel Companions, a brochure distribution company in Detroit Lakes, Minn.
It combines the brochure data base with such services as travel advisories from the State Department, a list of special events across the country and a message service.
To order brochures through the system, users pay a $12 membership fee.
By entering key words, users of the board can search for subjects such as a Mediterranean cruise, Maine fishing or Caribbean diving.


Seminar to Address Pros And Cons of Start-Ups
SMALL-BUSINESS owners and those thinking about starting a new business can learn about developing and maintaining a profitable company at a seminar on Thursday.
Representatives from the County Bar Association, the banking industry, accounting firms and the Small Business Administration will be speaking during the morning seminar, titled "Economic Development Day for Small and Emerging Businesses."


Kisa F. Hurtt, David S. Harris
Mr. and Mrs.
Caleb B. Hurtt of Sanibel, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kisa Forbes Hurtt to David Steven Harris, a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
Hugh Harris of Oakton, Va.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Hurtt, 30, is the training manager at Adobe Systems Inc., a computer manufacturer in Mountain View, Calif., where her fiance is the manager of the display products group.
She graduated from the University of Utah.
Her father, who is retired, was the president and chief operating officer of the Martin Marietta Corporation, the aerospace manufacturer in Bethesda, Md.
Her mother, Maryan Hurtt, is a painter in Sanibel.


West Side Group Pressures City to Put Zoning Limits on X-Rated Shops
Responding to pleas and protests from West Side residents, New York City planning officials are considering changing zoning regulations to curb the spread of x-rated video stores in some Manhattan neighborhoods.
The strategy was discussed at a public forum Monday night, where several officials said that the approach presented some difficulties, but could be successful in New York, based on experiences in other cities.


The Manipulators
THE LOBBYISTS
How Influence Peddlers Get Their Way in Washington.
By Jeffrey H. Birnbaum. 334 pp.
New York:  Times Books/ Random House. $25.


Where the Faces, Not Artifacts, Are the Center of Attention
CHIEF JOSEPH; Sitting Bull and his sons, Crowfoot and John; Rain-in-the-Face, and Young Man-Afraid-of-His-Horses: legendary American Indians are hanging in the Gallery of Contemporary Art, at Sacred Heart University in Fairfield, photographed as if they were big game trophies.
And the simile is not far-fetched, for at the time the pictures were taken, the pacification of the tribes was all but complete.
No dates are given for the photographer, David Francis Barry, but he was the last to photograph George Armstrong Custer before his Last Stand, remained active in the Dakota Territory during the 1880's and was in New York City as late as 1926.
His subject there was Sitting Bull's son John Sitting Bull, a deaf mute who had joined the Sells-Floto Circus.


CHRISTMAS OBSERVED
Your "Christmas Observed" issue (Dec. 20) was inspired!
It would be wonderful to make this a regular Christmas theme each year, and, rather than limiting it to stories by famous writers, make it open to the best from all your readers -- and writers.
SARA LANDIS
New York, N.Y.


Viewpoints; Just Leave Laura Tyson Alone
A few disgruntled economists have criticized the appointment of Laura Tyson, the University of California at Berkeley economics professor, to head the President's Council of Economic Advisers.
We know Laura Tyson well, having worked closely with her for the past six years on the development of new national economic policies.
We believe that her far-ranging knowledge and her realism about the global economy make her an outstanding choice for the job.
By tradition, past Presidents have given the top job at the council to economists who were experts on how the Government's monetary and fiscal policies influence the level of demand, the rate of growth and the level of unemployment.


RECORD BRIEF
Guy Clark: 'Boats to Build'
Elektra 61442-2; CD and cassette.


In Tax Policy, Clinton Provides Hope of Change
If you want to change behavior, tax it.
That, in its simplest form, is the case for taxing consumption, rather than income.
"As a nation, we have been consuming too much and investing too little," Roger Altman, the nominee for deputy Treasury secretary, said at his confirmation hearing last week.
"We're going to have to move in the direction of some new consumption tax."


Frequent Flier Bonuses Bloom
WITH a burst of ads and a clash of superlatives, the airlines sprang forth two weeks ago not with another round of fare discounts, but with a sheaf of frequent flier awards.
Basically, they offer bonus mileage or a free ticket to frequent flier program members who fly a certain number of flight "segments" or miles by the first week in April: Eight segments for a free domestic round-trip ticket, for example.
As of mid-January, eight domestic airlines and British Airways had such offers.
"It's a less risky way of attracting business than lowering fares," according to Sally C. McElwreath, vice president of Official Airline Guides, an electronic and print publisher of fare information.


Yassy Mazandi, Craig Castilla
Lady Renwick of London and Joe Mazandi of Los Angeles have announced the engagement of their daughter, Yassemine Mazandi, to Craig Castilla, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Adrian Castilla.
No wedding date has been set.
Miss Mazandi, who is known as Yassy, is a writer and an artist based in London.
Her father, now retired, was a publisher in Teheran, Iran, and a representative of American and European media organizations there.


Top-Notch Tables; St.-Etienne, France
Diners searching for the key to the future of grand French cuisine need only take a detour to the city of St.-Etienne, 40 miles southwest of Lyons, where the 42-year-old Pierre Gagnaire offers a personal style of cooking filled with art, poetry, audacity and rich flavors.
The Michelin two-star chef (and a worthy candidate for a coveted third star) recently transferred his restaurant from an airy, loftlike space in the center of town to a classic Art Deco mansion, built by a local pharmacist in 1932 as a house designed for gastronomic celebration.
Like Mr.
Gagnaire's cuisine -- grounded in the classics but offering bold touches of creativity, enthusiasm and humor -- the house fuses past, present and future artistic traditions.
Dining in this white and ivory space with bold touches of color is like feasting in a bright, modern living museum.
Every detail -- from doorknobs to light switches to artful menus -- has been considered, but there is no tortured sense of design for design's sake.


Commercial Property: 135 East 57th Street; A Tiny Park Plays Big Role in a Suit
SOME development sagas in New York City seem destined to play out over decades, rather than years.
That is certainly the case with 135 East 57th Street, an office tower as striking for what it has below ground -- a two-story antiques center called Place des Antiquaires -- as for the concave profile it cuts above ground.
The first decade began in December 1972, when the Gladstone and Wallace families signed a 36-year ground lease, with options running to the year 2103.
The rent started at about $350,000 a year.
Under a development agreement, the Gladstones were to build on the Wallaces' 27,000-square-foot property at Lexington Avenue and 57th Street.


Envoy's Envoy, an Iraqi Keeps Hoping
As the air attacks and vituperation were renewed over Iraq in the last week, few had as melancholy a look as Nizar Hamdoon, who as Iraq's delegate to the United Nations has a connoisseur's appreciation of the United States and its crisis tendency in foreign policy.
"I view it all with sorrow, of course, but if one is to produce he cannot be a prisoner of his emotions," said Mr.
Hamdoon, once one of the most celebrated diplomats in Washington and now back in this country with the unenviable mission of repairing Saddam Hussein's reputation.


Profitable Investment for Bentsen Shows Rewards of Political Power
n 1988 Senator Lloyd Bentsen, who will be the top financial regulator for President Bill Clinton, was invited by a Texas savings and loan operator to buy stock in a new company.
For Mr.
Bentsen, who met with Federal regulators on the businessman's behalf four months before he bought the stock, an investment of $100,000 came to be worth at least $600,000 three years later.
The stock was in a company that Federal regulators later determined had been created largely with a subsidy from the businessman's failing savings and loan, an arrangement that helped a small circle of invited investors to profit handsomely.
Familiar Ways of Power
Mr.
Bentsen's part in the stock deal, which he has reported as required in financial disclosure forms over the years, violated no laws or ethical strictures.
Nor is there any suggestion that he applied improper pressure on the Federal regulators, who ultimately spurned an appeal for help from the savings and loan operator, J. Livingston Kosberg.


Iraq Refuses to Guarantee Safety of Inspectors' Flights in South
WASHINGTON, Jan. 16 --
In a further challenge to the United States, Iraq said today that it would guarantee the safety of United Nations aircraft only if the planes stayed out of the no-flight zone imposed in the south.
But the United Nations quickly rejected the conditions.
The Iraqi rebuff, provided by Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz at a news conference in Baghdad, fell short of demands for assurances that United Nations weapons inspectors flying in from Bahrain would be guaranteed safe passage and unrestricted movements.


Alexia Hamm, John O. Pickett 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Hamm 3d of San Francisco have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alexandra Hersey Hamm, to John Olen Pickett 3d, a son of Mrs.
William I. Hollingsworth 3d of Locust Valley, L.I., and Mr.
Pickett Jr. of Palm Beach, Fla.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Hamm, who is 26 and is known as Alexia, graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is an investor in San Francisco.


When Shakespeare Wasn't for Everyone
I don't suppose the acting profession requires much defending these days, but if ever I'm called upon to come up with an eloquent explanation of why actors act, I know whom I'll quote.
James Hewlett.


'We're Probably in an Art That Is -- Not Dying'
When "The Last Yankee" has its world premiere on Thursday at the Manhattan Theater Club it will not be Arthur Miller's latest play.
For a man who talks readily about the demise of the theater as he knew it, he is not giving up easily.
Mr.
Miller has already written a new play, "Gellburg," as he told an audience at the 92d Street Y some weeks ago.
"Gellburg" is scheduled to open on Broadway next season.
Another recent play, "The Ride Down Mount Morgan," which opened in London in 1991, has not yet been seen in the United States, whereas a production of "The Last Yankee" opens in London on Jan. 27.
The evening at the Y, sponsored by the Unterberg Poetry Center, Mr.
Miller read from "The Last Yankee," which he described as "a comedy about a tragedy, and the tragedy is the way we live." The play, involving two couples who meet when the wives are patients in a mental hospital, stars Tom Aldredge, Frances Conroy, Rose Gregorio and John Heard and is directed by John Tillinger.
This article is adapted from Mr.
Miller's comments after the reading.


Cary Normile and Craig Sellers
TWO years ago, Craig Sellers attended a lecture at Marymount Manhattan College wearing sweat pants, high-tops and the ugliest yellow sweatshirt he could find.
Having recently been heartbroken, he was on a "sabbatical from women" and dressed accordingly.
The lecturer was Cary Normile, the director of adolescent clinical services at the Freedom Institute, an outpatient alcohol and drug clinic in New York.
While speaking, she found herself having "major eye-contact stuff" with the rumpled yet cute man in the small audience.


Riley Sims, 90, Dies; Leader in Cable TV And in Construction
Riley V. Sims, who rose from poverty to success in the construction, concrete, telecommunications and cable television industries, died Wednesday at a hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla., his home town.
He was 90.
He had cancer, his family said,


Elitists Unite
To the Sports Editor:
The German system of licensing hunters mentioned in Robert F. Jones's article involves months of study by applicants, and, if combined with higher fees and more severe penalties for game-law violations, would go a long way toward correcting the kind of abuses which Jones describes.


Mark Lieberman, Katherine Wachtel
Katherine Jane Wachtel, a daughter of Jesse and Sylvia Wachtel of Westport, Conn., was married last evening to Mark Frederic Lieberman, the son of Philip and Phyllis Lieberman of North Caldwell, N.J.
Rabbi Peter Kasdan performed the ceremony at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Mrs.
Wachtel Lieberman is an assistant market specialist for bedding at Frederick Atkins Inc. in New York, a cooperative buying office for retailers.
She graduated from American University.
Her father is a manufacturing consultant to the shoe industry, in Westport.
Her mother is a vice president and research manager at BBDO Worldwide, the advertising agency in New York.


HAITIANS EXPRESS SENSE OF BETRAYAL
A week ago, those planning their escape from Haiti spoke of President-elect Bill Clinton with reverence.
His statements in favor of Haitian refugees had earned him a common saying, "After God comes Bill Clinton."
But his decision this week to maintain for now the Bush Administration's policy of summarily returning fleeing boat people to Haiti has caused many here to regard Mr.
Clinton as the author of the ultimate betrayal.


China Village Prospers But Retains Old Ways
Every month when the moon waxes full and then again when it disappears, Li Yuqin takes a small torch, and in front of a red wooden ancestral tablet she lights three incense sticks and an oil lamp as an offering to the gods.
In 25 years of marriage, Ms.
Li, a sturdy 47-year-old peasant in this village in southern China, has never once forgotten to carry out this ritual.
If she offended the gods, she says, her family would starve.


For Tighter Shower Heads and Faucets
SHOWER-FIXTURE woes include dripping, water flowing from the bathtub spout while the shower is operating and uneven or obstructed spraying.
Except when parts are recessed behind tiled walls, most repairs are easy.
Dripping when the shower is off signals a problem in the faucets or faucet, if the shower has just one.
Repairing those is similar to repairing leaky faucets in sinks or lavatories.


Sex Farce, 'Don't Dress for Dinner'
YOU don't have to travel to Paris or to London to see the sort of babbling sex farce that, against all reason, lasts for years over there, but perhaps a fortnight on Broadway.
Like "Boeing-Boeing," to dredge up an arcane case in point.
And here's one called "Don't Dress for Dinner," which ran on home ground for two years under its original title, "Bon Anniversaire," and remains a current British hit about to enter its third year.
At the Paper Mill Playhouse, this inexplicable foolishness -- under either title, it's applesauce -- by Marc Camoletti, who wrote "Boeing-Boeing," begins the theater's annual respite from extravagant musicals.


Red Alert
AS IF THEY'VE DISCOVERED THE secret to a long and healthy life, chefs across America are hoisting beakers of tomato consomme heavenward and singing its praises.
"There is nothing like tomato consomme for poaching bass," declares David Bouley, the chef and owner of Bouley restaurant in Manhattan.
Charlie Trotter, the chef and owner of the Chicago restaurant that bears his name, seconds the notion, adding that the "tomato essence" he makes from organic tomatoes at the end of summer lends its sunny spell to stuffed chicken breasts, soups and pasta sauces throughout the winter.


Sports of The Times; Many Foot Soldiers Standing at the Gate
ONE day earlier this week, I joined Jesse Jackson as he made the rounds in this city to outline his strategy for attacking racism within the sports industry.
Jackson began the day by meeting with the major league baseball owners, who were gathered here, and reiterating his promise to take direct action against teams that did not submit an affirmative-action hiring plan by opening day of the 1993 season.


TRANSACTIONS
Football National Football League  BUFFALO BILLS -- Activated Chris Hale, cornerback, from injured reserve.
Placed Richard Harvey, linebacker, on the inactive list.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Activated Scott Secules, quarterback.
Placed Bernie Parmalee, running back, on the inactive list.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Activated Ralph Tamm, offensive lineman, and Wesley Walls, tight end, from injured reserve.
Placed David Wilkins, defensive end, on injured reserve.
Waived Chuck Thomas, center.
Hockey National Hockey League  PHILADELPHIA FLYERS -- Traded Brian Benning, defenseman, to the Edmonton Oilers for Josef Beranek, right wing, and Greg Hawgood, swingman.
College  METRO ATLANTIC ATHLETIC CONFERENCE -- Announced the formation of a I-AA football league to begin play in September 1993 and will include Canisius, Iona, St.
Peter's, Siena, Georgetown and St.
John's.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Jan. 3 about a class-action lawsuit accusing domestic airlines of price fixing misstated the number of airlines and omitted one name.
There are nine defendants, including American Airlines.


Director's Favorite Deal Involves Triple Squeeze
AMERICAN tournament players seldom stop to consider how lucky they are in a crucial area.
Their activities are supervised by an experienced, knowledgeable and tactful body of men and women.
The tournament directors very, very rarely make an error, whether in planning movements, giving rulings or compiling scores.
One of these unsung heros is best known in his homestate of Texas, although he has long worked at national tournaments all over the country.
He is John Harris of Houston, who announced his retirement in November after 31 years of service to the game.
He contributed the Web movement for pairs play to the theory of directing, so named because his nickname is Spider.


A Gay Guide To Palm Springs
Palm Springs, Calif., in cooperation with the city's year-old Gay Tourism Council, is distributing a free 52-page color guide for gay visitors.
The guide is an adaptation of the city's official visitor's guide, with an insert added to provide information on hotels and attractions of particular interest to gay people.


American Maestra


Nothing Is the Best Thing for Plants at Rest
JANUARY is a fine time to take it easy when caring for house plants.
Even though the plants may not appear to be resting, many of them are.
And pushing them too much is not a good thing.
Watering could be a problem.
So could overfertilization.
The lesson of the rest period was learned rather abruptly about a year ago.
A handsome clivia plant refused to bloom.
It was old enough by horticultural standards and should have flowered easily, but coddling and caring were of no avail.
Blooms were a special goal, for this particular plant was believed to be a yellow-flowering clivia, which is a rather exciting color break from the usual orange-red.


Hong Kong
To the Editor: In regard to "What's Doing in Hong Kong" (Nov. 8), I found on my last visit there that two unusual museums were a great pleasure.
The Flagstaff House Museum of Tea Ware, 10 Cotton Tree Drive, is in the new park in Hong Kong Central.
Its two floors of galleries specialize in the display of tea ware and the styles of tea preparation in China from the seventh century to the present.


Devils Made Him Do It
If BERNIE NICHOLLS was in a hurry when he was stopped for speeding in Edmonton, Alberta, Thursday afternoon, there was a reason.
Nicholls, who was traded by the Oilers to the Devils Wednesday night for KEVIN TODD and ZDENO CIGER, had been on his way to catch a plane to meet the Devils' general manager, LOU LAMORIELLO, in Toronto when his trip to the airport was unexpectedly delayed.
Naturally, he had stepped on the pedal a bit to make up for lost time.


Restoring Some Glitter to French Opera
French Baroque opera has been in the news of late, what with the film "Tous les Matins du Monde." So has contemporary French opera, with the Peter Sellars production of Messiaen's "St. Francois d'Assise." But what of French operas of the 19th century and their tonal descendants of the 20th?
With a few hoary exceptions, that grand and glittering repertory has slipped into the shadows.
Fortunately, record companies struggle to remind us of its existence, with greater or lesser success.
The French, bolstered by public and private efforts to promote native culture, have been particularly industrious.
By and large, their releases are no musical match for the major international labels with big-name talent.
On the other hand, however well international casts and orchestras perform, they often lack the requisite French style.


Cracking Down On Back Taxes
ON Tuesday, about 250,000 residents and businesses will start receiving some unexpected and generally unwelcome telephone calls as New Jersey officials take a new approach to collecting more than $400 million in unpaid state taxes.
For the first time, the Division of Taxation has hired an outside collection agency to help it clear up a steadily growing backlog of outstanding taxes.
And in another break with the past, division employees as well as the outside collectors will rely on telephone calls instead of written notices to scare up the missing taxes.


Paired


A Buddha To Call Their Own
Sometime in the early Fifth Century B.C., one of the countless itinerant ascetics wandering across India had an idea.
He was unhappy; everyone that he knew was unhappy.
The problem was fear of change, and the solution was to find equanimity in the face of mortality.
Easier said than done, of course, but the man was the great religious genius who came to be called the Buddha, the "Enlightened." He gained devotees, and the images eventually made of him gave visual form to the principle he taught: peace of mind through detachment from the things of this world.
That philosophy has inspired some of the world's great art, and it would be hard to find it more persuasively expressed than in the extraordinary metal Buddhist figures in "The Golden Age of Sculpture From Sri Lanka" at the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington.
The exhibition, which opened late last year and continues through September, was organized by the Musee Guimet in Paris.
Made up entirely of work drawn from Sri Lanka's national museums, it represents the first major showing of that country's work in the United States.


Their Target: Madonna
When it comes to poking fun at Madonna, the comedian Jackie Mason is a little slow on the draw.
This month, Mr.
Mason began work on a book that will spoof Madonna's book, "Sex." The photos, taken by Raoul Felder, the high-profile divorce lawyer, include one showing Mr.
Mason and two associates with their shirts off.
His parody is only the latest of many since the singer's book of sexual fantasies was published in October.
*
The first parody was on newsstands even before "Sex" was in the stores.
Paper Magazine, in its October issue, featured Ann Magnuson.
"I have a sex book, too," she said.
"It's going to accompany my album 'Neurotica.' " "Erotica" is Madonna's companion song to her book.


Oasis of Enjoyment Suffers Moment of Doubt


Hurt and Unwanted Find Home in a Zoo
THE scene at the rustic zoo in the Pine Barrens on a Sunday afternoon might be acted out at any zoo across the nation -- parents holding the hands of wide-eyed children as they stand awestruck, gazing at monkeys, wildcats and an elephant.
But the Popcorn Park Zoo here is anything but typical.
It is the end of the line for more than 300 animals that have been badly treated -- injured, neglected and abandoned -- by other zoos, circuses and individuals from all over the United States.


The Beach: That's a Life?
It was Saturday night, but Kenny Scharf wasn't going out.
The boyish artist, who once turned the basement bathroom of the Palladium in New York into a psychedelic Armageddon, wasn't going to the dinner at Barocco Beach with Lisa Phillips, the Whitney Museum curator, who was in town.
He wasn't going to Byblos, the new club that replaced the Cave, which replaced Boomerang, all within a year.
He wasn't even going to check out Les Bains, the new club of the week.
Mr.
Scharf, the 34-year-old neo-expressionist who had a show at the Tony Shafrazi Gallery in the fall and contributed art for Interview magazine's forthcoming all-Florida issue, wasn't even in South Beach.
At 11 P.M., he was at home with his family, 50 blocks north of the Art Deco district, in the ranch house that he moved into in July.


Correction
Because of an editing error, a review of Maeve Binchy's novel "The Copper Beech" on Dec. 20 misstated the publication frequency of The Irish Times.
It is published daily except Sundays.


Au Revoir, Matisse
A last glimpse of the Matisse Retrospective, at the Museum of Modern Art, Jan. 10.


UConn Makes a Timely Exception and Wins
Jim Calhoun can live with imperfections.
Not easily, but the coach of the Connecticut Huskies can live with them.
A lack of assertiveness, however, especially at those moments that define basketball seasons, can sit in his stomach for hours, if not days.
Which is why he saw progress tonight.
After preventing Boston College from pulling away several times in the second half, the Huskies stayed close enough to produce the most dramatic play of their season.
Donyell Marshall turned a decisive loose ball into a 16-foot jump shot with two seconds left to give Connecticut a 66-64 victory over the Eagles tonight at Conte Forum.


Nureyev: A Comet Passet This Way
Life became less of a bore when Rudolf Nureyev burst upon the West in 1961.
Like Vaslav Nijinsky before him, he was more than the "greatest" dancer of his age; he was a key symbol of a changing time.
The 20th century was here to stay, Nijinsky announced in 1913 (with Stravinsky's help) through the jarring modernism of his ballet "The Rite of Spring." Nureyev confirmed, in another context, that the world again could not continue on its previous course.
The 1960's would not have been complete without him.


Mr. von Hoffman And Ms. Teig
Carole and Marlowe Teig of Newton, Mass., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Jennifer Lynne Teig, and Constantine David Byrne von Hoffman, a son of Nicholas von Hoffman of Tenants Harbor, Me., the former political columnist, and Ann C. Bryne of Providence, R.I.
Ms.
Teig, 25, is an office manager for Community Works, a nonprofit fund-raising coalition of social and economic justice organizations in Boston.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Massachusetts.
Her father is a managing director in Newton for Berkerey, Noyes &amp; Company, a New York investment bank.
Her mother is a public-speaking coach in Newton.


The Company He Keeps
We're in a reaching out sort of mood this Inauguration.
We're connecting.
We're opening up.
We're celebrating diversity and embracing wholeness.
We're on an odyssey of self-discovery.
We're thinking communitarian, New Covenant, a Government that looks like America, inclusive not exclusive, omnicultural.
We're having Renaissance Weekends, wearing our names strung around our necks on pieces of colored yarn and talking about renewal of nation and self.
We've released our inner children and are looking for nannies for them.
We're feeling a little weepy, but that's O.K. (and you're O.K., too, although your family's dysfunctional).
We're wearing clothes that look like the Summer of Love, only a lot more expensive, and the designer gives part of the profit to Friends of the Earth.
We're not buttoned down and monogrammed anymore: We have a President named Bill, a First Lady named Hillary, a First Daughter named Chelsea and an Attorney General named Zoe.
We're hugging trees.
We're hugging each other.
We're hugging each other's trees.
The Co-Dependent White House is upon us.
The President likes to talk of his family's two generations of compulsions (stepfather an abusive alcoholic, mother a gambler, brother a recovering cocaine addict, himself a fast-food addict).
He has admitted to marital problems and has been through family therapy for his brother's addiction.


Sharpton Calls for Suspension of Officers
The Rev.
Al Sharpton yesterday called for the suspension of police officers who he said roughed up and cursed at a group of rap performers and producers in East Harlem last week.
The five artists have filed a complaint with the city's Civilian Complaint Review Board, saying they believed they were attacked because they are young black men.


I.B.M. Weighs Possibility of Job Layoffs
RECENTLY, when the talk at a party in Rye turned to speculating about the reverses of Westchester's largest employer, I.B.M., one of the guests, an I.B.M. employee, said he was worried only about two things: "My job and my stock."
He wasn't being facetious.
The announcement by International Business Machines, whose corporate world headquarters are in Armonk, that this year it was cutting 25,000 more jobs worldwide and reducing its budget for research, development and engineering by $1 billion may signify that the company will have to initiate the first layoffs in its history.
Up to now the company has used voluntary means like job buyouts and early retirement to eliminate jobs.


Auguries, Pieties And Scraps of Memory
I write these words on a winter's evening, looking west through a bay window at the floodlit dome of the Capitol, about 400 yards away.
Its shimmering symmetry (rendered ethereal by the window's old glass, which makes it waver as though reflected in water) is to me the most American of shapes.
That pale bell first imprinted itself on my mind when, as a boy in Nairobi, I browsed illustrated books in the library of the United States Information Service and dreamed of being able to walk in its environs, along with my bosom buddy Thomas Sawyer of Hannibal, Mo.
The Capitol imprints itself still whenever I come into my study, never more beautifully than at times like this, when the vast spiraling nation of which it is the center begins to slow down and solidify around it, like some quadrennial nebula gathering energy for fresh circuits and collisions.


Paris on a Budget
To the Editor: Dinner at McDonald's isn't my idea of how to deal with the franc gap.
Why leave home?
Like Raymond Blair and his wife, my husband and I traveled to Paris in September; unlike them, we took a scheduled airline (American) for $1,140 for two from Syracuse, as opposed to their charter flight at $1,198 from Boston.
We stayed at the modest but satisfactory Hotel Saphir on Rue Daguerre in a genuine old Parisian neighborhood that still exudes the flavor of Simone de Beauvoir, who lived there.
The price of the room, with toilet, shower, television and courtyard view, was $66 (with the dollar at 4.8 francs).


Scarsdale Japan Festival To Bridge East and West
FRUSTRATED by their community's image as a cloistered group of outsiders aloof from America at large, the Japanese residents of this village are speaking up.
With a zest many local organizations might envy, the newly formed Japanese Community Association has planned an ambitious American-style cultural festival to take place here beginning Tuesday.
Its planners say the purpose of the Scarsdale Japan Festival, which will offer artistic, educational and political events over a period of four and a half months, is to air differences and foster understanding between people who must live together as neighbors.
"The trend is, the Japanese are coming, and they aren't going back home anymore," said Kuniko Katz, who moved here from Japan 20 years ago.
"We need to get to know each other."


La Guardia Bus
To the Editor: "A Cheap Ride From La Guardia" (Travel Advisory, Dec. 20) makes no mention of the fact that the M-60 bus over the Triborough Bridge from Queens provides the only fully accessible public service from the airport directly to Manhattan.
At the Society for the Advancement of Travel for the Handicapped, of which I am executive director,we are trying to educate the world to look at every service as potentially accessible to people with disabilities.
M.
T.
V.
SHAW-LAWRENCE New York, N.Y.


Two Scientists Find a Way To Make Cheaper Methanol
A team of chemists in California has discovered what appears to be a cheaper way to turn natural gas into methanol.
If it can be commercialized, the process could create vast supplies of transportation fuel from reserves of gas that cannot now be tapped economically.
The process is described in the current issue of the journal Science by seven scientists from Catalytica Inc., a company in Mountain View, Calif.


Dizzy Gillespie: More Than the Man With the Bent Horn
The trumpeter Dizzy Gillespie was an easy person to get hold of, if he was in this country, which wasn't often.
It just took a telephone call and he'd speak with you, laconic and interested if you knew what you were talking about, monosyllabic if you didn't.
Searching for answers to a musical question or for an eyewitness report on some of the more important cultural history of the 20th century would incite two types of replies -- the "Umm, yeah . . ." sort, a bit gruff, mostly bored, and obviously the response of a person watching television, or an articulate expression of what he had experienced in the course of a life that moved from rural South Carolina to the streets of the major cities of the world.
Nearly 60 years of involvement in show business in America left Gillespie, who died this month at age 75, a profound judge of character, somebody who had seen just about every type of scam, malfeasance and insincerity.
An unprepared interviewer would turn into prey, and many were left with nothing.
He had been burned in print before -- a long profile in The New Yorker in 1948 poked fun at him and be-boppers.
He spent a good portion of the late 1950's and early 1960's a lost figure in a music he helped invent; be-bop was yesterday's music.


More Than Ever, U.N. Policing Is an American Show
MORE than two years after the end of the cold war, the question is no longer whether the United Nations can take action to keep the peace in the new world order, but why that action isn't working.
Disunited nations and ethnic groups are battling from the Balkans to Cambodia, and the United Nations seems able to do little to stop them.
Since it was established after World War II, the United Nations has been only as effective as its most powerful member states allowed it to be.
The Soviet Union, for most of its history, opposed the United States in the Security Council and in almost all cases blocked the United Nations from meaningful action.
In those instances where the United Nations was able to act, from Korea to the Persian Gulf, it always did so with the strong political backing and the military muscle of the United States.
Where the United States did not provide the wherewithal, the United Nations has seldom been effective.


A Musician Who Finds a Melody in His Trash
JOHN BERTLES is a serious musician, with all the credentials to prove it.
He hears music where others might least expect to find it: in empty coffee cans, hollow cardboard tubing, broken kitchen tiles and raw lumber.
Old refrigerator bins send shivers up his spine; discarded desk drawers set him humming.
On Thursdays -- "junk nights" in this village -- Mr.
Bertles walks the streets looking for garbage.
The materials he takes back to his basement workshop here are turned into musical instruments for Bash the Trash, his performing group.
It is known for its distinctive sound: assorted bangings, bongings and clatterings.


Russian Maestro


Savoring Foie Gras At the Source
OFFICIALLY, foie gras has no particular home.
The Jews may have brought the secret of its production from Egypt in biblical times; for a long time they produced foie gras in Alsace.
Norman farmers make foie gras.
From eastern Hungary, too, from the Puszta, a giant prairie mown by geese, foie gras is sent to France for blending with the local product.
All you need, after all, is a goose.
And a funnel.
And the disingenuous belief, perhaps, that the goose won't mind being gorged so fast that the grain must be massaged down its throat.
Nonetheless, foie gras is regional.
It is something that is made in parts of Europe; in one part of France it is what they make, period.


The Real Folk Singer
THE LIFE AND LEGEND OF LEADBELLY
By Charles Wolfe  and Kip Lornell.
Illustrated. 333 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $25.


For Tighter Shower Heads and Faucets
SHOWER-FIXTURE woes include dripping, water flowing from the bathtub spout while the shower is operating and uneven or obstructed spraying.
Except when parts are recessed behind tiled walls, most repairs are easy.
Dripping when the shower is off signals a problem in the faucets or faucet, if the shower has just one.
Repairing those is similar to repairing leaky faucets in sinks or lavatories.


Tilting at Networks: A Group Tries to Save 'Quality' Series
The flood of mail has brought everything to a standstill at the home of Dorothy Swanson in Fairfax Station, Va., in suburban Washington.
With more than 10,000 letters spilling from plastic postal tubs, Ms.
Swanson says she hasn't seen such an outpouring since ABC terminated "Our World," a news and public affairs program, in 1987.
Most of the mail is from people complaining about the imminent suspension of three of their favorite shows: "Brooklyn Bridge," "I'll Fly Away" and "Homefront." Ms.
Swanson gets the letters because she is the director and sole full-time employee of Viewers for Quality Television, an eight-year-old group that uses viewer mail as leverage to petition the networks to save programs that have avid followings but low Nielsen ratings.


An Afternoon for the Dogs


Knicks Blow Fuse, Hold Team Meeting
After another late-game collapse on the road tonight, the Knicks held a players-only team meeting in the locker room that lasted about 20 minutes.
The conference had been building for some time.
The Knicks have lost seven of their last 12 games, and they have looked nothing like a team that is ready to contend for a championship.


Deborah Logan and Mark Evans
Mr. and Mrs.
Norman C. Logan of Weston, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Deborah Tate Logan, to Mark Lawrence Evans, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel J. Evans of Seattle.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Logan, 30, is a management consultant with Price Waterhouse &amp; Company in Boston.
She graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College, from which she also received an M.B.A.
Her father is the president of Logan &amp; Company, a management consulting firm in Boston.
Her mother, Ada Logan, is the associate conservator in charge of textiles at the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum there.


Helped by Friendly Trade Rules, Trucks Fly Off the Lots
TRUCK-LIKE vehicles mini-vans, sport utility vehicles and pickup trucks -- have replaced more and more cars as everyday transportation since the 1980's, defying expectations within the automotive industry that the trend would reach a plateau.
Last year saw yet another rise in the percentage of car buyers choosing mini-vans, pickups or sport utilities.
In 1992, trucks of all kinds accounted for 37.4 percent of the 13.1 million vehicles sold, up from 24.5 percent a decade earlier.


Myrl E. Alexander Is Dead at 83; Former Director of U.S. Prisons
Myrl E. Alexander, a former head of the Federal prison system and leading innovator in penal reforms, died Thursday at Spohn Hospital in Corpus Christi, Tex.
He was 83 and lived in Corpus Christi.
He had suffered several strokes, his family said.


Movies That Don't Make the Multiplex
BACK in 1983, when he was a 24-year-old graduate student in the French department at Rutgers University here, Albert Gabriel Nigrin was an aspiring film maker frustrated by the absence of any local art film theaters.
So he set up his own seat-of-the-pants film series in a basement classroom.
Ten years later, Mr.
Nigrin has conceived and directed two dozen short films of his own.
At the same time, he has nursed that original tiny series into New Jersey's largest continuing public film series devoted to experimental, offbeat and influential cinema -- and dedicated to the proposition that there is more to life than multiplexes.


The Word On Storm Insurance
The announcement last month by the Travelers Corporation that it planned to stop selling new homeowners' policies on Long Island, along the Connecticut coast and in sections of New York City and Westchester has worried homeowners that other companies might follow suit.
But so far at least, no other company has done so, though many indicate that they are weighing their options in the wake of the huge losses they suffered in Hurricane Andrew in Florida and Louisiana and the additional losses caused by December's devastating storm in the Northeast.


Marissa Handwerker, David Effman
Marissa Eve Handwerker, the daughter of Marian Handwerker of New York and the late Bernard Handwerker, was married last evening to David Stephan Effman, a son of Janet Effman of Port Washington, L.I., and the late Neil M. Effman.
Rabbi Robert Levine performed the ceremony at the Water Club in New York.
Mrs.
Effman, 27, is an assistant vice president at National Westminster Bancorp in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father was an administrator at the New York State Insurance Liquidation Bureau, a state regulatory agency in Manhattan.
Her mother is a sales associate at Wendy Walters &amp; Associates, a Manhattan realtor.


For Weapons Makers, a Time to Deal
Last spring, the Air Force warned the three major contractors for the F-22 jet fighter -- General Dynamics, Lockheed and Boeing -- that if costs continued to escalate, the program could be drastically scaled back or even canceled as part of the Pentagon's deep budget cuts.
Predicting that there wasn't room for three F-22 contractors in a shrinking weapons market, General Dynamics offered to buy Lockheed's majority share of the program.
But Lockheed refused to sell, saying that the F-22 was crucial to its aeronautics business.


For January, Symphony Anticipates Spring
HALF a dozen Connecticut ensembles give their first concerts of 1993 next weekend.
The Eastern Connecticut Symphony will perform at 8 P.M. on Saturday at the Garde Arts Center in New London.
"January is such a cold month," said the group's music director, Paul Phillips, "that we decided to warm things up a bit with Igor Stravinsky's controversial 'Rite of Spring.' "
Grieg's "Two Elegiac Melodies," in observance of the composer's centennial, and Beethoven's Third Piano Concerto performed by Ru-jie Gu, the winnner of the orchestra's young artist competition in 1992, will also be on the program.
Tickets can be purchased at the Garde on the day of the concert; for reservations call the Symphony office at 443-2876.


In Norwalk, 'The Play's the Thing'
"THEATER about theater." That's what artistic director Ugo N. Toppo said of the current season at the Rainbow Theater, a small professional company in Norwalk.
And "The Play's the Thing," a frivolous 1920's period piece by the Hungarian playwright Ferenec Molnar is just the thing to catch the truth of Mr.
Toppo's point.
For it is precisely about high theatrical artifice, impeccable bravura technique and urbane performances -- all style, no substance.
Since the makeshift Rainbow staging, with no discernable sign of direction by Mr.
Toppo, has none of the above, the choice of play is simply unfathomable for a company that has dealt with somber contemporary plays.


From the Start, Superlatives
AFTER RUDOLF NUREYEV defected from the Soviet Union in 1961, it took Western critics little time to recognize his unique qualities.
Here are excerpts from some early reviews.
"More than Nijinsky, he is Vestris, who was known as 'the god of the dance.' "  Olivier Merlin,
Le Monde (Paris), June 21, 1961
"To innate romanticism Nureyev adds a variety of gifts. Technically he is endowed with a neat figure, natural turn-out, exceptional elevation, impeccable turns and beats, strong but sensitive feet (rare in a man) and a suppleness laced with a fiery dash of Slav temperament which permits him more grace than most men could get away with. When he makes one of his great loping runs like a cheetah caught behind bars, he seems to be made of more elastic material than normal humanity."  Alexander Bland,
The Observer (London), Feb. 23, 1962
"As to his beats, we have not, I think, seen their like before. Soft, without strain, without vestige of hurry, with the feet fluttering as though motivated by a bird's wing rather than by a man's muscle, his entrechats are beyond description."  A. H. Franks,
The Dancing Times (London), March 1962
"A pop dancer -- that's what we've got -- a pop dancer, at last. What the telly did for art, what Billy Graham did for religion, Nureyev has done for ballet. . . . Pop dancers, like pop singers, have got to have a gimmick or some special thing about them, like tears or a wiggle or a half-starved little-boy look; and I think Nureyev's thing is that even when he is behaving in a withdrawn and gentlemanly way you feel that he may suddenly snarl and bite you in the neck."  Richard Buckle,
The Sunday Times of London, May 20, 1962
"Nureyev, with his shock of unruly hair, his sullen expression, seems indeed, at first glance, like a beatnik in ballet tights. . . . But there is nothing crude or gauche about this animal. He is catlike in both his elegance of action and his enigmatic expression. The discipline of a premier danseur appears to cloak a creature of wild and beautiful movement impulses." Walter Terry,
The New York Herald Tribune, June 10, 1962
The New York Times, Oct. 22, 1962


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The Perot Factor; PEROT IS EXPANDING HIS GROUP TO SWAY THE NEW CONGRESS
Ross Perot plans a major effort to influence legislation on Capitol Hill during the early years of the Clinton Administration, starting with the May 1 special election in Texas to replace Senator Lloyd Bentsen, President-elect Bill Clinton's choice as Treasury Secretary.
Mr.
Perot said in an interview on Friday that in the first 24 hours after he announced his intention to resume political activity last Monday, more than 500,000 people called his telephone banks and more than 400,000 joined United We Stand, America, the organization that grew out of his independent Presidential campaign in 1992.
Tens of thousands of letters are piled in a warehouse here, waiting to be opened.
The group's annual dues are $15.


Tsongas's Health: Privacy and the Public's Rights
These are the days when Paul E. Tsongas had hoped to be preparing to move into the White House.
Instead, after falling by the wayside in last year's Democratic Presidential primaries, the former Senator from Massachusetts is now being treated in a Boston hospital in a new battle against cancer.


India's Spiciest Writer
She's been called a "chimpanzee." It's even been suggested that she suffers "from mental sickness and base instincts." But remarks like those from literary connoisseurs in India don't seem to faze Shobha De.
The Jackie Collins of India keeps on writing -- amused, unruffled and unsuppressed by the commotion, and enraging her critics even further.
Ms.
De thinks sex, talks sex, writes sex.
And in doing so she shocks India, and much of its literary set, like no other writer today.
She is quintessentially Bombay, a product of a city that is molded by the extremes of fast living and violent religious conflicts, show business and extreme poverty.
In the last week, Bombay has been torn by the worst sectarian violence since independence.


Wall Street; Things May Finally Be Picking Up at Failure
Is a degree of success finally on the horizon for the Failure Group?
Failure, a large consulting firm devoted to analysis of accidents and disasters, has been something of a disaster itself as an investment.
After trading close to $30 a share in 1991 on the expectation of lucrative business after the Gulf War, Failure has been in a virtual free fall, trading as low as $6.50.


Collared, and Lavishly
Two versions of the fur-collared coat are making a revival.
One is glamorous; the other is a stylish storm coat.
The version at left echoes the 1930's portrait collar, a head-framing signature of the era's movie queens.
The trench coat at right is lavishly collared in beaver.
This everyday coat mimics an early 1940's style that was a hallmark of Ivy League college students.
That coat, in turn, replaced the raccoon coat worn by the previous generation.


Officers Painstakingly Study Suspect's Belongings for Clues
As the future of Katie Beers remains shrouded in the custody battle between her mother and the county, the police today meticulously combed the yard and converted bungalow where she was imprisoned for 16 days, searching for more evidence of her kidnapping and new clues to whether other children had been held there.
Lieut.
Dominick Varrone, who is heading the investigation for the Suffolk County police, said he and other detectives had discovered some evidence that he characterized as suspicious, though still inconclusive.


Smearing It On, Rubbing It In
Romance with
commitment
. That's what today's woman wants."
Those were the words of Calvin Klein, introducing a floral-scented fragrance named Eternity five years ago.
That's when
commitment
was in, a word that has gone from connoting entrance into a mental institution to its modern meaning of "permanent relationship" or perhaps a mutual understanding to date steadily at least through New Year's Eve.
If you want a word to stand for a long-range commitment,
eternity
cannot be topped. (
Forever
must have been considered, but the diamond people have a lock on that word;
forever
is expensive.)


Dear Mike: You Didn't Miss Much
In Binghamton tonight, Mike Richter found himself in an altogether refreshing situation: He was given a lead and a tight defense, and he played behind a group of players who have been at the top of their league all season long.
Here in Montreal, at the Forum, John Vanbiesbrouck wasn't so lucky.
He has had nights -- too many nights -- so much like this one all season long.
Vanbiesbrouck faced far more shots from the home-team Canadiens than his teammates hurled at Patrick Roy, played most of the game with the score against him and left the arena with his 10th loss of the season.


A College Says Thanks
An honorary doctorate for Elizabeth Rohatyn.


Take a Page From the Library
To the Editor:
I read with particular interest Carol Vogel's article "Dear Museumgoer: What Do
You
Think?"  [ Dec. 20 ]  because 38 years of my professional life were spent working in a university art museum, where I was constantly aware of the contrast between museum and library services. If indeed some museum staff members are concerned that "public opinion" could supplant "curatorial wisdom," then the curator had better be more available to the public and offer services that help in the understanding and appreciation of works of art.


Elizabeth Wood, 93, Innovator In Early Days of Public Housing
Elizabeth Wood, a public housing pioneer who advocated racial and economic integration and the designing of workable neighborhoods, died yesterday at a nursing home near Atlanta.
She was 93.
She suffered from Alzheimer's disease, a broken hip and a stroke, said Gisela Titman, a niece.


Fright Nights


Carol E. Davis, Robert B. Fiske 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
George A. Davis of Summit, N.J., have announced April wedding plans for their daughter Carol Elizabeth Davis and Robert Bishop Fiske 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fiske Jr. of Darien, Conn.
Ms.
Davis, 32, is a former associate in the New York office of Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius, a Philadelphia law firm.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father is the chairman of C. R. Bard, a hospital-supply company in Murray Hill, N.J.
Her mother, Maria Davis, is a corporate art consultant in Summit.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 17, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The death of a woman leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
2
3
MCNALLY'S SECRET, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A sleuth's pursuit of a stolen block of priceless stamps uncovers scandals on Florida's Gold Coast.
3
51
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
4
40
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder in rural Mississippi.
5
9
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) An American probes a mysterious balloon accident in the Alps.
6
1
BEYOND EDEN, by Catherine Coulter. (Onyx, $5.99.) A young woman trying to escape menaces from her past is aided by a private investigator.
7 *
4
FUGITIVE NIGHTS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Bantam, $6.50.) Three people on the trail of a dangerous fugitive in Palm Springs.
8 *
12
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (Pocket, $4.99.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
9
3
COMPELLING EVIDENCE, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A woman charged with murdering her husband is defended by her former lover.
10
11
HIDEAWAY, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A man miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is haunted by visions of evil.
11
26
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
12
17
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a farming family.
13
1
THE SAPPHIRE ROSE, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) Book Three of the fantasy series "The Elenium."
14
6
THE WASTE LANDS, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) The third volume of "The Dark Tower," a series about time travel and a heroic quest.
15
8
ANGEL, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A young woman enjoys a torrid romance while visiting a Texas ranch in the late 19th century.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
2
3
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President-elect discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save the earth.
3 *
8
DIANA: Her True Story, by Andrew Morton. (Pocket, $5.99.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
4
14
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
5 *
87
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
6
480
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
7
1
THE JORDAN RULES, by Sam Smith. (Pocket, $5.99.) An account of a championship season with Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls.
8
11
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Vintage, $11.) Essays about the recent political and cultural scene.
9
73
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
10
1
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
11 *
11
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) The tribulations of travel suffered all over the world.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
75
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
6
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1993. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
3
100
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
17
THE INDISPENSABLE CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of previously published cartoons.
5 *
117
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Deals and Discounts
KIWI SIX-PACK KIWI International Air Lines is offering a package of six one-way tickets good on flights between Newark and Chicago (Midway), Atlanta and Orlando.
Called KIWI Business Bonus Pack, the package costs $590, or $98.33 a trip.
Reservations can be made anytime within three days of travel.
There are no penalties for changes, but the tickets are nonrefundable and nontransferable.
They are good for travel within a year of purchase.
The Bonus Packs are available from travel agents or KIWI ticket counters at airports, or they can be ordered by calling (800) 538-5494.
RESORT RATES Two resorts on opposite sides of the globe are offering promotions as they open for business.
The new Four Seasons Resort Bali has introductory rates through March 31 at 40 percent off regular prices.
The special rates start at $195 for a one-bedroom villa. (As of April 1, the lowest rate will be $325.) Though all the accommodations will not be finished until late March, 63 of 147 villas were scheduled for completion earlier this month; only interior work remains on the rest, according to a spokeswoman.
All restaurants were also set to open early this month except for a beachside cafe.
The resort is situated on 35 acres at the southern tip of the island.
The one-bedroom villas have at least 2,150 square feet of indoor and outdoor living space, and each has a plunge pool and sundeck; larger villas are also available.
The resort has a 110-foot swimming pool with a waterfall that cascades into a free-form pool below.
There are hot and cold whirlpools, a beach with water sports and a tennis club and fitness center.
Call Four Seasons at (800) 332-3442.


For Tighter Shower Heads and Faucets
SHOWER-FIXTURE woes include dripping, water flowing from the bathtub spout while the shower is operating and uneven or obstructed spraying.
Except when parts are recessed behind tiled walls, most repairs are easy.
Dripping when the shower is off signals a problem in the faucets or faucet, if the shower has just one.
Repairing those is similar to repairing leaky faucets in sinks or lavatories.


U.S. JOB IN SOMALIA IS GROWING IN COST
The United States military operation in Somalia will cost at least $583 million, exceeding original expectations, and the Defense Department proposes to pay for it by canceling planes and research projects that are dear to key Democratic lawmakers, according to internal Pentagon documents.
The latest estimate, which was sent to Congress late Friday by President Bush, assumes that most American forces will withdraw by mid-March, three months after they landed.
The White House originally said the relief effort would last six weeks, and Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said the extra food, fuel and water would add "a few hundred million dollars" in military spending.


6 Somalis Killed as Bandits Clash With G.I.'s
Six Somalis were killed and five were wounded Friday night in an exchange of gunfire between a United States Army convoy and several assailants on a road between the capital and Bale Dogle.
One of the dead and one of the wounded were gunmen and the others were believed to be innocent people caught in crossfire, said Col.
Fred Peck of the Marines, a spokesman for the troops in Somalia.


Florio Gun Ban Is Still in Place
In his State of the State Message, Gov.
Jim Florio served notice that he would continue to fight for the ban on the sale and possession of semiautomatic firearms that he pushed through the New Jersey Legislature in 1990.
The newly elected Republican majority voted to repeal the ban last year, but the Governor vetoed the repeal.


If You're Thinking of Living in: New Rochelle
THE picture window of the Rosens' living room commands a sweeping view of Long Island Sound.
To one side is open water, to the other, the wooded peninsula of Premium Point in Larchmont and its million-dollar homes.
In 1950, Phil Rosen, a builder, and his wife, Rita, bought almost an acre of waterfront property for $7,500.
They built a four-bedroom contemporary with open spaces and large windows that make it seem more a beach house than a primary residence.
The property is said to be worth about $900,000.


Off-Campus Lessons for College Volunteers
MAUREEN SULLIVAN'S volunteer work with Hispanic children in New Haven has taught her lessons about life that she never would have learned in the classroom.
Her friendship with the children began at Quinnipiac College in Hamden, where Ms.
Sullivan and other students held a Halloween party for about 50 children from Latino Youth Development, an organization that provides education and recreation for children from poor families.
After seeing how much attention the youngsters needed, Ms.
Sullivan, a junior who is majoring in psychology, decided she could not simply say goodbye when the party ended.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 27 about the Big Island of Hawaii included conflicting information about the opportunity to see lava flows from the Kilauea crater in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park.
As the initial reference said, visitors may approach and see the flows on foot as well as observe them from aircraft.
Access by foot has been possible since October.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
DISASTER IN JAPAN
An environmental disaster in Minimata, Japan, will be detailed in events taking place over the next several weeks at Trinity College in Hartford
"The Legacy of Minimata," an exhibition of photographs on display Tuesday through Feb. 21 in the Widener Gallery of the Austin Arts Center, documents the toll in death and disease suffered by the city when its waters were poisoned by the Chisso Chemical Company.
The gallery is open daily from 1 to 5 P.M. free of charge.


Captured Mafia Leader's Hometown Rejoices, Then Worries
At first, they said, they could not quite bring themselves to believe it: Salvatore (Toto) Riina, boss of all bosses of the Sicilian Mafia and Corleone's best-known son, had finally been captured.
No one, after all, had expected that the mobster whose Pimpernel image had assumed near-mythic proportions would ever be taken -- certainly not on an island held in fearful thrall by his uncompromising brutality.


Public &amp; Private; Time to Tackle This
Talk to administrators or counselors at shelters for battered women, and sooner or later they will tell you the one about the football game and the beating.
This is not to be confused with the one about the mislaid keys and the beating, or the pink slip and the beating, or the cold hamburger and the beating.
The football game story is omnipresent: the kids make too much noise during a crucial play, or someone steps in front of the screen, or he loses a bet, or he runs out of beer, and "Pow!" One man who works with batterers in Philadelphia says one in four had at least one story in which sports somehow led to domestic violence.


How Johnson Built a Winner From Scratch
JIMMY JOHNSON stood tall before a hungry firing squad and absorbed shot after shot from every angle when he became the Dallas Cowboys' coach in 1989.
Here was the guy with the icky-sticky hair.
Here was the college guy, the guy who would be outcoached and outclassed by his pro peers.
Here was a guy who divorced his wife of 25 years when he arrived in Dallas and seemed to marry the Cowboys instead, letting the job consume him.


Nets and Coleman Win Mad Dash
Quietly, methodically, the Nets are in the middle of another winning streak.
Recently their play has been solid, strong and at times spectacular.
And it is no coincidence that their four-game streak has run parallel to the rise in the game of Derrick Coleman.
For about 30 minutes tonight, the Nets seemingly toyed with the Washington Bullets.
Both teams were trading baskets and the game was close -- for a while.


Hate Was Just an Ember, But Oh, So Easy to Fan
THE tears came suddenly to Dragica, as though all else the old woman had endured, the shelling and the hunger and the cold, were not as hurtful as the hatred of a neighbor.
"He stood there and screamed: 'All you Serbs in Sarajevo will end up getting your throats cut! And when we've done for you, we'll go to Serbia, and cut all their throats, too!' "
The neighbor, a Muslim in his mid-30's, had been friendly for years, inviting the old woman and her husband over for meals on Muslim festive days, accepting their return invitations to Christmas.
But it was summer in Sarajevo, 1992, and Velesici, their neighborhood, was being bombarded hourly by shells fired by Serbian nationalists besieging Sarajevo.
The neighborhood was predominantly Muslim.
Many civilians died.


Sports of The Times; Montana's Stand-In Scenario
AS compelling as Steve Young has been as the 49ers' quarterback, if he were an actor, he would be starring in a motion picture with Jack Nicholson learning his lines as a stand-in.
If he were a singer, Sinatra would be humming in the wings.
If he were a dancer, Gregory Hines would be spinning a new step.
Steve Young is merely pro football's most valuable player, but Joe Montana will be his backup today in the National Conference championship game against the Dallas Cowboys at soggy Candlestick Park.


Mutual Funds; The Economy's $1.6 Trillion Gorilla
Long just a bit player in the world of capital markets, the mutual fund industry now commands the stage with $1.6 trillion in assets under management.
Yet its incredible muscle is still not appreciated by most financial researchers or policy makers.
Mutual funds are still analyzed largely for how they serve the individual investor and too little for how they serve the economy as an important component of growth.


Arizona Hopes Holiday for King Will Mend Its Image
The citizens of Arizona have a perfect retort for the talk show hosts, ghetto rappers and East Coast pundits who have pilloried their state as a racist backwater, one of the last holdouts against a paid holiday honoring the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
On Monday, after years of botched legislation, rescinded gubernatorial decrees and failed ballot measures, Arizona will officially celebrate the King birthday for the first time.
And with chins jutted forward, Arizonans can brag that when they resoundingly voted in November to approve the holiday, they made Arizona the first and only state to honor Dr.
King by popular vote.


Writer Finds Bearings, and Success
SEAN M'GRADY of Northport was a 20-year-old junior at Yale when he wrote his first novel, "Rock Lyric," a coming-of-age story about high school life.
The publisher whom Mr.
McGrady hoped would buy the book called at 7 o'clock one morning and said he wanted to meet at noon at Morey's in New Haven.
Mr.
McGrady put on his blue blazer and university tie and told his college friends that he had been discovered and that his first novel was going to be published.


The Ruth Legacy Still Pays Dividends
MORE than 70 years ago, the Philadelphia master Bill Ruth was considered eccentric, a player who persistently defied mainstream theory.
And Europeans, ignorant of his play, attributed his major contribution to another, Trompowski.
Across the Atlantic, the Ruth Attack is still credited to Trompowski, but now that Ruth has been dead for two decades, the world's top players have come to appreciate the fresh approach to strategy his brainchild encourages.
This can be seen in a game between two grandmasters, Boris Gulko of Fair Lawn, N.J., and Walter Browne of Berkeley, Calif., in Round 5 of the United States championship in Durango, Colo., which ended Dec. 20.


Not Disgruntled
To the Editor:
In "This Inaugural Thing Irks Hollywood" (front page, Jan. 10), I find myself a member of what you characterize as a bunch of disgruntled egomaniacal Hollywood celebrities who are unhappy with their inaugural arrangements.
Let me make some things perfectly clear:


Recent Sales
Hillsdale  $310,000
73 Wermus Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, c/a, porch, family room with fireplace; taxes $6,511.
Howell  $131,600
17 Bernard Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 6-year-old colonial; c/ a, eat-in- kitchen, full basement; taxes $2,338.
Jackson  $155,000
3 Brewers Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-full bath, 18-year-old colonial; fireplace, c/a, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,967.
Mahwah  $290,000
282 Campgaw Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 28-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, fireplace, laundry room, full basement; taxes $4,639.
Oradell  $155,000
89 Beverly Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, over-45-year-old colonial; enclosed porch, 1-car garage, c/a; taxes $2,412.
Park Ridge  $176,000
21 Tuxedo Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 39-year-old colonial; den, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $3,432.
OTHER AREAS Harwinton, Conn.  $170,000
91 Hill Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 39-year-old ranch; scenic views, fireplace in living room, country kitchen, 2 acres; taxes $2,919.
Millwood, N.Y.  $220,000
391 Saw Mill River Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; living room, dining room, eat-in kitchen, front porch, deck, cottage; taxes $5,319.
Lindenhurst, L.I.  $145,000
160 43d Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 100- by 100-foot lot; taxes $4,000.


From Thunderbird to Hawk to Dove
PROMISE AND POWER
The Life and Times of Robert McNamara.
By Deborah Shapley.
Illustrated. 734 pp.
Boston:  Little, Brown &amp; Company. $29.95.


'JFK: Reckless Youth'
To the Editor:
In his review of Nigel Hamilton's "JFK: Reckless Youth" (Nov. 22), Roger Morris observes the "simplistic, breathless" style in which the book is written but then goes on to praise the book as if somehow language and content can be physically separated.
Yet the language Mr.
Hamilton uses to paint a picture of an "abused" childhood from which John F. Kennedy heroically emerges is so disconnected from the evidence he presents that it destroys the credibility of the entire enterprise.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The Corporate Sponsors; Groups Give $17 Million in Loans for Inauguration
Some 200 organizations and individuals have made $17 million in interest-free loans to President-elect Bill Clinton's inaugural events, inaugural officials say.
In addition, corporations have contributed $2.5 million to subsidize events that are free to the public.
They have also donated use of their products, including automobiles, computers, fax and telemarketing machines, delivery services, food and beverages.


Designer Dearest
YOU arrive at the Gene London Studios in lower Manhattan to find Mr.
London fussing over a Marilyn Monroe mannequin in a "Seven Year Itch" dress.
You have heard he does a terrific impression of Joan Crawford giving Marilyn a tour of her clothes closet.
Mountains of shoulder pads and no wire hangers.
Right away, you ask him to do Joan.
"Later," he promises with a wink.
He switches on a floor fan and Marilyn's pleated skirt flies up the way it did when she stood on a subway grate in the 1955 movie.
In the background, you can hear M. M. singing "Diamonds Are a Girl's Best Friend."


Finally, a Bottoming Out?
APARTMENT prices in New York City fell, for the most part, in 1992, but the overall rate of decline appeared to be smaller than in the last two years.
There was a small increase in average prices for large, high-end properties in prime neighborhoods, but a steep drop among studios and one-bedroom co-ops, most condominiums and units in marginal areas.
The easing in the overall rate of decline may indicate, according to many local brokers, that the plunge in prices that began in 1988 may have bottomed out.
To be sure, this isn't the first time that brokers have heralded the end of the city's residential real estate recession.
In the early months of 1991 and 1992, many of them predicted, incorrectly, that prices had reached their nadir and would soon rise.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
MOLASSES FLOOD.
Written and illustrated by Blair Lent.
Houghton Mifflin. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8) Occasionally there is a warm day in Boston in January.
Once upon a time a tank of molasses exploded on such a day, and in this fantasy Charley Owen Muldoon sounds the alarm.
In the aftermath even Charley grows tired of the stuff.


Making a Difference; When Your Warm-Up Act Is Merely David Rockefeller
No one has to tell John E. Avery that he has big shoes to fill.
At the Americas Society, where Mr.
Avery is the new chairman, those shoes belonged to David Rockefeller.
The society is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization that seeks to promote economic, political and cultural cooperation between the United States and Latin America, the Caribbean and Canada.
Mr.
Rockefeller, as founding chairman, presided over the society's rise to prominence in inter-American affairs.
"You can't replace David," said Mr.
Avery, 64, a longtime executive of Johnson &amp; Johnson.
"He's the closest thing we have to royalty."


Susan Golden and Victor Del Rio
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. Golden of Teaneck, N.J., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Susan Golden and Victor Del Rio, a son of Adeline Del Rio of Brooklyn and the late Jose Del Rio.
Miss Golden is a reading specialist and the assistant to the head of the lower school at the Allen-Stevenson School in New York.
She graduated from Villanova University and received a master's degree in education from Fordham University.


Banking's New Bosses in Congress
WHEN Senator Carol Moseley Braun, newly elected to represent Illinois in Washington, received her committee assignments, most of the attention focused on the seat she won on the high-profile Judiciary Committee.
After all, the meteoric rise of this African-American woman from obscurity reflected dissatisfaction over the committee's famed hearings into the confirmation of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court.
But to her, that assignment is second to the seat she had most avidly sought: one on the Banking Committee, where her presence is just one sign of sweeping change to come in how the new Congress is likely to look at the financial services industries.


Driving Is Safer Than Ever, Since Sobriety Sank In
FEWER people died in motor vehicle accidents last year than in any year since 1962, continuing a long-term trend in highway safety.
Auto safety specialists insist that even more lives could be saved if more drivers used their seat belts and fewer of them mixed drinking and driving.
Factors contributing to the downward trend include improvements in motor vehicles and in driving habits and greater public responsibility for highway safety, prompted by stronger laws and by increased awareness.
The sluggish economy last year also helped reduce accidents by curtailing driving strictly for pleasure.


Not Really Strait-Laced
NAME: Pearl.
IDENTITY: South African-born corset maker and costume designer.


But . . . Bedtime Is Never an Absolute
To the Editor:
Not so fast.
There's got to be more to the story on Sally Narodnick of the Edmark Corporation ("Getting Them Young, Keeping Them Engaged," Sound Bytes, Dec. 27).
I was following her typical workday: "I usually have my first meeting at 7 or 7:30 A.M." . . .
"I have dinner with my kids and put them to bed, then I work a couple more hours." Thousands of people, myself included, said to themselves as they read that, "Wow, I could be so productive if I had a schedule like that."


Elizabeth Sigety, Gerald P. Marcus
Elizabeth Snell Sigety, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Sigety of Pipersville, Pa., was married yesterday to Gerald P. Marcus, a son of Elaine Marcus of Wayne, N.J., and the late Richard P. Marcus.
The Rev.
Leslie Merlin, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Brick Church in New York.
Mrs.
Marcus is the vice president of marketing for Navigator Realty, a management and development company in New York.
She graduated from Tulane University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is the chairman of the board of Professional Medical Products Inc., a manufacturing company in Greenwood, S.C.
Her mother, Katharine Sigety, who is retired, was a food editor at WOR-TV in New York and for the "Today" show on NBC.


The Executive Computer; New Apple Printers Are Not for the Timid Buyer
Apple Computer Inc. earlier this month introduced its first color printer, an inkjet, and its first high-resolution laser printers -- and broke some ground on the price front as well.
Several companies have already introduced color printers using the same engine Apple is using, and several others have laser printers capable of printing 600 dots per inch, compared with the 300 d.p.i. of the first-generation lasers.
Nonetheless, the Apple printers are significant because they mark a push into potentially lucrative areas where Apple has lagged -- color printing and corporate networks -- and, in the case of the lasers, they bring Apple into line on the price front, where others have tended to lead the way down.


Turgeon and a Rookie Throw Devils Off
Darius Kasparaitis, the 20-year-old rookie defenseman of the Islanders, had the Devils looking for him virtually every time he was on the ice tonight after his hard checks caused some physical and psychological bruises.
Pierre Turgeon took advantage of the Devils' preoccupation with the defenseman by getting a hat trick that led the Islanders to a 5-3 triumph.


The Durability of Doo-Wop
In a country whose new President imitates Elvis, it may well be time to pay homage to doo-wop.
After all, Elvis and doo-wop started out at the same time to a like mixture of teen idolatry and adult approbation.
Doo-wop's most resonant star, Frankie Lymon of the Bronx, sang with the passion of his tenement streets as much as Elvis embodied Memphis.
And Lymon led a life even more drug-filled and tormented than the King and, not incidentally, died every bit as prematurely.
But Elvis achieved sainthood, while Frankie Lymon's grave remained unmarked for years.
Big surprise.


Making a Difference; A Bank That's Committed To South-Central L.A.
While the inner city still smoldered after April's riots, Carlton Jenkins organized luxury bus tours past burned-out businesses for some top executives.
The "tours" were a new twist in an old campaign by Mr.
Jenkins, managing director of Founders National Bank, California's only black-owned bank.
Long before the violence he pressed for greater economic development in the South-Central section, hardest hit by arson and looting.
Now conscience-stricken white executives have joined his cause.


Ms. Brookman, Howard Kadish
Heather Beth Brookman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael D. Brookman of Southampton, L.I., was married last evening to Howard Albert Kadish, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Kadish of Aventura, Fla.
Rabbi Joel Goor officiated at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Mrs.
Kadish, 20, is a junior at New York University.
Her father is the president of the New York law firm of Brookman &amp; Brookman.


Vandy Joins the Opry as Nashville S.R.O.
The lines at the ticket counter had been consistently long and steady enough for Lucy Jones, the ticket manager at Vanderbilt University, to wonder if the people had been coming by the busload.
Normally at this time of year, the few remaining tickets for the men's basketball games at 15,317-seat Memorial Gymnasium would go until they quietly disappeared, and everyone in the office would return to a normal existence.
But not Friday.
Extra help had been added.
Lunches rested on tables.
New customers were buying tickets to see the undefeated women, the first No. 1-ranked team in the history of the school, at a pace that exceeded the most optimistic hopes of promoters.
The game against No. 2 Tennessee was 15 days away when Lucy Jones realized the unthinkable.


M. David Sherrill and Mary Hoyt
Mary Alice Hoyt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur F. Hoyt of Rockville Centre, L.I., was married Friday to M. David Sherrill, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
D.
David Sherrill of New York.
The Rev.
Kenneth O. Jones performed the ceremony at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Sherrill, 30, is a sales representative with Project Solvers Inc., fashion industry consultants in New York.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father, now retired, was a consultant to the hotel industry in New York.
Her mother, Margaret O. Hoyt, is a broker with Martell Realtors in Rockville Centre.


So Much for Savings, Congress Says
Three Congressmen from upstate New York, each of them seasoned and schooled on the twists of Washington bureaucracy, got a frustrating lesson last week on just how much there still is to learn.
It began when the trio -- Amo Houghton of Corning, Bill Paxon of Amherst and James T. Walsh of Syracuse -- decided to share the cost of a centralized district office in the town of Auburn, about 30 miles west of Syracuse.
It was intended not only as a symbolic gesture in a time of increased public outcry over government spending, but as a practical solution for serving the 31,000 residents of a town which is split among the three Republicans' districts.


Flyers and Oilers Swap
The Philadelphia Flyers acquired right wing JOSEF BERANEK and defenseman-left wing GREG HAWGOOD from the Edmonton Oilers yesterday for defenseman BRIAN BENNING.


New &amp; Noteworthy
JEFFERSON DAVIS: The Man and His Hour, by William C. Davis. (Harper Perennial, $18.) Jefferson Davis emerges here as an insecure and indecisive man, yet still capable enough to have staved off Southern defeat in the Civil War for four bloody years.
"It is much more than a chronicle of the life of the Confederate President," David Herbert Donald said here last year.
"It is, in addition, a carefully thought out and persuasively argued psychological interpretation of that life."
COMPLETE COLLECTED STORIES, by V. S. Pritchett. (Vintage International, $20.) In his long, prodigious career -- he is now 92 years old -- Sir Victor Pritchett has become an acknowledged master of writing, particularly of short fiction.
This collection, which contains 82 of his stories, illustrates both his talent for metaphor and his genius at transforming ordinary people into characters of mythic stature.
In 1991 our reviewer, Frank Kermode, praised these tales for providing, "in addition to their intrinsic beauty, a series of rich allusions to the condition of England from the 30's to the 90's. . . . If it is true that England had to grow disorderly before it could have a great story writer, this volume suggests the sacrifice may have been worth it."


Update; Neighbors' Bid to Improve Hotel Survives a Challenge
In a case that could determine the fate of a once-grand Brooklyn hotel now used to house AIDS patients, a judge has ruled that a neighborhood group did not violate the hotel owners' rights by pressing for upgraded conditions at the hotel.
Justice Constance Baker Motley, in a ruling on Jan. 8, dismissed a multimillion-dollar lawsuit brought by the Hotel St.
George Associates against four members of the Brooklyn Heights Association, saying there was no basis for it.


Sears Outlet Unit To Cramer-Krasselt
Sears has added another agency to its roster, naming Cramer-Krasselt in Chicago to handle its Sears Catalog Outlet Stores account, previously handled in-house.
Billings were estimated at $5 million to $6 million.
Cramer-Krasselt was awarded the advertising, direct marketing and public relations account after a review that included three other Chicago-based agencies: CME KHBB Advertising, Grant/Jacoby Inc. and Ketchum Advertising.
Dan Brashears, a senior vice president at Cramer-Krasselt, said the agency's only previous relationship with Sears was a direct-marketing project to introduce the Discover card.


Enjoying the Good Things Winter Has to Offer


Israeli High Court Opens Hearing On Legality of Arabs' Deportation
Israel's deportation crisis entered a new phase today as the Israeli Supreme Court began a hearing into the legality of the expulsion last month of more than 400 Palestinians from the occupied territories to Lebanon.
Many Israelis, both in and out of the Government, say they are looking to the High Court of Justice as a possible "back door" through which they might be able to exit from a political and legal predicament that has brought Israel worldwide condemnation and warnings of possible United Nations sanctions.


Jane Oberwager, David Gaines
Dr.
Jane Gayle Oberwager, a clinical psychologist at the New York Mental Health Services clinic in Bay Shore, L.I., was married yesterday to David Alan Gaines, the director of bands at Massapequa (L.I.) High School.
Rabbi Robert Raab performed the ceremony at the Suburban Temple in Wantagh, L.I.
The bride, 30, graduated from Emory University and received her doctorate in psychology from the Florida Institute of Technology.
She is a daughter of Alan and Maxine Oberwager of Westbury, L.I.
The bride's father teaches the sixth grade at Copiague (L.I.) Junior High School.
Her mother is a kindergarten teacher at the Old Westbury (L.I.) Hebrew Congregation.


Three Killed In Two Fires In Queens
Three people were killed in separate two-alarm fires in Queens early yesterday, fire officials said.
The second fire was declared suspicious.
In the first fire, Irene Monette and her nephew, Paul, were trapped shortly before 3 A.M. in their first-floor apartment in a two-story wood-frame house at 126 Noel Road in Broad Channel.
The fire was not brought under control until 4:27 A.M., said Capt.
Brian Dixon, a Fire Department spokesman.


Dance in Review
Stanley Love Performance Group  Cunningham Dance Studio


Patents
AFTER spending a decade trying to turn garbage into energy economically -- but mainly burning money in the effort -- the founders of Waste Conversion Systems Inc. think they've finally got it right.
Waste Conversion, which is based in Englewood, Colo., last week patented a "biomass burner," which company officials say efficiently ignites anything from newspaper to old tires and can be used as an alternative fuel source for conventional oil and gas boilers.


Disputes on U.S. Trade Grow in Japan
Government officials here are speaking openly about taking a harder line against American trade demands even as Japan's most famous business figure, Akio Morita, the co-founder of the Sony Corporation, has been warning that Tokyo is "inviting its own economic decline" by resisting further openings in the economy.
The arguments mirror a rift here between those who view the beginning of the Clinton Administration as a time for Japan to dig in its heels, and those who fear Japan is losing an opportunity to defuse trade tensions with the United States.
At its core, it is an argument over which country will change its own economy to look more like the other's.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  U.S. FIRES MISSILES NEAR BAGHDAD
U.S.
Navy ships launched about 40 cruise missiles at an Iraqi industrial complex near Baghdad.
U.S. officials said strike was in response to Iraq's restrictions on U.N. weapons inspectors and its challenge the no-flight zones imposed by the U.S. and its allies.
A1  WHAT HUSSEIN MAY BE SEEKING
News Analysis: Saddam Hussein seems intent on weakening the U.S.-led coalition by showing that it is not likely to go to war again and that his defiance may break the sanctions that have hurt Iraq's economy.
A1


The Inauguration; An Inaugural Guide
Today 8 A.M.
Private reception for the diplomatic corps at Georgetown University. 10 A.M. - 4 P.M.
"America's Reunion on the Mall" continues.


Review/Music; Singing Stories, in 2 Tones at Once
The "throat singers" of Tuva, who appeared on Friday night at Washington Square Church, demonstrated vocal techniques that differ radically from European norms, and they encouraged new views of singing's possibilities.
Also known as overtone or harmonic singing, throat singing allows a performer to produce two or three notes at once through careful positioning of the lips, tongue, jaw, velum and larynx.
The singer produces a basic note as well as its harmonics, which have a flute- or whistle-like tone.
Tuva, a former Soviet autonomous oblast bordered by Russia and Mongolia, is one of the few places where overtone singing is practiced.
Other throat singers, such as the Gyoto Tantric Choir and new-age innovator David Hykes, place the technique in a spiritual context, emphasizing the discipline it requires and its meditative qualities.
The singers from Tuva showed another way it can signify: as a means of storytelling and of comprehending the natural world through art, which are classic motivations for folk music.


From I-XV to XXVII, and Does It Feels Good
A football generation ago, when the Dallas Cowboys were America's Team, they treated victories in big games as if they were a birthright.
Today, when the new Cowboys took another step toward becoming the best team in pro football, they seemed to enjoy every moment.
As the final seconds ticked off in their 30-20 victory over the 49ers, sending them into the Super Bowl two weeks from today, Super Bowl caps miraculously appeared on the sideline and found their way onto Cowboy heads.
In their locker room, so jammed with news media people that players had to beg their way to get through the mob to the showers, the young winners were boisterous.


The Longest Ride: Serbs Hinder Aid
Until Serbian nationalist forces began a campaign of killing and terror in Muslim areas across eastern Bosnia last spring, the mainly Muslim town of Zepa was about a 90-minute drive from the capital, on a sinuous route through the alpine uplands.
For a United Nations relief convoy that set out for Zepa on Friday with 76 tons of food and medicines, the journey took three days, ending at dusk today when the convoy cleared a final minefield and drove into the town.


Old Mill Pioneers Workers' Education
For 100 years, ever since Robert K. Fowler's great-great-uncle built a sprawling red brick paper mill here, the paper was colored in the same time-honored way.
Machines fed rolls of white paper under flint stones taken from the nearby Connecticut River and slowly buffed color onto the paper.
All the workers had to know, recalled Mr.
Fowler, now the president of Hampden Papers, was to punch the green button on the machine in the morning to start it and the red button in the evening to stop it.
They did not have to know how to read or write.


Correction
A picture yesterday with an obituary of the actor Michael Aldridge was published in error.
It actually showed Robin Bailey, who appeared with mr.
Aldridge in a 1986 PBS "Mystery" series.
Mr.
Aldridge is shows above.


Corrections
A brief report in Business Day on Wednesday about a $150 million note offering misidentified the issuer and omitted the underwriter.
Salomon Inc. is the issuer and Salomon Brothers is the underwriter.


THE EARTHQUAKE REPORT
The Damage . . . A16
LOCATIONS AND LOSSES -- An earthquake that measured 6.6 on the Richter scale struck at 4:31 A.M. yesterday about 20 miles northwest of downtown Los Angeles.
It was felt from San Diego, 125 miles to the south, to Las Vegas, Nev., 275 miles to the northeast.
Water and natural gas lines were ruptured, sending torrents rushing water through streets and fireballs billowing into the predawn sky.
Dozens of homes and other buildings collapsed.


Corrections
The Sports of The Times column on Friday, about the possible abuse of human growth hormone by athletes, incompletely quoted Dr.
Gary Wadler's description of the substance, also known as HGH.
The passage should have read:
"There are children who are treated with HGH for medical reasons. There are adults who produce excess amounts of HGH as a result of having tumors of their pituitary gland. These individuals develop a disease called acromegaly. They start to notice their shoes don't fit them. Their rings are too tight. Their wives say their faces don't look the same. If it makes muscles bigger, it is not going to be selective. There is no reason to think all the effects are going to be positive."


Sports of The Times; The Goat Who Butted 49ers Out of Playoffs
WITH the Cowboys leading, 24-13, early in the final quarter, fourth down and 1 at the 49ers' 7-yard line, Jimmy Johnson was on the phone with his offensive coordinator, Norv Turner.
"We got to get a first down," Johnson barked.


CHRONICLE
Does Washington have a monopoly on parties this week?
Not according to organizers of tonight's Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. awards dinner and reception given by the Congress of Racial Equality at the Sheraton Centre in New York City.
More than 2,000 people, including dozens of names from Hollywood, Broadway and the United Nations have bought tickets to the $1,000-a-plate affair that commemorates the civil-rights leader's birthday and the 50th anniversary of CORE.
"We're probably having one of the largest dinners in the country for the Martin Luther King Jr. holiday," said GEORGE HOLMES, executive director of CORE.
"We attribute that to the kind of event we have. We've invited everybody, Republicans, Democrats, conservatives, liberals, blacks, whites, Asians, old and young. That is what the King spirit was about."


Review/Music; Seriously Comic, 'Die Zauberflote' Returns to the Met
One would expect Mozart's "Zauberflote," by its nature, to allow directors a relatively free hand.
Its Egyptian setting, after all, is a fanciful affectation: apart from the pyramids, which do double duty as Egyptian and Masonic symbols, the work's connections with Egypt are tenuous.
The Masonic ritual toward which the tale so elegantly leads is, mythical Egyptophilia notwithstanding, entirely Northern European.
And its characters seem almost Alpine.
Papageno, for one, may have a connection with the bird-men of Egyptian hieroglyphics, but surely those fierce-looking figures are not meant to be Papageno-like dunces.
Indeed, the work's blend of low comedy and high seriousness argues that the setting is the least of the work's concerns.
But for all the leeway this opera offers, directors who update it, transport it or otherwise depart from the traditional staging are few.
The production that returned to the Metropolitan Opera on Saturday evening is not among the renegades.
Based on a John Cox staging that was originally mounted at Glyndebourne 15 years ago, this "Zauberflote" was restaged at the Met by Guus Mostart in 1991, and is now directed by David Kneuss.


Ms. Greenberg, Jay Ira Sabin
Wendy Beth Greenberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl Greenberg of New Vernon, N.J., was married yesterday to Jay Ira Sabin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Sabin of River Vale, N.J.
Rabbi Andre Ungar performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in Westfield, N.J.
Ms.
Greenberg, 27, is a social worker for District Council 37 of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
Her father is a senior partner in Budd Larner Gross Rosenbaum Greenberg &amp; Sade, a law firm in Short Hills, N.J.
Her mother, Barbara Greenberg, is a kindergarten teacher at the Clinton School in Maplewood, N.J.


Advertising
IT'S beginning to sound like a broken record, but here it is again: For the 13th time in less than two years the relationship between an auto maker and its agency has been disrupted.
This time, it was Porsche Cars North America Inc. and Fallon McElligott unexpectedly disclosing on Friday that their five-year relationship would end after an unspecified transition period.
Billings, once as high as $15 million to $20 million, were believed to have fallen recently to $3 million to $5 million.


Rangers' Strategy Isn't Hard To Figure
The Canadiens are not the greatest defensive hockey team, but on Saturday night in Montreal they knew exactly what to do to beat the Rangers.
Clog up the lane.
Smother the neutral zone.
Give up any thought of breakaways or three-on-one rushes to the net; force the Rangers to do the same.


The Day's Weapon of Choice, the Cruise Missile, Is Valued for Its Accuracy
The military relied on unmanned Tomahawk cruise missiles in today's attack on Iraq because of the missile's accuracy and to avoid sending piloted aircraft near heavily defended Baghdad.
About 40 cruise missiles, carrying 984-pound explosive warheads, were fired at what United States officials said was the Zaafaraniya nuclear fabrication plant from four ships in the northern Persian Gulf and Red Sea, Pentagon officials said.
Senior Defense Department officials said they would have to wait for reconnaissance reports overnight before judging the mission's success.


Nicholls Is Anxious to Make Contribution
Bernie Nicholls was apparently just as anxious to get onto the ice for his first shift with the Devils as he was to get out of Edmonton, Alberta, where he got two, repeat two, speeding tickets on his way to the airport en route to New Jersey last Thursday.
For his first shift with the Devils, at Byrne Arena Saturday night against the Islanders, Nicholls jumped off the bench with so much speed that he was lucky the officials didn't issue him a two-minute penalty.
Realizing he was off the bench too early, Nicholls, acquired Wednesday night from the Oilers for Kevin Todd and Zdeno Ciger, jumped back in quickly enough to avoid a minor for too many men on the ice.


Formulas Aren't Holding in Big East
The basketball teams of the Big East conference do not need to be reminded that this season holds more imperfections than the league has known in the past.
What they need to do to survive is learn how to cope.
As the league race begins to take shape, an ability to conceal or correct problem areas will determine which teams can rise from a crowded pack.


Faltering Companies Seek Outsiders
When John F. Akers announced last month that the International Business Machines Corporation would cut 25,000 more jobs in 1993, he acknowledged what management experts say is the biggest conundrum for reviving any stumbling giant: speeding its response to changing markets and technology.
But there is an emerging view among business scholars and management consultants suggesting that loyal "company men" like Mr.
Akers, I.B.M.'s chairman and chief executive since 1986 and a 33-year I.B.M. employee, are ill-equipped to lead faltering corporations through painful recoveries.


Charging Bias, Blacks File Suit Against Agency
Fifteen black agents of the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms have accused the agency of discrimination in hiring and promotions in the last decade, saying it also punished agents who complained about racism.
In a lawsuit filed in Federal court on Friday on behalf of the bureau's 180 black agents, the 15 described an atmosphere of racial harassment and retaliation for the last 10 years that they said prevented most black agents from reaching senior positions.


New Standard for Drug Makers: Proving the Cure Is Worth the Cost
Later this month, the Synergen Corporation will complete clinical trials of a new biotechnology drug for treating sepsis, a deadly bacterial infection.
With the spotlight on health-care costs, Synergen intends to show that its new molecule not only saves lives but also saves money over other sepsis treatments.
Drugs have long been held to just two standards -- safety and efficacy.
But huge customers like insurance companies and health maintenance organizations are beginning to insist on a third: cost-effectiveness -- that is, whether one drug more than another can reduce hospital stays, say, or employee absenteeism.
Standard Gains Support
The criterion is gaining sway with Government regulators and may be embraced by the Clinton Administration, which has vowed to make drug-price containment a cornerstone of its plan to cut the nation's health-care bill.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A new criterion is emerging for drug approval.
Under increasing pressure from insurers and H.M.O.'s, drug makers are being asked to show regulators that their new products are cost effective.
Perhaps the most conspicuous targets are the wonder drugs of biotechnology companies like Synergen, many of which can cost patients as much as $30,000 a year.  [ Page A1. ]
Bill Clinton's advisers are recommending an $850 million investment in community development banks that would help distressed neighborhoods.  [ D1. ]


Much Study Went Into New York City's Rainbow Curriculum
To the Editor:
I was pleased by "Schools Across U.S. Cautiously Adding Lessons on Gay Life" (Education page, Jan. 6), on the efforts of other school districts to promote tolerance of diverse family structures.
However, I would like to clarify some of points about New York City's Children of the Rainbow, Grade One teachers' guide.


Easing Plight of Others To Honor Anniversaries
Tired of browsing through that umpteenth department store in search of the perfect gift for a wedding anniversary?
Ready to surrender to the time-worn ritual of buying roses and champagne for a loved one?
A simple alternative is helping another family stay together.
That is what dozens of contributors to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund have done.
Many of these spouses, children, parents and friends asked that their donations in honor of wedding anniversaries be used for programs that strengthen marriages and families, like counseling and low-income housing for the homeless.


Market Place
THE Equitable Companies, the grand old mutual insurer that went public in July, has turned into a success story, at least in the short term, for managers who are attempting to transform a company that was battered when the junk-bond and real estate markets of the 1980's collapsed.
The stock has risen 65 percent from its initial price, from $9.125 on July 16 to $15.125 on Friday.
And some analysts are now effusive with praise for the man who masterminded Equitable's switch to a stock base: Richard H. Jenrette, the chairman and chief executive.


Martin Luther King Day
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Most closed.
PARKING Alternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION Regular pickups and recycling; street cleaning suspended.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Open.
TRANSPORTATION Subways, buses, Metro-North and Long Island Rail Road on regular weekday schedules.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Most closed.
SCHOOLS Most closed.
TRANSPORTATION N.J.
Transit trains on regular weekday schedules; buses' schedules vary.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on regular weekday schedules.


Topics of The Times; Shackle the Sick?
The news that Jean Harris is back in the hospital raises a troubling issue for New York prison officials.
Ms.
Harris, who was convicted in 1981 of killing the diet doctor Herman Tarnower, is being treated for a blood clot in the leg from which a vein was taken for use in quadruple bypass surgery she underwent on Dec. 29 -- the same day she learned Gov.
Mario Cuomo had granted her clemency.
Her attorney, Michael Kennedy, says doctors have told him the clot may have been caused by leg shackles she wore on her return to the Bedford Hills Correctional Facility after the surgery.


Abroad at Home; Clinton's Nightmare
Bill Clinton wanted, and promised, to be a domestic President.
But he is going to take office facing the worst foreign-policy nightmares of any incoming President since the time of Vietnam.
Serbia's savage aggression continues in Bosnia even as its leaders say they are ready for peace.
The siege of Sarajevo goes on, as do attacks elsewhere.
Instability threatens the whole Balkan region.


No Headline
"If Thomas Jefferson was alive today, I would appoint him Secretary of State, and then suggest to Senator Gore that we both resign so he could become President. " -- PRESIDENT-ELECT CLINTON, asked if Jefferson would merit a job in his administration.  [ A12:2. ]


Reaching Teen-Agers, Without Using a Phone
They sign letters to their favorite magazines with names like Utterly Alone and Majorly Bummed.
They are overwhelmed by their moods, which range from Totally Psyched to Totally Embarrassed.
And here's something they would surely describe as Totally Cool: They have sparked one of the most ferocious competitions in the magazine industry.


Inaugural Addresses: Urban Hopes for a Change
URBAN and city are two words that have not been spoken in a Presidential inaugural address for at least a quarter-century, but Mayor Patrick Pasculli of Hoboken figures that this year may be different.
"We spoke briefly when he was here last May," the Mayor said of President-elect Bill Clinton.
"He was visiting a vacant school building that we converted into a day-care program that serves several hundred children and includes space for private schools, too.


Unlike 49ers, Field Held Up
Despite intermittent rain during today's National Conference championship game, the mostly resodded Candlestick Park field never dissolved into the muddy swamp that the Cowboys and 49ers had feared.
"The field was certainly better than last week," 49er Coach George Seifert said, alluding to the 49ers' 20-13 victory over the Redskins.
"The grounds crew did a wonderful job. We can't use the field or the weather as an excuse."


Ups and Downs of Strike the Gold
Nick Zito calls it "just another saga in the story of Strike the Gold," and he should know.
He has been the trainer and chief saga-spinner for the horse since Strike the Gold won the Kentucky Derby two years ago and then lost 12 races before staging a strong comeback last year.
The latest turn in the story of Strike the Gold came after he finished eighth in the Breeders' Cup Classic last Oct. 31 and later came down with a severe case of anemia that mystified his veterinarians.
But after a month and a half of treatment at a clinic in Lexington, Ky., they found that the colt's system was once more producing red blood cells and he returned last week to his winter quarters at the Jonabell Farm.


Results plus
N.B.A.
Drexler Leads Blazers Clyde Drexler scored 24 points, his best outing since returning from the injured list, as Portland won at home against Seattle, 109-97, last night.
Six technical fouls were called in the rough game, four on the Sonics and two on Portland's Jerome Kersey, who was ejected with 8 minutes 57 seconds remaining after tangling with Shawn Kemp on a jump ball.
Kersey was tossed out with Portland leading by 80-77, but the Blazers scored the next 6 points to lead, 86-77, with 7:16 left.
Ricky Pierce and Derrick McKey had 20 points each for Seattle, but Pierce didn't score in the fourth quarter and McKey fouled out with 4:25 to play.
This was Drexler's fourth game since coming off the injured list, where was placed to rest his sore right knee. (AP) GOLF Twitty Ends Drought Howard Twitty won the Hawaiian Open by four strokes yesterday in Honolulu, his first victory in 12 years 7 months.
It was Twitty's his first triumph since the Greater Hartford Open of 1980, the longest time between titles in PGA Tour history.
The previous record of 12 years was set by Leonard Thompson, who won the 1989 Buick Open.
Twitty, who led all the way in this event, closed with a four-under 68 and a 269 total, 19 under par on the revamped Waialae Country Club course.
Joey Sindelar, who holed a 155-yard, 8-iron shot for an eagle-2 on the sixth hole, finished second with a closing 68 and a 273 total.
Paul Azinger, after moving to within one stroke of the lead, fell back in the stretch run, shot 70 and was third at 274. (AP) SKIING Schneider Wins Slalom Vreni Schneider of Switzerland, using a leather support to overcome back pains, beat the New Zealander Annelise Coberger by 1.13 seconds yesterday in a World Cup slalom in Cortina d'Ampezzo, Italy.
Schneider's victory, her second of the season, was the 42d World Cup triumph of her career.
The 28-year-old Schneider dominated the first run and fought off a strong comeback by Coberger in the second.
The winning aggregate time was 1 minute 32.39 seconds.  (AP) The Points Game: Tomas Fogdoe of Sweden earned his third World Cup slalom victory of the season, edging Jure Kosir of Slovenia to win in Lech, Austria.
Marc Girardelli finished 12th and won the combination, a paper race that combined the results of the slalom with those of Saturday's downhill at nearby St.
Anton.
He was sixth there. (AP)


Wannstedt Future Is on Hold
Had the Dallas Cowboys lost to the 49ers today, the Giants might have hired Dave Wannstedt in the next day or two as their head coach.
But because the Cowboys won and will play in Super Bowl XXVII two weeks from today, the future of the Cowboys' defensive coordinator is on hold.
The 40-year-old Wannstedt clearly seems to be the one General Manager George Young of the Giants now wants to succeed Ray Handley, who was dismissed almost three weeks ago.
But the Giants are not alone.
Mike McCaskey, the owner of the Chicago Bears, and John Beak, the general manager of the Denver Broncos, have also received permission from the Cowboys to talk to Wannstedt about their head-coaching vacancies.


Corrections
An article on Friday about a dispute between the Newspaper Guild of New York and the publisher of The Daily News, Mortimer B. Zuckerman, misstated the number of black women rehired as reporters by Mr.
Zuckerman.
Four of the paper's six black female reporters were offered new jobs.


India's Premier Installs 12 Cabinet Ministers
Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao, responding to criticism that he has been indecisive in handling Hindu-Muslim riots in the last month, recalled several political veterans to his Cabinet today.
After a ceremony to install 12 new ministers, Mr.
Rao told reporters that he had accepted the resignations of 14 others, but he did not identify them.
Nor did he announce the portfolios for the new team.


Review/Theater; Brecht as Groucho; The Artist as Candide
In "Tales From Hollywood," Christopher Hampton dramatizes the life in exile of European emigres who found sanctuary along with artistic barrenness as screenwriters in the 1940's.
To tell the story of Thomas Mann, Heinrich Mann, Bertolt Brecht and others, the playwright chooses as his surrogate Odon von Horvath.
For the purposes of his play, he imagines that von Horvath did not die in a freak accident in Paris in 1938 but went on a "Candide"-like journey to Hollywood.
This is certainly a rich subject for exploration, especially when one considers Mr.
Hampton's own cultural background and the great theatricality of his other work ("Les Liaisons Dangereuses," "The Philanthropist").
"Tales From Hollywood" has some pithy comments to make about the price of compromise and the misuse of artists in the movies, but it remains a melange, an unsettled combination of fantasy, satiric comedy and domestic tragedy.


Corrections
An entry in the Market Indicators tables in Business Day on Friday misstated the volume on Thursday in the New York Stock Exchange's basket session, in which large groups of shares are traded after regular trading ends for the day.
It was 24,398,600 shares.


Bernard King Continues to March To the Beat of His Own Basketball
On New Year's Day, Tom Gugliotta shook the hand of his basketball hero.
It occurred to him that Bernard King was the epitome of a distinguished gentleman.
"He gave me a big smile, introduced himself and said, 'I'm looking forward to playing with you,' " said Gugliotta, the Washington Bullets' rookie forward who has drawn comparisions, however overstated, to a young Larry Bird.


Northern Ireland Talks Are Expected in Dublin
The new Irish Foreign Minister, Dick Spring, is expected to discuss the civil strife in Northern Ireland in a meeting in Dublin this week with the British Secretary for Northern Ireland, Sir Patrick Mayhew.
Sir Patrick called for new talks on the north last week after Mr.
Spring became Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister in a coalition Government headed by Prime Minister Albert Reynolds.
Mr.
Spring's Labor Party provided the parliamentary seats necessary for Mr.
Reynolds to continue to lead the country, although his Fianna Fail party lost seats in the Nov. 25 election.


THE INAUGURATION: Inaugural Notebook; Many Drummers in History's March
The rectangular greensward of the Mall disappeared today under the boots and sneakers of 400,000 people, a merry mob that danced and trudged its way through a festival that was part Woodstock, part county fair, all mud and all gridlock.
Instead of the august classical columns of the Smithsonian museums, all that was visible from within the crowd were crenulated tent tops and a river of heads, backs and shoulders.
The human flood sometimes dammed up and became impassable near the tents humming with the music of Broadway stars or Texas guitars.


Abacus Gives Young Asians a Math Edge
To the Editor:
A study once again reports that American students trail Japanese and Taiwanese students in math scores (news article, Jan. 1).


A Company Flourishes in the Bronx
Zero International Inc. makes a decidedly humble first impression.
It occupies a windowless brick building in the South Bronx with the word "Zero" scrawled in yellow paint on each side.
Not that Zero, which is at 415 Concord Avenue, ever had lofty pretensions.
It was born in 1924 when two Hungarian immigrants chose the name for their stab at the American Dream.
They chose it because they had no money, no English and no business knowledge.


Transit Police Reorganize Management
Buffeted by persistent charges of racial friction, inadequate training and misconduct by some of its top officials, the Transit Authority police announced a major management reorganization yesterday, simplifying its command structure and reshuffling critical personnel under Transit Police Chief Michael F. O'Connor.
Under the reorganization, an official recently accused of sexual harassment was relieved as the commander of the department's inspectional services and internal affairs investigations.
But the department's top black official, who had been reprimanded recently for showing x-rated movies to visiting Russian officials in 1991, was given command of all patrol and detective services.


The Talk of Paris; French Strike a Linguistic Blow In Their Film Industry's Oscars
French intellectuals have always loved a good fight.
But the latest Parisian cultural brouhaha spoke to something beyond ideas -- to money -- and exposed once again France's fears of being culturally overwhelmed by that internationalist upstart and ogre, the United States.
The crisis, which broke out on Monday and was at least superficially resolved on Thursday, arose almost surreptitiously.
On Dec. 17 the French Academy of Cinematic Arts and Technology, which administers the Cesars, or French Oscar equivalents, decided to ban films not in French.


As a Crowd Gapes, Police Dig Up Cell That Held Girl
Hundreds of curious spectators gathered on Saxon Avenue here today as the Suffolk County police used a backhoe to begin digging up the underground bunker where Katie Beers was held captive for 16 days.
The man who has been charged with kidnapping the 10-year-old girl, John Esposito, remained under a 24-hour suicide watch at the county jail in Riverhead, where he received a visit from his lawyer, Andrew Siben.


Dance in Review
Anne Hammel and Dancers Dia Center for the Arts


Executive Changes At Leo Burnett
The Leo Burnett Company in Chicago has disclosed changes involving two top executives.
Henry J. Feeley, 52, vice chairman and corporate director of client services, will retire in the spring.
Mr.
Feeley, who joined Burnett in 1965, was chairman of Leo Burnett International until taking his current position on Jan. 1, 1992.
He assumed the client-service duties previously handled by Hall Adams Jr., who retired as Burnett's chairman and chief executive.


India's Business Devastated
The communal violence that has spread across this city, India's commercial and banking center, has paralyzed manufacturing, trading and exports, causing hundreds of millions of dollars in losses, business leaders say.
"We have estimated that a single day's loss of production in Bombay has caused a loss of 1.5 billion rupees" -- about $50 million -- "and we have been closed for nearly 10 days," said Shekhar Bajaj, president of the Indian Merchants' Chamber, the most influential organization of industrialists in the prosperous industrial belt of western India.


Economic Memo; Clinton Goes Head to Head With the Fed
Presidents have often put pressure on the Federal Reserve to keep interest rates down, but President-elect Bill Clinton seems to have gone them one better: his lieutenants are jawboning the Fed even before he takes office.
And the Fed is jawboning right back.


U.S. IS BROADENING ENFORCEMENT ROLE
By firing cruise missiles at an Iraqi factory today, the United States in effect took over enforcing the weapons restrictions that the Security Council imposed on Iraq as part of the cease-fire that ended the Persian Gulf war.
Under Resolution 687, which brought the gulf war to a close, the Security Council assigned a special commission to finding and destroying Iraq's nuclear, chemical and bacteriological weapons and its long-range missiles.
The commission was given the task of monitoring the country's industry to insure that Iraq never tries to make such weapons again.


Essay; Stumbling Into the Oval Office
One week before taking power, Bill Clinton made his first foreign-policy blunder, weakening U.S. policy toward Saddam Hussein.
He then made it worse by claiming falsely to have been misinterpreted when the record plainly showed the opposite.
That is a sure-fire way to create a credibility gap.
Bush policy toward Iraq has been clearly stated a hundred times: Only if you get rid of your bloody-handed dictator will we begin diplomatic discourse.
The purpose of worldwide sanctions is to induce the overthrow of Saddam's genocidal regime.


Bills and Cowboys Are Super Bowl Bound


Riley Sims, 90, Dies; Leader in Cable TV And in Construction
Riley V. Sims, who rose from poverty to success in the construction, concrete, telecommunications and cable television industries, died Wednesday at a hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla., his home town.
He was 90.
He had cancer, his family said,
When Mr.
Sims, a native of East St.
Louis, Ill., was 12, his father died.
The youth quit school after the seventh grade to support his mother by baling hay for 50 cents a day and shucking corn for 6 cents a bushel.


Rift Between Faiths Spills Into Court
They kneel inside a small but ornate cathedral in Queens, bearing gifts of candles, jewelry, medicine and even a pair of crutches for an icon said to work miracles.
But for worshipers at St.
Irene Chrysovalantou Greek Orthodox Cathedral in Astoria, the faith of miracles has run headlong into the reality of the world.
It has been more than a year since the theft and recovery of the Weeping Icon of St.
Irene stunned the worshipers, but the frustration and grief have not subsided.
The theft and the controversy that erupted over it have deepened the rift between St.
Irene's, whose parishioners belong to a dissident sect, and the traditional Greek Orthodox Church, a dispute that has left many grappling with their faith or defending it with crusader zeal.
Dispute Lands in Court
Now the struggle between the faiths, fought for decades from Greece to New York City, has landed in court.
In a $30 million lawsuit filed last month in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, St.
Irene's and its leaders accused the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of North and South America and two newspapers of slander, libel and defamation for saying its leaders had staged the robbery of the icon to generate publicity and money.
The defendants have not filed formal responses to the charges, although they deny them.


Bridge
Two Brazilian experts strengthened their claim to be considered the world's best partnership by winning the Cap Gemini World Top Tournament in the Hague yesterday.
Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco, who won the world team title in 1989, the world pair title in 1990, the Sunday Times event in England a year ago, and the Reisinger Teams in Orlando, Fla., finished 64 victory points ahead of Tony Forrester and Andrew Robson of England.
Zia Mahmood and Michael Rosenberg of Manhattan, who won a year ago, were in sixth position and the highest-ranking American pair.
The diagramed deal caused some gnashing of teeth.
Almost all the partnerships reached seven spades, a borderline contract that was doomed by the 4-1 trump split.
Seven no-trump is decidedly better, and Robson as South played that contract against the Brazilians. (The bidding is not on record. The diagramed auction is hypothetical.)


Topics of The Times; A German Lesson in Law
In days when Germany was divided, East German authorities routinely denied pleas from citizens who wished to be reunited with relatives in the West.
East Germans who fled their imprisoning country could be gunned down or attacked by dogs on the "death strip" that flanked the now-vanished Berlin Wall.
These memories all but crowded out the image of Erich Honecker, East Germany's former chief jailer, huddled in a car, being driven to the Frankfurt airport so that he could without hindrance fly to join his own family in Chile.
A court in Berlin ruled that Mr.
Honecker, 80 years old and dying of liver cancer, should be freed on humanitarian grounds.
That removes the most prominent defendant from a trial of East German leaders charged with manslaughter, since they made the rules that caused the slaughter of some 200 people on the death strip.


Much Study Went Into New York City's Rainbow Curriculum; Church Leads the Way
To the Editor:
You examine the roles of the Roman Catholic Church and the New York City parents who oppose the Children of the Rainbow curriculum in a Dec. 15 article.


Qiaotou Journal; Chinese Bet Their Shirts on Buttons and, Bingo!
For a glimpse into China's economic revolution, it is useful to stroll down the main street of this humble little town on the banks of a putrid river in the middle of nowhere.
Peasants amble along the dusty pavement, carrying protesting chickens over their shoulders, as rickshaws squeeze by street stalls pressing in on both sides with mounds of bric-a-brac.
Yet this remote speck in southeastern China has propelled itself over the last dozen years into the button capital of the world.


Faltering Companies Seek Outsiders
When John F. Akers announced last month that the International Business Machines Corporation would cut 25,000 more jobs in 1993, he acknowledged what management experts say is the biggest conundrum for reviving any stumbling giant: speeding its response to changing markets and technology.
But there is an emerging view among business scholars and management consultants suggesting that loyal "company men" like Mr.
Akers, I.B.M.'s chairman and chief executive since 1986 and a 33-year I.B.M. employee, are ill-equipped to lead faltering corporations through painful recoveries.


INSIDE
Haiti Accepts U.N.
Monitors The Haitian military agreed to let the United Nations deploy hundreds of civilian observers in the Caribbean nation.
Diplomats described the pact as the first step toward restoring Haiti's ousted President.
Page A3.
Transit Police Shakeup
Stung by persistent charges of racial friction, inadequate training and misconduct by some officials, the New York City transit police announced a major reorganization to simplify its command structure.
Page B1.
Collision Course on Growth
Presidents have often pushed for lower interest rates, and Bill Clinton has started lobbying the Federal Reserve even before taking office.
Page D1.
Town Meeting, Somali Style
A Somali town has taken the first step toward self-government, and relief workers are not pleased.
Page A3.
Fatal Beating at Church
An 80-year-old woman was beaten to death as she tried to enter a Bronx church, the police said.
Page B1.


Ed A. Hewett, an Adviser to Bush On Soviet Economy, Is Dead at 50
Ed A. Hewett, a member of the National Security Council staff in the Bush Administration who was an expert on the economies of the Soviet Union and its successor states, died Friday at George Washington University Hospital in Washington.
He was 50.
He died of cancer that began in an adrenal gland, said John Steinbruner, the director of foreign policy studies at the Brookings Institution.


Incinerator Trial Is Blocked, Leading to Test of New Administration
A Federal district judge in Ohio has blocked the owners of the nation's newest hazardous-waste incinerator from conducting a series of tests that would lead to full commercial operation later this year.
Judge Ann Aldridge of Federal District Court in Cleveland issued a temporary restraining order late Friday night that barred Von Roll Inc., a Swiss company, from starting trial burning at its incinerator in East Liverpool, Ohio, on Saturday.


THE INAUGURATION: A Lecture for Clinton; Inauguration or Not, Jackson Is Driven by the Agenda of Dr. King
For a master of political symbolism, it was not a place, a moment or a message lightly chosen.
As the capital prepared to inaugurate its first Democratic President in 12 years, and observe the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. in the same week, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson was on the outside, highlighting unfinished business.
The guards broke up when Mr.
Jackson stopped at the security checkpoint at the Lorton correctional institution on a chilly afternoon last week, threw up his hands and declared that he was carrying "nothing but the Holy Ghost." The joking stopped when he climbed to the stage, confronted his audience of young black men and began to interpret the legacy of Dr.
King, mournful and proud but also angry.


U.S. Has Some Designs on Olympic Gold
Like a bunch of Citizen Kanes plaintively uttering "Rosebud," American bobsledders have spent decades longing for the sled that would revive the glory of this country's last Olympic gold medal in that sport, which came in 1936.
Their latest hopes, it now seems, ride with a man in whose sport the word "sled" is the worst thing you can call his equipment.


CONFERENCE CHAMPIONSHIPS: Cowboys Triumph, but There Is a Matter of These Bills; Buffalo Adds to Its Storybook
As the final minute of the American Football Conference championship game ticked away on a scoreboard high above the field here at Joe Robbie Stadium, and the Bills became secure in the belief that they had beaten the Dolphins, 29-10, a restrained celebration erupted on the Buffalo sideline.
But Bills receiver Don Beebe sat on the bench, isolated from the high-fives and hugs, his hands folded in his lap and a pensive look engulfing his face.
He wasn't taking in the scene.
What was he doing?


Most Markets Open Today
The Government securities market will be closed today in observance of the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
All other financial and commodity markets will be open.
Many banks and government offices will be closed.


Miami Gives Up Ball And a Trip to the Bowl
Miami Dolphins quarterback Dan Marino stood in a near-empty locker room at Joe Robbie Stadium today and spoke softly but matter-of-factly about another squandered chance to reach the Super Bowl.
The Dolphins had five turnovers in their 29-10 loss to the Buffalo Bills in the American Football Conference title game, and those miscues weren't the only problem, Marino said.


Caren A. Yusem, Alan S. Drimmer
Caren Anne Yusem, the daughter of Stephen Yusem and Dr.
Anita Yusem of Gwynedd Valley, Pa., was married yesterday to Dr.
Alan Stessin Drimmer, the son of Iris Drimmer of Cleveland and the late Dr.
Melvin Drimmer.
Rabbi Gregory Marx performed the ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel in Philadelphia.
Ms.
Yusem, 28, is keeping her name.
She is a communications associate at the Tierney Group, a public-relations concern in Philadelphia.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in law and diplomacy from Tufts University.


Herbert A. Rothman, Lawyer, Is Dead at 64
Herbert A. Rothman, a lawyer specializing in health law, died on Friday at the Winthrop Memorial Hospital in Mineola, L.I.
He was 64 years old and lived in Old Westbury, L.I.
He died after suffering a heart attack at home, said his son Jeffrey.


Hearken to Jefferson, Mr. Clinton
President-elect Clinton started his roll toward Washington from Monticello, the home of the first Democrat and the most ardent democrat to occupy the White House.
Mr.
Clinton said he was visiting the home of Thomas Jefferson, the founder of his party, to form a specific connection with the values of the third President.
Jefferson was the inspiration for "the populism of this campaign," Mr.
Clinton said in the crisp, clear air of Jefferson's mountaintop in Virginia.
But the Clinton inaugural is shaping up as anything but a reassuring celebration of the primacy of the popular will.
It looks more like an affirmation of corporate clout that would do any big-business Republican proud.


Children of Prisoners Face a Grim Inheritance; Focusing on Fathers
To the Editor:
In "Holding Fragile Families Together When Mothers Are Inmates" (The Week in Review, Dec. 27), you neglect a very important aspect of this problem, the fathers of these children.
As volunteer prerelease counselors at the Taconic Correctional Facility in Bedford Hills, N.Y., we spend hours listening to these women one to one.
The vast majority tell how the fathers of their children rarely acknowledge these children or take any responsibility for them.


A Lending Plan for the Distressed
The transition team for President-elect Bill Clinton is drafting legislation to create a nationwide network of 100 community development banks, which would invest in distressed neighborhoods and lend money to poor people starting businesses.
In the Presidential campaign, Mr.
Clinton often praised such banks, citing the South Shore Bank of Chicago as a model.


After Czechoslovak Split, Europe Has to Rethink Nationalism
To the Editor:
Contrary to the chronology "75 Years as One Nation," with your Jan. 1 coverage of the breakup of Czechoslovakia, Tomas G. Masaryk did not sign the Pittsburgh Agreement with President Wilson in 1918, but with representatives of Czech and Slovak immigrant groups.
Masaryk did not meet Wilson until then.


West Confronts a Stranger: A Wet, Snowy, Icy Winter
This winter the American West is a stranger.
From Southern California and Arizona, where nearly a year's amount of precipitation has fallen in just six weeks, to the avalanche-bruised canyons of the Rockies, the land is heavy with the scarcest of Western commodities: water.
Westerners have come to expect certain things: The sun will usually shine, there is never enough water and on rare occasions the ground will move.
But after nearly two months of record rainfall, smothering snow and abnormal temperatures, the first two of these defining pillars have washed away, at least for the time being.


Soviet Collapse Is Chess Bonanza in Brooklyn
The mist of chalk dust hangs heavily over Room 446 of Edward R. Murrow High School in Brooklyn, where Elliot Weiss teaches math.
But twice a week, vinyl chessboards are pulled from lockers, and lectures about sines and cosines are replaced with talk of queens and knights.
The room fills with the ticking of timers and breathy anticipation that accompany the game of chess.
But the Murrow chess team, which practices where the math classes leave off, is not just any high school team.
Last year, it won both state and national titles with a group of students who are new in Brooklyn: they all emigrated from former Eastern bloc countries.


World Economies


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY WEEPING ICON, FEUDING CHURCHES
It has been more than a year since the theft and recovery of the Weeping Icon stunned the worshipers at the St.
Irene Chrysovantou Green Orthodox Cathedral in Astoria, Queens, but the frustration and grief have not subsided.
Now St.
Irene's and its leaders have accused the traditional Greek Orthodox Church, with which it has long argued, and two newspapers of libel, for saying that the theft was a publicity ploy.
A $30 million lawsuit has been filed.
B3.


In Spite of Gains, College Eludes Most Black and Hispanic Students
Despite small gains and limited progress over the past year, black and Hispanic students are still far less likely to attend college than white students, said a report to be released today by the American Council on Education.
The report also shows that minority students are far less likely to finish high school than white students.
This is especially true for Hispanic students.
Last year, the high school completion rate for Hispanic boys dropped to its lowest level, 47.8 percent, since such figures were first collected in 1972.
The graduation rate for Hispanic girls increased slightly.


Knicks Go Behind Closed Doors For Emergency Session on Decline
The players-only meeting that the Knicks held Saturday night in Houston after they lost, 104-102, to the Rockets was an obvious indication that their problems have grown serious.
"This started about three weeks ago," forward Charles Oakley said of the Knicks' decline, in which they have lost seven of their last 12 games.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Agreed to terms with Marvin Freeman, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
Football National Football League  BUFFALO BILLS -- Activated Chris Hale, cornerback, from injured reserve.
Placed Richard Harvey, linebacker, on the inactive list.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Activated Scott Secules, quarterback.
Placed Bernie Parmalee, running back, on the inactive list.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Activated Ralph Tamm, offensive lineman, and Wesley Walls, tight end, from injured reserve.
Placed David Wilkins, defensive end, on injured reserve.
Waived Chuck Thomas, center.


THE INAUGURATION: An Impatient Public; Letting Go of Hope as Clinton Softens Pledges
Four years after they installed George Bush as President, people here will watch the inauguration of his replacement this week, celebrating more Mr.
Bush's ouster than Bill Clinton's ascendancy.
They hope for improvement even as they are filled with cynicism.
Without any prompting in conversations over the last four days, voters here cited the campaign pledges that Mr.
Clinton already seemed to be pulling back on, like a tax cut for the middle class and easing the immigration of Haitians.
Some people were angry about that.
But most seem resigned, with looks that said, "What else did you expect?"


Men's Field the Toughest in Australia
When the Australian Open began today, women's tennis entered the third year of the Monica Seles era, which came fast on the heels of the Steffi Graf era, which came fast on the heels of the Martina Navratilova era.
The men's game is no longer so easy to define.


Becker Is Stunned By Jarryd In Opener
Boris Becker, the man who would again be king, was ranting at the strings of his racket, rolling his eyes at the umpire and shouting up into the gusty, pale blue sky.
For a player like John McEnroe, this can be a positive sign.
For Becker, this usually spells disaster.


Robber Kills Woman, 80, With Pipe Near Church
An 80-year-old woman about to enter a Bronx church was jumped from behind and beaten to death by a pipe-wielding man who stole her purse before he was chased and captured by neighborhood residents, the police said.
Doll Johnson was attacked by a man whom the police identified as Christopher Battiste, a 33-year-old resident of the city-run Franklin Avenue Armory, a shelter for homeless men.
She was jumped outside the Salvation Baptist Church, at 1127 Fulton Avenue in the Morrisania section at 1:55 P.M., said Sgt.
Nicholas Vreeland, a police spokesman.
Dragged Her Behind Church
Mr.
Battiste, who had emerged from the church shortly before Sunday services, pounced on Mrs.
Johnson and dragged her behind the church, where he continued to bludgeon her about the head before dashing off with her purse, Sergeant Vreeland said.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week:  Monday
None  Tuesday
None  Wednesday
None  Thursday
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday
Housing Starts Dec.


Kelly Can Now Tell Naysayers To Punt
It was, or should have been, Jim Kelly's triumphant return, a vindication for the Bills' star quarterback.
Kelly was back today after spending two playoff games on the sideline with a sprained right knee -- games in which backup Frank Reich helped produce victories -- and led the Bills to a solid decision over the Miami Dolphins.
Kelly now gets his third straight crack at a Super Bowl title.


Dispute Over Weeping Icon Divides Faiths


THE INAUGURATION: Seizing the Day; New President Brings Opportunity to Cash In
The air in the nation's capital these days is rich with the smell of curried favors.
In any financial deal, the novelist Kurt Vonnegut once wrote, there is a golden moment, when the money has left the pocket of the first party and is not yet in the pocket of the second party.
At that sweet and fleeting point, the lawyer steps lightly in and helps himself to a piece of the passing cash.


Corrections
A map on Friday with an article about young rightists in Hungary mislabeled a country west of Hungary, between Austria and Croatia.
It is Slovenia, not Slovakia.


Curtains for The Dolphins, Courtesy of the Screen
They didn't put their own version of it into the playbook until last Wednesday.
But the screen pass Jim Kelly employed against the Dolphins yesterday became an unusually effective weapon: All five he tried worked well, especially on third downs.
"It was more suited to the Houston Gamblers," said tackle Will Wolford, speaking of Kelly's old U.S.F.L. team.
"It's a run-and-shoot thing, like the Oilers use. In fact, we stole it from the Oilers." The Oilers used it in a victory over Miami this season.


The Score That Wasn't Proves Fatal to the 49ers
Every football game may have a turning point, but as early as the third snap of the game?
Many of the 49ers felt that if the third play today had turned out differently, the game might have, too, and perhaps they -- and not the Dallas Cowboys -- would have won.
The play that was, or wasn't, came with the contest barely a minute old.
The 49ers called for a pass and the Cowboys blitzed.
Steve Young threw a short slant pattern that Jerry Rice turned into an apparent 73-yard touchdown.
But the play was wiped out because Guy McIntyre, the 49ers' offensive guard, was called for holding Russell Maryland, the Cowboys' quick defensive tackle.


Books of The Times; The Case for Discretion In Opposing Secrecy
Now You Know By Michael Frayn 282 pages. Viking Press. $21.


Tubbs Is the Big Loser Before Bell Ever Sounds
Tony Tubbs's failure to pass a drug test last week -- a test he took voluntarily -- prevented him from fighting here tonight and likely derailed any chance he had of moving into position for a heavyweight title fight any time soon.
The Nevada State Athletic Commission ruled this morning that Tubbs could not fight Tyrell Biggs for the vacant United States Boxing Association title at the Union Plaza Hotel.


A Lowly Advance Man Shows a Golden Touch
Sure, the Hollywood contingent has not entirely got into the populist spirit of the inauguration.
Sure, some stars have been fighting over their hotel accommodations, whining for more private after-hour parties at chic restaurants and Georgetown homes and demanding a higher class of impresario to direct their musical galas.
But there is one lone Hollywood executive who's in the selfless "American Reunion" spirit.


Despite Critics Right and Left, Mandela Pushes Talks With de Klerk
Nelson Mandela, the president of the African National Congress, said today that mounting alarm about South Africa's economy had created a new sense of urgency that he believes will bring the end of white rule this year.
In an hourlong interview before he left for Washington for the inauguration of President-elect Bill Clinton, Mr.
Mandela brushed aside one by one the obstacles that have made some politicians pessimistic about the path ahead.


Review/Pop; With Spooky Melodrama, Women Recall Gothic Rock
The Spanish king of post-modern cinematic camp, Pedro Almodovar, could have been directing the action at the Limelight on Tuesday night.
Maria Excommunikata, a band with an international membership and a penchant for spooky melodrama, bore an uncanny resemblance to the outrageous glam groups that dash madly through Mr.
Almodovar's movies.
Arrayed in the black costumes of a thousand Halloweens, these women swooped through a repertory of original songs that mixed gothic imagery, hard-rock posturing and cabaret sentimentality into a brew that could have been deliciously clever had it been seasoned with a bit of irreverence.
But Maria Excommunikata's performance was unfortunately marked by more sincerity than wit.
The group's musical abilities did not save it from its own pretensions.
The operatic vocals of the Romanian-born Anca Marinescu intertwined with the atmospheric guitar work of Elizabeth Morgan and the snaky keyboards of Sina Hjort of Denmark to form intriguing sound patterns recalling early 80's gothic rock, but the songs' lyrics were stuck in typical boy-girl sentimentalism.


Taiwan, Winning New Friends, Hopes for Another One in Clinton
With relations between the United States and Taiwan already improving, Taiwan is hoping for even more from the Clinton Administration.
As Arkansas Governor, Bill Clinton visited Taiwan four times, and a photo of him during one visit hangs in the Foreign Ministry.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week.
MONDAY
Central &amp; South West  Pall  Southern Co.
Twin Disc TUESDAY  Crompton &amp; Knowles  Eastern Utils Assoc  Fannie Mae  First Intst Bancorp  Gleason  Hawaiian Elec Inds  Hillenbrand  Kmart  Southern Ind G&amp;E  Southwest Gas Corp.
Ca  Teco Energy WEDNESDAY  Athlone Inds  Chase Manhattan  Pacific Gas &amp; Elec  St.
Joseph Lt &amp; Pwr  Western Res  Zero Corp.
THURSDAY  Firstar Corp.
New  Homestake Mng  Kimco Realty  Oneok  Outboard Marine  PPG Inds  Ralston Purina  Universal Foods  FRIDAY  Central LA Elec  Harland John H.  Monsanto  Snap-On Tools


Unusual Choice Of an Ad Firm
Men's Health magazine, in an unexpected choice, has named Foote, Cone &amp; Belding/ Orange County in Santa Ana, Calif., to handle its trade advertising account, following a review that included two other West Coast shops.
Jeff Morgan, publisher in New York, said it was far more common for a magazine to hire a smaller, close-by agency; a notable exception is The New Yorker, which has its account at Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein in San Francisco.


With Canada's Dollar Weak Shoppers Snub U.S. Stores
Charmaine Morrison, eight months pregnant, and her husband, Dale, are scouting the big Zellers discount store here at the Fairview Mall for baby clothes and diaper-changing pads.
Mr.
Morrison's mother, Shirley Trento, is looking at garbage bags and a wood cutting board, while his stepfather, John Trento, inspects paints for the hobby horses he builds in his spare time.
A few months back they would have gone on a shopping expedition across the border, into the malls of Buffalo or Niagara Falls, N.Y.
"Now, it's just not worth it," Mr.
Morrison, 32, the comptroller at a local auto parts company, said recently.
"With the Canadian dollar down so much, you'll break even at best."


King's Light, Malcolm's Shadow
The renewed attention paid to Malcolm X's life and career often trades on the assumption that he was the polar opposite of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Malcolm was open to armed black self-defense while King was nonviolent.
True.
Malcolm blessed black rage, while King preached the virtues of Christian love.
True.
Most forcefully, Malcolm spoke the uncompromising truth about black America while King, in Malcolm's words, was a "20th-century Uncle Tom" -- the "best weapon that the white man" has ever had.
Nothing could be further from the truth.


Electrasol Account To Deutsch/Dworin
Benckiser Consumer Products Inc., Danbury, Conn., has selected Deutsch/Dworin Inc. in New York to handle its Electrasol Ultra dishwasher detergent account, which for the last year had been at Rotando Lerch &amp; Iafeliece in Stamford.
Deutsch/ Dworin was awarded the account, with billings estimated to reach $7 million, without a formal review.


A Measure of King's Legacy: Call to Action
Aelaf Worku may have come to the African-American Museum here to learn about history, but as he leaned against the straps of his bulging book bag and stared at the photographs of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., he wasn't dreaming about the past.
"We've finally overcome -- quote unquote -- but it seems as if we really haven't," said Aelaf, who is 16 years old.
"Every generation is always going to have its problems, and it's up to whoever is going to be the leaders of our generation to take care of them."


Vision of Tumbling Racial Barriers Is Part of Suit
A social miracle of sorts is one goal of a lawsuit seeking to integrate Hartford's schools with those in surrounding towns.
In the name of quality public education, the lawsuit would have Connecticut stand up against the defining population trend in the United States since World War II: the retreat of the middle class to the protected world of suburbia.
City children would attend suburban schools, suburban children would attend city ones, and the towering political, psychological and racial barriers dividing city from suburb would come tumbling down.


Dance in Review
Footprints Project Dance Company  Theater of the Riverside Church


Robbers Shoot Police Officer And Bystander
An off-duty city police officer was shot as he resisted a group of men who were trying to rob him early yesterday outside a Brooklyn grocery store, the police said.
A stray bullet struck an off-duty Metropolitan Transportation Authority employee standing nearby.
After he was grazed in the chest by a bullet, the 27-year-old rookie officer, Eric Mercer, flagged down a livery cab, which took him and the other victim, James Beatty, to the hospital.
The robbers fled.


Borland Will Cut Price on New Software
Adding fire to the price wars in the computer-software industry, Borland International Inc. will announce on Monday that it will cut the price for its Quattro Pro for Windows spreadsheet program to $99 and reduce the price of its Paradox for Windows data base management program to $139.
The promotion is scheduled to run from Feb. 1 through April 30.
Quattro has a suggested retail price of $495; Paradox, which is scheduled to be shipped soon, has a suggested price of $795.


Sports of the Times; Bills Are No Ordinary Wild Card
ALL week long, this game had the clammy feeling of the Runnerup Bowl, which the pre-merger National Football League used to force upon two hurt and humiliated squads.
The Bills and the Dolphins.
For third place.
Except that this time, the league, in all its wisdom, played it the same day as the National Conference championship.


A Musical Celebration Before the Inauguration


Faltering Companies Seek Outsiders
When John F. Akers announced last month that the International Business Machines Corporation would cut 25,000 more jobs in 1993, he acknowledged what management experts say is the biggest conundrum for reviving any stumbling giant: speeding its response to changing markets and technology.
But there is an emerging view among business scholars and management consultants suggesting that loyal "company men" like Mr.
Akers, I.B.M.'s chairman and chief executive since 1986 and a 33-year I.B.M. employee, are ill-equipped to lead faltering corporations through painful recoveries.


Anniversary Stirs Hawaii Sovereignty Movement
Sam Kaina stood among a crowd before Iolani Palace, his hands on the shoulders of his 7-year-old son and tears in his eyes after watching a re-enactment of the 1893 overthrow of Hawaii's last monarch, Queen Lili'uokalani.
"There are deep-down, gut-wrenching emotions," said Mr.
Kaina, 35, who compared his feelings to those he had experienced as a boy watching the funeral procession for President John F. Kennedy.
"There is a big sense of loss."


Letterman Vs. Leno: When Cool Meets Hot
Such a fuss over one short hour.
It was almost impossible to read anything last week about David Letterman's decision to defect from NBC to CBS without running into a sober, somber analysis of whether Mr.
Letterman can export his goofy comedy to a time slot an hour earlier, a time slot in which he will be competing against the show he wanted (the "Tonight" show) and the host NBC wanted (Jay Leno).


Mexican Army Rescues 400 Stranded in Floods
Almost 400 people, at least half of them Americans, were evacuated this weekend across a swollen river in northwestern Mexico after being stranded for more than a week by floods that had washed out bridges and set off mud slides.
At least 25 people have been killed and 130 are still missing.
Mexican Army and Navy units using tractors and other rugged vehicles towed cars, vans and trucks on Saturday and today across the rushing Santo Domingo River, which on Jan. 7 had swept away the only bridge connecting the town of San Quintin with the Trans Peninsula Highway to the north.
San Quintin is 180 miles south of the United States border.


After Foreman Wins, He Hints at Retiring
In the frenzy of Saturday night's post-fight news conference, George Foreman neither looked nor spoke like someone intent on continuing his boxing career.
He even said, in response to a question about retirement, that he was going home to discuss the matter with his wife.
Did anyone believe him?
Even with a tinge of sincerity in his voice, it was unlikely that Foreman, upon returning to Houston this week, would wrestle with the question of whether to quit or keep fighting.


THE INAUGURATION: A Grand Beginning; Inaugural Week Begins With Pomp and Populism
President-elect Bill Clinton, elected on his promises to focus the nation's energies on the problems at home, came to Washington this afternoon to assume the leadership of his country as American missiles showered destruction on an enemy half a world away.
Wrapping himself in the mantle of Thomas Jefferson at Monticello, then pausing to worship at a small-town Baptist church before continuing north in a bus caravan reminiscent of his triumphant campaign, Mr.
Clinton reached the Lincoln Memorial late on a sunny winter day, less than 72 hours before he was scheduled to take the oath as the 42d President of the United States.


Point Man for Economic Agenda
With thousands of journalists poised to descend on New York for the Democratic National Convention last summer, Robert E. Rubin, the Wall Street financier who headed the convention host committee, wanted someone to throw a party for them.
At a breakfast meeting with Michael Fuchs, chairman of Home Box Office, Mr.
Rubin broached the notion, only to get a cool response.
"They came and dumped this party on me," Mr.
Fuchs said.
"They did it in such a friendly, nice way, it was hard to say, 'No,' even though I wasn't looking forward to it." So, courtesy of H.B.O., 8,000 journalists were feted in Bryant Park in midtown Manhattan.


After Czechoslovak Split, Europe Has to Rethink Nationalism
To the Editor:
Re "Czechoslovakia Breaks in Two, to Wide Regret" (front page, Jan. 1): Czechoslovakia's obituaries in the Western news media have been unsatisfactory because of two inadequate focuses.
One is historical, viewing the rise of Czechoslovakia in the 20th century as a model of a multiethnic Central European democratic federation.
The other is political, stressing mainly the economic -- but not the ethnic and nationalist -- consequences of the breakup.


BUSH LAUNCHES MISSILE ATTACK ON A BAGHDAD INDUSTRIAL PARK AS WASHINGTON GREETS CLINTON
Navy ships in the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea launched about 40 cruise missiles at what officials say was an Iraqi military complex in a Baghdad suburb today, as the United States brought battle to the Iraqi capital for the first time since the end of the Persian Gulf war.
Bush Administration officials said that today's strike, the second in five days, was a response to Iraq's decision to restrict United Nations weapons inspectors and to challenge the no-flight zones imposed by the United States and its allies.
A senior Pentagon official left open the possibility that additional air strikes could be carried out soon, if Iraq did not comply with United Nations demands.


Executive Shakeup at Fox Puts Its Growth in Question
Hollywood will be watching closely as the new team takes the reins at Fox, with Lucie Salhany succeeding Jamie Kellner at the head of its television division, Peter Chernin replacing Joe Roth at the helm of the Twentieth Century Fox film studio, and Rupert Murdoch, chairman of Fox's parent, the News Corporation, effectively replacing Barry Diller as chairman of Fox.
"Fox is obviously at a critical point in its life cycle," said Jessica Reif, who follows media businesses for Oppenheimer &amp; Company.
"It has attracted younger audiences. Now it wants to broaden its audience. The recent spate of departures could make it more difficult."


Children of Prisoners Face a Grim Inheritance
To the Editor:
From "Holding Fragile Families Together When Mothers Are Inmates" (The Week in Review, Dec. 27), one might conclude that of the hundreds of thousands of American children who have a parent in prison, only those with a mother in prison need help.
Although the number of women in prison is rising, about 90 percent of those incarcerated are men (94 percent in 1990, the most recent statistic available), and most of those are also fathers.
Thus when you state that "children of prison inmates are five times as likely as most Americans to end up in prison themselves," those children are mostly children of fathers in prison.


Times's Machinists Approve Contract
The membership of the machinists union yesterday ratified a new agreement with The New York Times that will help stabilize the daily operation and labor relations of the company's new printing plant in Edison, N.J., the newspaper said.
District 15 of the International Association of Machinists, whose members maintain and repair the newspaper's production equipment, became the sixth of the seven production unions involved in the $450 million color printing plant to ratify agreements with The Times, said Nancy Nielsen, a spokeswoman for the newspaper.
The seventh union, the paperhandlers, has reached a tentative accord with The Times, she said.


Milton J. Slocum, 87, Hell's Kitchen Doctor
Dr.
Milton Jonathan Slocum, a general practitioner in the Hell's Kitchen section of Manhattan during four decades and the author of a volume of memoirs, died on Friday at his house in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 87 years old.
He died of congestive heart failure, said his daughter, Susan Hinerfeld.


Impeachment: A Political Question
Only rarely does the Supreme Court find an issue beyond the power of courts on grounds that it is a "political question." The Court rightly did just that last week when it told lower court judges, in no uncertain terms, to stay out of the Congressional impeachment process.
All the justices rejected the claim of Walter Nixon, a judge convicted of bribery, that he was treated unfairly when Congress impeached and removed him from the Federal bench in Mississippi three years ago.
Seven justices, in an opinion by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, held that the judiciary could not even entertain his lawsuit.


Jailing of Man With AIDS Spurs Legal Debate
In November, 33-year-old Johannes Brete was waging his battle with AIDS in a split-level ranch house here in rural Columbia County.
Mr.
Brete is now a prisoner at a state psychiatric center, living in a six-story brick building surrounded by razor-wire fencing as he tries to preserve his failing health while lawyers and others debate questions that his case has raised about how the legal system handles people with AIDS.


Dance in Review
Wendy Rogers 'Trans Missions' St. Mark's Church


Accounts
*
Software A.G., Reston, Va., to Tucker Wayne/Luckie &amp; Co., Atlanta, previously at Smyth, Bauer &amp; Lewis, Richmond.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Borders, Perrin &amp; Norrander Inc., Portland, Ore., was awarded two new accounts previously handled by various agencies on a project basis: Smith Sports Optics, Ketchum, Idaho, a maker of goggles and sunglasses, and Insport, Beaverton, Ore., a sports apparel company.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Extra Broadway Corp., New York, to Beery Associates Advertising, New York, to handle its two Pauly's Italian Family Style Restaurants and Aspen Cafe.
Billings were not disclosed.


Television
THE barb competition between David Letterman and Jay Leno to determine who will be the leading star of late-night television will get all the public attention between now and the night they face off in August.
But for the networks involved, the first round of the competition has already provided one definite result: NBC didn't win.
That's no surprise.
NBC executives readily described the network's tortured negotiations with Mr.
Letterman as a textbook example of the no-win situation.
No matter which star NBC eventually chose as host of the "Tonight" show, the network would end up in the minus column: down one star from its current, hugely profitable late-night lineup.


Dr. King, Peaceful Disturber
A distorting revisionism threatens the memory of Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., whose 64th birthday Americans commemorate today.
In life, he was the passionate voice of a civil rights revolution, an apostle of civil disobedience and speaker of uncomfortable truths to power.
In memory, some now cast him as the unthreatening "Moderate Alternative," an integrationist whose nonviolence can be favorably contrasted to more militant strategies of black empowerment.


Marines in Somalia Try to Rebuild a Town Council
In the shell of a former bank building, a tentative experiment in self-government was under way before a wary audience of international relief workers.
Several dozen people had gathered for the weekly session of a relief committee formed in the days since the United States Marines arrived to bring security to this town at the center of the Somali famine.
But the session went awry almost as quickly as it started.


Ad Firms in the West Gain Influence
Greg Helm, president of the advertising agency Stein Robaire Helm here, says he knows what Madison Avenue thinks of the West Coast: "Less disciplined. Palm trees and sitting on the beach."
He shrugs it off.
What's irresponsibility to skeptics feels like innovation to Mr.
Helm -- and to more and more businesses looking for a better way to move their products.


THE INAUGURATION: A Smooth Ride; Train Builds Momentum for 60 Years
In a throwback to an era when it was de rigueur to ride the rails to Washington for the swearing-in of a President, a private train dubbed the "Broadway Special" rolled into Washington today from New York City in an inaugural procession unlike any before it, bringing an entourage that included a celebrity sex therapist, a rope-twirling cowboy and the descendants of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
"As much planning has gone into this as D-Day," said Barry Landau, organizer of the train trip and owner of a Manhattan-based public relations office that specializes in planning celebrity-studded events.


Iraq's Gamble: Sharp Words, Dull Claws
In choosing inauguration week for his latest challenge to the United States, President Saddam Hussein appears to be gambling on two things:
First, he hopes to demonstrate that the gulf war allies are not likely to go to war against Iraq again, and thus he may weaken the American-led coalition that crushed his forces two years ago.


Envoy Says Haiti's Military Agrees to Allow a U.N. Observer Force
After two days of talks here, a special United Nations envoy said today that the Haitian military had agreed to the use of hundreds of civilian observers as part of a process that the diplomat said was aimed at restoring the rule of law and the country's democratically elected President.
Diplomats described the agreement as the biggest breakthrough in negotiations since Haiti was thrown into turmoil and economic isolation by the ouster and exile of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide in a violent military coup in September 1991.


The Stuff of Musical Myth Turns Up in the Flesh
A tall, spare man with receding reddish-brown hair wearing coffee-tinted glasses used a faint, quavering falsetto to demonstrate how to project an operatic high note.
"You must chew the breath," he said, speaking with a thick Italian accent to a young soprano standing onstage beside him.


Review/Television; How 'Separate but Equal' Left the Law of the Land
Having established an estimable record of bringing pieces of American history to life with evocative photographs, contemporary documents and scholarly interpretations, "The American Experience" tonight goes in for docudrama.
"Simple Justice," based on Richard Kluger's memorable 1975 book of that title, is not the worst example of a dubious genre, but it cannot match the quality of such recent straight documentaries as "The Kennedys" and "The Donner Party."
The problem is not that the story of Brown v. the Board of Education, Topeka, Kan., is short of the stuff of drama.
John McGreevey's two-and-a-half-hour screenplay begins in the 1930's at Howard University Law School, where Charles Hamilton Houston inspired a generation of young black lawyers, including Thurgood Marshall, to do battle against the separate-but-equal doctrine established in the Supreme Court's 1896 Plessy v.
Ferguson decision.
The play lays out the N.A.A.C.P. strategy of first proving that there was no such thing as equal graduate education in the South, as a step toward the proposition that "separate" in public schools inherently meant unequal.
That was the case that was won on May 17, 1954.


CONFERENCE CHAMPIONSHIPS: Cowboys Triumph, but There Is a Matter of These Bills; Dallas Rolls in Stunning Style
It was billed as Youth versus Experience.
Experience was supposed to have the edge.
But it was more like a young team teaching an older one several new tricks, and in the process, temporarily creating an entirely new order in the National Football Conference.
The Dallas Cowboys zipped past the San Francisco 49ers, 30-20, today, displaying such style and grace and guts in play-calling and in production that one could have sworn this was one of the 49ers' four championship teams of the 80's masquerading in blue and white.


Gore Rules Out Regular Links With Iraq Chief
Vice President-elect Al Gore closed the circle today on a careful restatement of the new Administration's policy toward Iraq, saying there could never be normal relations with Iraq as long as Saddam Hussein is in power.
He also urged that the Iraqi leader be ousted.
Mr.
Gore's statements, delivered on national television in an unequivocal fashion intended to give President-elect Bill Clinton firm footing on foreign policy, were a result of three days of reformulation by Mr.
Clinton and his advisers.


CHRONICLE
In his 90 years, Prof.
YESHAYAHU LEIBOVITZ of Hebrew University in Jerusalem has been a scientist and philosopher, as well as an acerbic social critic and no stranger to dispute.
That was certainly the case yesterday after a committee of scholars said that Professor Leibovitz's life-long "contribution to original thinking" qualifies him to be among several winners this year of the Israel Prize, the country's most prestigious award for intellectual and cultural achievement.
The panel's selections are almost always final, but Prime Minister YITZHAK RABIN reportedly was so unhappy that he asked his Minister of Education, SHULAMIT ALONI, to investigate whether the recommendation had to be honored.
On the right, politicians were apoplectic.
The award, said former Prime Minister YITZHAK SHAMIR, "fills me with disgust."


Reichstag Veiling Opposed
Several leading German politicians are quietly opposing the artist Christo's plan to wrap Berlin's historic Reichstag building in silver fabric, making it uncertain that the plan will be realized.
Christo has been trying to create "Wrapped Reichstag" for 20 years, and this month he seemed to have made a great step forward by winning the support of Rita Sussmuth, President of the German Parliament, which administers the Reichstag building.


Burt Visits Some Old Friends
For eight seasons with the Giants and three with the 49ers, Jim Burt was a feisty nose tackle, an overachiever who made good defenses better.
Now, at age 33 and in his first season after football, he misses the game and the people who play it.
So he flew here from his New Jersey home for the 49ers-Cowboys game, and when the 49ers arrived at their hotel Saturday night he was there to greet them.


An Inauguration Designed to Play to the Cameras
This time, the buses wore American flags.
The politician in blue jeans and a sport shirt had vanished, replaced by a statesman in a dark suit.
Long before the sun rose on inauguration week, the enduring images of Bill Clinton's ascension to power had been ordained: the historical backdrops to today's bus ride from Monticello; tonight's candlelight march across Memorial Bridge; the politically canny guest list for lunch with common folk on Monday; the gait and pace of his walk with his wife, Hillary, (hand-in-hand, no question) down Pennsylvania Avenue on Wednesday.


Corrections
An article on Friday about Vice President-elect Al Gore's role after the inauguration misidentified Katharine Graham.
She is chairman of The Washington Post Company, not publisher of The Post.


Beth R. Cosnow, 70, A Community Leader
Beth Robertson Cosnow, a longtime community leader on the East Side of Manhattan, died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
She was 70.
The cause was lung cancer, said a friend, Lauren Giber.


Classical Music in Review
Emerson String Quartet 92d Street Y


Nation Is Optimistic About Clinton Years
Americans are waiting for Bill Clinton's Presidency with revived optimism about the nation and the economy, a new New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.
Three-fourths of those polled said they thought the President-elect cared "about the needs and problems" of people like them.
And the survey suggests much indifference to campaign promises, with the exception of health care.


Topics of The Times; Flowery Promises
The future, for gardeners, showed up in their mailboxes in early January.
The new seed catalogues always seem not so much a sales pitch as an act of mercy at a time when gardeners' expectations are as frozen as their flowerbeds.
This year, as the catalogues were arriving, winter played an unkind hoax.
The temperatures went up into the 60's, the soil was as warm as April's and everything seemed ready for planting -- except, of course, that there weren't any seeds yet.
In style, the catalogues turned out to be their usual summer selves.
In substance, they are pretty conservative.


Star Banc Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Southern Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Oration by Daughter of Dr. King Adds Special Touch to a Service
In a ceremony at times angry, searching, proud and poignant, the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. was memorialized here today, a quarter-century after his assassination in Memphis.
Part of what gave special meaning to the annual service marking the national holiday was the featured speaker: Dr.
King's youngest daughter, the Rev.
Bernice King, gave a dramatic oration at the Ebenezer Baptist Church, where both her father and grandfather were pastors.


Awaiting the Bentsen Treasury
With the inauguration of the Clinton Presidency tomorrow, the bond market should find out soon if the Treasury Department under Lloyd Bentsen will fiddle with its debt-management levers to stimulate the economy and cut the record Federal budget deficit.
By simply shifting billions of dollars of long-term Treasury borrowing to shorter maturities with lower interest rates, the Government could lower its borrowing costs by billions of dollars a year, some analysts argue.
And by doing so, according to some theories, the Treasury could also bring down the level of long-term interest rates, which economists agree are still restraining the economy's recovery.


Witt and Friends Becoming Stars in Prime Time
These must be the halcyon days of figure skating on television.
Katarina Witt, Brian Boitano and Nancy Kerrigan are growing omnipresent in competitions and exhibitions usually taped weeks and months before their air dates.
The lesson of figure skating's ratings-grabbing performances at the Winter Olympics is that more is more.
In Albertville last year, CBS's average prime-time rating was 21.5 on nights with competitive skating, 16.0 without it.


ECI Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Chess
Nigel Short, a 28-year-old English grandmaster, holds a 3-2 lead over Jan Timman, a 41-year-old Dutch grandmaster, in the final candidates match for world championship aspirants in San Lorenzo de El Escorial, Spain.
The winner of the 14-game series will get $124,000 and a title match in August with the world champion, Gary Kasparov of Russia.
The loser will receive $76,000.
Whoever emerges victorious will become the first non-Soviet player in 21 years to play for the world crown.
The last one was the American Bobby Fischer, who won the championship in Iceland in 1972 by defeating Boris Spassky.


Central &amp; South West reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rolls-Royce Picks a Director To Be Chief of U.S. Operation
Rolls-Royce P.L.C., the giant British maker of jet engines, named John Rose president and chief executive of its United States subsidiary in Reston, Va., today.
Mr.
Rose, 40, is currently the director of corporate development for Rolls-Royce and is chairman of an affiliated company, Rolls-Royce &amp; Partners Finance.
He will succeed John W. Sandford, 58, who was recently appointed managing director of the company's Aerospace Group based in Derby, England.
The change takes effect on Feb. 1.


Reynolds Is Ready to Make a New Start
A lot can happen to a world record-holder during a long enforced layoff, and among the more important things that happened to Butch Reynolds during his disputed 28-month suspension from international track competition is Kevin Young.
Reynolds, who holds the world record in the 400 meters, was suspended from international competition in August 1990.
He will begin to find out what he missed on Feb. 5, when he resumes sanctioned competion by running the 400 meters at the Millrose Games in Madison Square Garden.


Americans Have High Hopes for Clinton, Poll Finds
Americans await Bill Clinton's Presidency with revived optimism about the nation and its economy and a pre-inaugural burst of confidence in him as an effective leader who cares about them, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.
The public's high hopes for Mr.
Clinton's term include one critical and difficult expectation: that he keep his campaign promise to change the nation's health-care system.
While the poll suggests much indifference to campaign promises health care is the exception.


Hunt Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Brady Anderson, outfielder, on a one-year contract.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about the data processing subsidiary of the International Business Machines Corporation understated the value of a 10-year contract that it was awarded last month by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation.
It is worth $3 billion.


King Holiday Is Observed in All 50 States


Review/Television; Going Without the Giggles and Leers, on Fox Yet
Postponed from October, two Fox broadcasting series will finally make their debuts tonight: "Class of '96," at 8, and "Key West," at 9.
In both instances, the evolving network eases away from the giggle-and-trash image it has sculptured with shows like "Married . . . With Children." Is the country ready for Fox and, all things being relative, upscale programming?
Each hourlong series is, of course, rooted in formula.
What matters are the sensibilities and skills shaping those formulas.
So while set in a fictional Northeastern Ivy League college (actually filmed at the University of Toronto), "Class of '96" is not just a next-stage development of "Beverly Hills 90210," Fox's hit high-school drama.
The crucial factor: the drama "Class of '96" is created by John Romano, who since the mid-1980's has been associated with Steven Bochco as a writer for "Hill Street Blues" and "L.A. Law." More significant, before that he was an English instructor at Columbia University.
The concept for "Class of '96" grows out of his own academic experiences.


Canadian Satellite Commun reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Anton Crihan Dead; Moldova Exile, 99, Escaped Soviet Rule
Anton Crihan, a leader in the movement that reunited his native region of Bessarabia with Romania between the world wars, , died on Jan. 9 in a hospital in St.
Louis, Mo.
He was 99 and lived in St.
Louis.
He died of cancer, his family said.
Further details on the cause of death were not available.


Dieters Sometimes Eat More Than They Will Admit
CHRONIC dieters who can never lose weight are eating much more and exercising much less than they say, according to a new study.
The study, conducted by the Obesity Research Center at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York, traced the eating and exercising patterns of 10 obese people who considered themselves diet-resistant.


CHRONICLE
For some people who went to the party billed as a farewell to Henri Matisse at the Museum of Modern Art on Sunday evening, it was like saying goodbye to an old friend.
For others, it was like seeing a new one depart.
It all depended on how many times they had seen the blockbuster retrospective that ends this evening.
Several members of the Lauder cosmetics family are officials of the museum or committee members, so LEONARD and EVELYN, RONALD and JO CAROLE and ESTEE (who could not be there) LAUDER invited more than 200 business associates and friends for one last look at the approximately 400 works in the exhibition and for a dinner that included choucroute garnie and cookies with a rendering of a "Blue Nude" cutout in icing.


U.S. LEADS FURTHER ATTACKS ON IRAQI ANTIAIRCRAFT SITES; ADMITS ITS MISSILE HIT HOTEL: LIMITING THE RESPONSE
In his final days in office and with the tacit consent of President-elect Bill Clinton, President Bush has changed military strategy regarding Iraq -- exchanging the use of overwhelming force for a policy of tit-for-tat intended to keep the pressure on Saddam Hussein while the new President decides how to deal with him.
The unheralded change, which has produced three limited air and missile strikes on Iraq, has done nothing so far to break President Hussein's defiance.
Some Bush and Clinton aides said there was a danger that if matters continued at this level, Mr.
Hussein could eventually dictate the pace of the confrontation and gradually win more sympathy.


Abuse Trial Forces Jury To Ride Tide Of Minutiae
Day after day, week after week, a county clerk has spread the evidence before the jury: a baseball bat leaning against a rostrum, a red-handled broom alongside, a piece of wood dowling lost among papers stacked in uneven piles on a counter.
In the courtroom setting, the implements appear innocuous -- a bat, a stick, a broom -- banal.
Day after day, week after week, the jury has filed in, settling back for endless tides of arcane questioning as the four defense lawyers mounted separate assaults on the state's case, grilling witnesses at length and lingering on such minutiae as who typed a given report and precisely how and where and why an array of colored pencils was laid out by a psychiatric nurse who specialized in rape trauma syndrome.
Over time, the essential issue of the case -- sexual assault -- was obscured in that mountain of detail.


And So to Bed, Thanks to Neediest Cases
The two little boys had a roof over their heads, but no beds to sleep in.
Their mother, Aneila Huff-Ford, who is unemployed and raising her sons by herself, found it increasingly difficult to provide for them.
The city found them a subsidized apartment in Elmhurst, Queens, and gave them $205 to furnish it.
But try as she would, Ms.
Huff-Ford could hardly buy two mattresses for that amount, let alone two beds.


Corrections
One entry in a series of brief profiles of candidates for mayor of Los Angeles on Friday described the electoral history of Assemblyman Richard Katz incorrectly.
He was elected in 1980, and has been re-elected every two years since.


Westco Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


John Stender, 76, Dies; First Director of OSHA
John Stender, the first director of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration, died Saturday at the Hallmark Nursing Home in Federal Way, a suburb of Seattle.
He was 76 and lived in Federal Way.
Mr. Stender died of bone cancer, said his wife, Mary Ruth.


Stocks Rise in Japan
Stock prices rose today on hopes of easier credit.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed up 181.4 points, or 1.09 percent, at 16,798.64.
On Thursday, the final trading session of last week, the Nikkei lost 2.31 points.


Coach Says He'll Resign
The South Carolina basketball coach, STEVEN NEWTON, facing allegations of recruiting violations, said yesterday he would resign at the end of the season and become an assistant athletic director. (AP)


INSIDE
New Hopes for Protection
Domestic industries are lining up for Government protection against foreign rivals, encouraged by Clinton campaign promises.
Page D1.
G.O.P.
Hires Passport Aide
A Federal official who was demoted for his role in the search of Bill Clinton's passport files has been hired by Senate Republicans.
Page A18.
Indiana Train Crash Kills 7
Seven people were killed and dozens more were injured in Gary when two commuter trains sideswiped each other near a bridge.
Page A16.
Big Plunge in a Drug Stock
Centocor's stock lost two-thirds of its value after the company said it was stopping American clinical trials on its leading new drug.
Page D1.
Teaching by the Book
Because of bureaucracy and union seniority rules, a veteran Manhattan teacher is being forced to leave her class of gifted pupils.
Page B1.


Review/Television; The Past Is Still Present In a Report on Clinton
Although "Clinton Takes Over" may sound like tomorrow's news, tonight's "Frontline" report is mostly yesterday's news.
A few minutes of new material was not included in the review tape, but it cannot help much.
Despite the best efforts of the producers, who have been trailing Clinton &amp; Company for several weeks, they find themselves doing the job of the little fellow in the Chaplin movie who follows the elephants in the big parade.
The pictures of the President-elect being besieged by an army of reporters have been carried on all networks.
The transition showpieces, especially the economic summit (interpreted on the program as a way of reducing expectations incited in voters during the campaign), have been much chewed over.
Similarly, Mr.
Clinton's on-camera outburst about the "quota games" being played by women's groups pressuring him for more female Cabinet members was heavily covered at the time.
One reporter suggests that Mr.
Clinton brought the problem on himself with his campaign effusions over diversity, but even feminists may sympathize a little with the man when they hear Judith Lichtman, the president of the Women's Legal Defense Fund, rule that "the requisite number of jobs" for women "ought to be at least half."


Corrections
An obituary on Friday about Josephine T. Moran, a former Westchester resident who died on Wednesday in Boulder, Colo., misstated her age.
She was 81.


Morton International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


This Time, Defense Delivers In Clutch
Sam Bowie has had better seasons.
There was a time, not too long ago, when the Nets considered him indispensable.
But with new regimes come new attitudes.
Chuck Daly came in, and the trade talk started.
There have been times this season when Bowie has simply flopped.
Some began to wonder: Is Bowie tough enough?
Tonight against the Indiana Pacers, Bowie had the kind of game that answers that question.
And his performance may help to redefine the way this team thinks of him.


Jacobs Engineering Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BCT International reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


In His Own Words
PRESIDENT-ELECT BILL CLINTON  In an address yesterday to diplomats at Georgetown University
"The foreign policy of my Administration will be built upon three pillars:


Bio-Logic Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


To Bolster Olympic Bid, China Eases Its Surveillance of Reporters
The Chinese authorities appear to have stopped following foreign reporters, as part of an effort to spruce up their image and help their bid to become host of the Olympic Games in the year 2000.
The State Security Ministry and Foreign Ministry jointly issued an internal Government circular this month announcing an end to the following of foreign journalists, Chinese familiar with the document say.
The circular said the step was necessary to improve Beijing's human rights image and therefore its chances of being awarded the Olympic Games.


By Design; Chic Notes for Up Top
Barrettes, bands, combs, clips and sticks are not just gadgets to rein in errant hunks of hair.
They are small style statements.
Sometimes they even make news.
Take Hillary Clinton's headbands.
But headbands are just one way of taming tossable hair.
Browsing at a store counter or drugstore rack of such gadgets is bewildering.
The selections seem endless, and frankly there is a lot of junk out there.
The game is to find the good stuff.


The Greatest Flood
The greatest flood on Earth occurred in south-central Siberia near the end of the last Ice Age, according to a study published in the current issue of the journal Science.
The authors of the study calculated that 630 million cubic feet of water overpowered slabs of ice that had acted as naturally occurring dams in the lakes and rivers of the Altai Mountains of Siberia.
The Siberian flood was about 65 times as large as any of the floods generated by the Amazon River, the largest river in the world, and may have reached depths of 1,600 feet, the researchers estimated.


COMPANY EARNINGS: Highlights; PRIMERICA CORP. (N)
Even with a rise of nearly 68 percent in fourth-quarter income, Primerica's financial results were greeted with a frown on Wall Street yesterday, as investors sold shares on the news.
The reason was that much of the growth came from one-time gains from the company's sales of investments and securities.
When those nonrecurring items are stripped away, Primerica had growth in operating profits of about 16 percent, earning $153.3 million, or $1.32 a share -- a respectable performance that was in line with many analysts expectations.


Dow Gains 3.79 in Active Holiday Trading
Investors took no holiday from buying cyclical stocks yesterday, as companies that would prosper the most in an accelerating recovery stood out in an otherwise mixed market.
The Dow Jones industrial average was up 3.79, about a tenth of a percentage point, to 3,274.91, with the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 off by a hair.


The Next Informational Wave May Be Carried on Compact Disk
JUST as audio compact disks have banished vinyl phonograph albums to the nostalgia bins, compact disks for computers may soon reduce the role of the familiar floppy disk.
After several years of slow growth, the use of compact-disk drives in personal computers is beginning to accelerate.
According to computer market researchers, there are now approximately 2.5 million CD-ROM drives in active use.
More than 750,000 drives have been sold in the last six months, and the researchers say there may be 8 million to 10 million CD-ROM drives in use by 1995.


Winners Circle Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Rabbits Beware! Some Birds of Prey Hunt in Packs
THE majestic image of the lone eagle may often hold true.
But scientists are also beginning to piece together a more complex picture of eagles, hawks and falcons as team players whose hunting tactics and cunning intelligence invite comparison with the wolf and the fox.
Eagles, in fact, not only mount concerted and successful attacks on the fox itself; they also deceive monkeys, humans' close relatives, in the deadly game of predator versus prey.
By acting together, they are even able to bring down big animals like deer, antelopes and African bushbucks.


Mysterious Epidemic Of Furtive Liver Virus
EVERY Tuesday is liver clinic day at the Veterans Affairs Hospital in Washington, a time when patients with every sort of liver ailment are seen by Dr.
Leonard Seeff and his staff.
Last week was typical.
Dr.
Seeff saw 15 patients, and 13 had hepatitis C, a tenacious, insidious and sometimes fatal virus that infects the liver and that only now is becoming recognized as a public health threat.
The virus is a medical mystery.
Ever since a test to detect it in blood became available in 1990, doctors have found more and more people who are infected but have no symptoms.
Some 20 to 40 percent of people coming to inner-city hospitals have the virus, as do 80 percent of intravenous drug users.
Yet, to doctors' puzzlement, some 40 percent of hepatitis C carriers say they never used intravenous drugs, never had a transfusion before 1990 when blood was first screened for the virus, and have no apparent reason for contracting the infection by blood-to-blood contact.


Guest Supply reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Crown Heights, Inequality Goes Back to '66
To the Editor:
Andrew W. Cooper maintains in "The Two Nations of Crown Heights" (Op-Ed, Jan. 6) that the antagonism between blacks and Hasidim in that Brooklyn section had its roots in 1977, when local government allegedly made greater municipal resources available to the neighborhood's Jews.


Mark Twain Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Suit Threatens Indigent-Care System
Every year, Jamaica Hospital in Queens treats thousands of patients like Elba Echevarria, who arrived at its emergency room last summer with a crushed finger and no health insurance.
"I was grateful to them because I didn't have anyplace else to go," said Mrs.
Echevarria, 47, a nurse's aide whose $7.50-an-hour job did not include benefits.


Advertising
WHEN a large agency remakes itself, it's often difficult to communicate that change is under way.
After all, it is not as if, in some equivalent of Consolidated Edison, a huge "Dig we must" sign can be posted over a blank magazine page to indicate work in progress.
So in revamping the flagship New York office of DDB Needham Worldwide, Andy Berlin, who was unexpectedly named president there last spring, is taking some unusual steps to convey the extent of his plans.
One is to forgo, for an unspecified period, the pursuit of new business.
Another is to create a core team of high-ranking executives through hirings, reassignments and departures.


Ruddick Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Advances in Physics Lie Just Ahead
To the Editor:
We read with amusement your article about the "failure to find supersymmetry" in a high-energy physics experiment at Fermilab (Science Times, Jan. 5).
If all experiments found only what they were expected to find, they would be failures, since they would have only confirmed existing ideas and failed utterly to advance knowledge.


On My Mind; Bill Clinton's War
And so from the moment he takes the oath Bill Clinton becomes a wartime President -- exactly as he had known all along.
The reality that Mr.
Clinton knew before he was elected that he would preside over a country at war has escaped the public and battalions of politicians and commentators.


THE INAUGURATION: Generations of Transitions; Former Torch Passers Reflect on Clinton's Daunting Task
To Herbert Brownell Jr., Bill Clinton's experience is renewed proof that no incoming President has anything approaching complete control of his agenda.
Hamilton Jordan urges Mr.
Clinton to fight the natural tendency to overreact to previous administrations' failings.
Michael K. Deaver hopes the Clinton team understands that "what's in the package counts as much as the wrapping."
Since the end of World War II, eight new Presidents have moved into the White House.
Two of them succeeded to power suddenly -- Lyndon B. Johnson on the death of John F. Kennedy and Gerald R. Ford on the resignation of Richard M. Nixon.
The six others, accompanied by leading members of their administrations, went through what Mr.
Clinton and his associates are experiencing now.


Corrections
A music review on Saturday about "Die Meistersinger von Nurnberg" at the Metropolitan Opera on Thursday night misidentified the singer who performed David.
He is Lars Magnusson, not Jan-Hendrik Rootering.
Mr.
Rootering sang Pogner.


Whitney Holding reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Recriminations Follow Debacle of Short First Flight of Earthwinds
BITTER recriminations and a far-reaching post-mortem followed the crash last week of Earthwinds, probably the most expensive and ambitious ballooning project in history.
But participants believe the crash offers a painful object lesson not only for balloonists but for planners of such complex systems as future space missions.
Earthwinds, a 300-foot-high assemblage resembling a gigantic hourglass, was designed to fly nonstop around the world to achieve the last major landmark in lighter-than-air aviation.
The craft and its three-member crew rose majestically above a snow-covered Nevada airfield last Tuesday to the cheers of a crowd that included former astronauts, champion balloonists, actors, business executives, airplane pilots, aeronautical engineers, systems analysts and other experts.
But the shimmering, translucent balloon scarcely covered five miles before scraping a ridge line on the California-Nevada border and crash-landing on its farther slope.


Colonial BancGroup Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE INAUGURATION: A Lunch to Remember; 'Power Lunch' With Clinton: Faces and Food for Thought
It was billed as a gathering of ordinary people who impressed Bill Clinton and Al Gore and their wives on the way to the White House.
If the "Faces of Hope" luncheon showed anything, it was that ordinary people -- thanks to Oprah Winfrey and Phil Donahue -- are as hip and media savvy as the canniest political operative.
It was not a question of who was exploiting whom, but rather how much mileage each could get out of the all-expense paid week of inaugural hoopla.


Lattice Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


Rumors of U.S. Superplane Appear Unfounded
RUMORS and reported sightings of a secret American superplane have been proliferating lately almost as abundantly as yarns about unidentified flying objects.
But despite the acknowledged yearning of many American aviation experts and buffs for an ultrafast spy plane, it appears that development of even the engine needed for such a plane is moving faster in Russia than in this country.
The possible existence of a new American intelligence-gathering plane capable of flying at eight times the speed of sound has been suggested in recent articles in the British periodical Jane's Defense Weekly, the American magazine Aviation Week &amp; Space Technology and other respected technical publications.


Energy Nominee Plans Broad Agenda
The Clinton Administration plans to make the modernization of the Russian oil industry a priority of the Energy Department under a program to aid American industry, stabilize world oil markets and assist Russian democracy by providing hard currency.
That goal was one of a broad range of programs outlined by Hazel R. O'Leary, the nominee for Energy Secretary, in a written response to questions from the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee.


Gundle Environmental Sys.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Catalina Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An Inaugural Guide
Today 1:30 P.M.
"Salute to Children," Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts (ticket required). (Disney Channel - 3 to 4 P.M. (taped)) 3:30 P.M.
"Salute to Youth," Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts (ticket required). (Disney Channel - 5 to 6 P.M. (taped)) 7 P.M.
"Presidential Gala," Capital Center, with entertainment (ticket required). (CBS - 9 to 11 P.M.) Tomorrow 8 A.M.
Prayer service, Metropolitan A.M.E.
Church (by invitation).
President Bush and his wife, Barbara, receive President-elect Bill Clinton and his wife, Hillary, at the White House. 11:30 A.M.
Inaugural ceremony, west front of the Capitol.
Inovation by the Rev.
Billing Graham.
Vice President-elect Al Gore is administered the oath of office by retired Justice Thurgood Marshall.
President-elect Clinton is administered the oath of office by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist.
Mr.
Clinton delivers his inaugural address.
Private luncheon with Congressional leaders and members of the Supreme Court, at the Capitol. (NBC - 10 A.M. to 2 P.M., CBS, ABC, CNN - 10 A.M. to 1:00 P.M., PBS - 10 A.M. to 2:30 P.M., FOX - 11:30 A.M. to 1:30 P.M.) 2 P.M.
The Clintons and Gores head for the inaugural parade reviewing stand in front of the White House.  2:30 P.M.
The inaugural parade begins following route from the Capitol to the White House. (NBC, CBS, ABC, CNN - 2 to 4 P.M.) 6:30 P.M. - 9 P.M.
The ITT Corporation is holding a "gala reception" in the Sheraton Carlton Hotel. 7 P.M.
National Ball, National Building Museum.
Thursday 9 A.M. - Noon Open house at the White House (ticket required). 2 P.M.-5 P.M.
Reception for Arkansans, White House (ticket required).


Humbled in Hartford: UConn Loses by 17
Another stellar performance by Othella Harrington, Georgetown's freshman center, opened the way for the Hoyas tonight.
They routed Connecticut, 86-69, and moved into a tie for third place with Pittsburgh in the Big East standings.
And they are just a half game behind the co-leaders, St.
John's and Seton Hall.
Georgetown's record is now 11-2 over all and 4-2 in the conference.
Their losses were by one point to Boston College and by 11 to last-place Miami.
Connecticut dropped to 8-4 and 3-3.
The 17-point margin of defeat was definitive, as the Huskies' other losses had been by 4, 3 and 2 points.


Corrections
An obituary on Thursday about Thomas B. Curtis, a former Congressman from Missouri, omitted the name of a surviving son.
He is Leland B. Curtis of Webster Groves, Mo.


No Headline
"Every administration tends to be an overreaction to the last. We went in because of Watergate, and in that environment we wanted to be loose, informal, open, press conference every week, no White House perks, and it didn't work. You have to strike a balance." -- HAMILTON JORDAN, President Carter's chief of staff.  [ A15:6. ]


Bridge
Bridge, like golf and tennis, has a "senior circuit." The minimum age is 55, and the overall winner in 1992 was Loren Lang of Hurley.
N.D.
The most successful married couple, finishing tied for fourth at the end of the year, was from White Plains.
Dr.
Dan Hertz, a psychiatrist on the faculty of Cornell Medical College, and Natalie Hertz, a lawyer who is a director of the New York State Bar Association, won 533 master points in senior events.
They won 13 regional senior events, including a rare triple victory in Virginia Beach, Va., in October.
On the diagramed deal, played there, they bid efficiently to six no-trump using a Roman Key-Card Blackwood sequence.
Four no-trump apparently set diamonds as trump, so five spades showed the diamond queen as well as two key cards, the spade ace and the diamond king.
Natalie Hertz, as South, beat a planned retreat to six no-trump and West led the club king.


Turks' Concern Grows On Tie to Anti-Iraq Bloc
Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel summoned the United States, British and French ambassadors today amid indications that Turkey is increasingly uncomfortable about being brought closer to the conflict with Iraq.
As American and allied warplanes again struck in Iraq, Turkish officials also said they were uneasy about allowing the Incirlik air base to be used for offensive bombing raids on Iraqi targets.
At present the base is used for planes that patrol the area.


Executive Changes
COROMETRICS MEDICAL SYSTEMS INC., New York, a unit of American Home Products Corp., named Craig A. Castle president.
DETREX CORP., Southfield, Mich., named Joseph L. Wenzler president and chief executive.


TransAmerican Waste Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Now Hirsch Gets His Chance
Now, it's John Vanbiesbrouck's turn to watch from the sideline.
Tonight, rookie goaltender Corey Hirsch will make his first National Hockey League start when the Rangers face the Red Wings in Detroit.
Vanbiesbrouck, who has started New York's last three games, will serve as Hirsch's backup.
Meanwhile, Mike Richter, the other Ranger goaltender, will practice in Binghamton with Hirsch's former teammates at the Rangers' minor league affiliate.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  AN INMATE SCHEME THAT STARTLES JAILERS
New York City jail officials thought they had seen it all.
Now they have uncovered a scheme that even startles them: Inmates are shooting themselves.
Investigators say they think as many as 10 inmates in the last three years have arranged to suffer the pain of minor gun wounds.
Their payoff: They can sue the city for negligence, or they can try to get better jail accommodations.
In most cases, the investigators believe, the inmates have bribed correction officers -- with payoffs ranging from $1,100 to $7,500 -- to smuggle in the guns.
None of the suits, which accuse the city of failing to provide adequate protection in the jails, have come to trial.
A1.
UNDERCOVER OFFICERS WOUNDED


Classical Music in Review
Olaf Bar Baritone Alice Tully Hall


Criticized as Appeaser, Vance Defends His Role in Balkans
On the eve of what he regards as a decisive moment in his five-month effort to find a way to end the savage wars in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cyrus R. Vance finds himself for the first time in his life being sharply criticized for even talking about peace.
Some of Mr.
Vance's longstanding admirers are among those who say they are dismayed at his willingness to deal with Serbian leaders in Yugoslavia and Bosnia whom Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger has included on a list of suspected war criminals.
The underlying criticism is that Mr.
Vance, in his desire to find a solution, is appeasing the aggressors in Bosnia.


Standard Products reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


Electronic Arts reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Teco Energy Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hancock Holding reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE INAUGURATION: The Overview; Era of 'Peril and Promise' Is Ahead, Clinton Says
President-elect Bill Clinton blended celebration with statecraft today as he sought to assure foreign diplomats that he was ready to inherit the White House in a time of global conflict.
On a day when American, French and British planes again bombed missile batteries in Iraq, Mr.
Clinton ducked out of public view now and then for briefings by his national security advisers.
And just a few hours after the White House had reported the latest attack, Mr.
Clinton took his constantly expanding inaugural entourage to his alma mater, Georgetown University, to address Washington's diplomatic corps.


Software Spectrum reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


China Cultivates Its Burmese Connection
To the Editor:
Your article on China's interests in Southeast Asia (front page, Jan. 11), while perceptive, ignores one major element in China's role in that region: its relationship with Myanmar, formerly Burma.


Observer; Diaries on the Eve
Bill Clinton's Diary
Inauguration tomorrow.
Hillary wants me to cut 45 minutes out of the speech.
Tell her there's not a superfluous word in it.
"How about those 6,000 words explaining what GATT is?" she asks.
"How about those 5,000 words explaining the difference between a macroeconomist and a mackerel sky?" Luckily we're interrupted by phone call from G. Bush.
"Friendly advice," Bush says: "Whatever you do, don't keep a diary." Apparently there's nothing prosecutors like more than spending dozens of millions of dollars trying to subpoena diaries.
This is the last diary entry I'll ever make.
Not that I'm worried about being prosecuted.
It's just that diary pages are too small to hold the forty or fifty thousand words I'll need every night to do justice to the events of my day.
Albert Gore's Diary
Worried all day about the rain forest burning.
Tipper begs me to give it up for the next 24 hours.
She thinks it's worrying about all that burning wood that makes me look so wooden when standing beside Bill.
Yes, empathy for the death of trees may be showing up in my posture as rigor mortis.
After breakfast tomorrow I'll try to worry about global warming.
Senator Nunn's Diary
It could be me up there tomorrow except for those popularity polls -- just one short year ago -- showing no earthly human could possibly beat George Bush.
Richard Nixon's Diary
Of course I didn't expect Clinton to offer me a front-row seat for the swearing-in.
That would be wrong.
Should he ask me to head an emergency program to prevent the former Soviet Union from collapsing into a chaos perilous to the entire world, I shall accept it as a great American uniquely qualified for the assignment -- ought to accept it without pointing out that Clinton was not so quick to recognize my stature when invitations to the swearing-in were being handed out.
Marilyn Quayle's Diary
Dan thinks increasingly of being the next President.
This morning he asked, if I became First Lady, would I let him invite Murphy Brown to the White House.
I asked why in the world he would want to do that.
He said he thinks his attack on Murphy Brown cost votes in the last election and believes inviting her to the White House would show he has nothing against her, thus winning over her supporters and helping himself to get elected.
I pointed out that if I were the First Lady he would already have been elected, so wouldn't need the Murphy Brown vote.
"Good thinking, Marilyn," he told me, as usual.
Barbara Bush's Diary
Keeping my eye upon the doughnut and not upon the hole, thank Heaven George will no longer have to prove he's just plain folks by stuffing himself on pork rinds that give him those awful gas pains.
Mario Cuomo's Diary
Sure it could be me up there tomorrow except for those popularity polls showing no human on earth could beat George Bush, in addition to many, many other factors which tempt me to contradict myself and say, No, it could not be me up there tomorrow.
Tomorrow!
Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow creeps in this petty pace, as Shakespeare observed.
But I shall save that for my journal, not throw it away on a flimsy diary.
Some think my journal has literary merit, and literature will always outlast the governorship of New York.
Its other advantage is that you don't have to go to Albany to do it.
Saddam Hussein's Diary
The hour of glory approaches.
The father of evil, the Satan of Satans, the poisonous begetter of mothers of all battles will be forever stripped of his power tomorrow.
As I have commanded the author of destiny to write, "It is writ that when the abominable Bush is struck from power, the rule of Saddam will roll on unbroken upon mighty blasts of heated air." Powerful is my prose.
Beware thereof, O Clinton!
Ronald Reagan's Diary
There they go again.


Trouble in the Future
To the Editor:
A Jan. 1 article about fortunetelling in New York City omits the most important fact of all: under article 165.35 of New York's penal law, it is a class B misdemeanor to tell fortunes by claimed or pretended use of occult powers, to answer questions or give advice on personal matters or to exorcise, influence or affect evil spirits or curses.


Mountaineer Bankshares of W. Va. Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Disabled Germans Fear They'll Be the Next Target
Frank Weber has never been able to walk during the 25 years of his young life, but his wheelchair has made him mobile and independent enough that he hardly ever thinks about his handicap.
In the Kaufhof department store near his home here a couple of months ago, three neo-Nazi skinheads brutally reminded him of his condition.
"They must have forgotten you in Dachau," one of the youths snarled at him, while the others looked on menacingly.
None of them were older than 21.


Reynolds Metals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bills Aren't Sounding As If You Know What Is a Concern for Them
An hour after Buffalo had beaten the Miami Dolphins on Sunday to win its third consecutive American Football Conference championship, there were four players left in the Bills' locker room, talking to reporters.
Linebacker Cornelius Bennett was one of them.
This caught even Bennett by surprise.
"This is the longest I've ever stayed in the locker room after a game talking to reporters in the last two years," Bennett said.
"Usually, I'm out of here in 20 minutes. But I don't mind standing around talking if we play the way we've been playing."


Roshangarh Journal; As India Seethes, Old Rhythms Soothe a Village
Sabir Ali combed his cream-white beard with his gnarled fingers and broke into a toothless grin.
"Oh, yes," he said, "I'll plow fields for Hindus this year, just like every year."
Mr.
Ali, a Muslim, has lived in this village of 3,000, half Hindu, half Muslim, his whole life, "50 or 60 years," he said, shaking his head slightly at the blur of years that makes precision unnecessary, and impossible.


Neighbors Remember A 'Grandmother' to All
He did not have to kill her, her grandson and neighbors insisted.
Doll Johnson would have given him the money anyway, as she had done to so many needy people in her 80 years of life.
Instead, Mrs.
Johnson, who suffered from arthritis, diabetes and heart disease and walked with a cane, was attacked Sunday afternoon as she was entering the Salvation Baptist Church in the Bronx by a man who beat her to death with a pipe and tried to flee with her purse.


Employee Benefit Plans reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


A Hard Lesson in Living With Seniority Rules
To Aicila Barksdale, Kendra McCall and the other fourth graders struggling to be somebody in the gifted and talented class at Public School 145, Lorraine Uhlmann was someone special.
She was the teacher who taught them how to figure how many seeds are in a pumpkin, who showed them how to bake peanut butter cookies, who took them on a weeklong wilderness adventure, who assigned more homework than the other teachers, who hated the color green.


Sports of The Times; Sir Charles Needs Time To Reflect
It started off so sweetly for Charles Barkley and it ended so nastily.
He loped toward the court for pre-game warm-ups and he spotted a couple of little boys standing there, gawking at the giants.
Barkley somehow knew these boys had been waiting all their young lives for a glimpse of his shaven head and his alert pointy ears and his piercing calculating eyes, and he extended his hand and gave a deadpan professional very low-five to one of them.
What a nice fellow.
What a charming way to start a Martin Luther King holiday afternoon game.


Early Departure for the Lone McEnroe Still on Tour
Since 1988, when the Australian Open left the grass at Kooyong Stadium for the Rebound Ace of Flinders Park, the McEnroe clan has nearly always played an integral role in the proceedings.
This year, that is no longer the case.


Brain Cancer Strikes Chief of TLC Beatrice
Reginald F. Lewis, chief executive of TLC Beatrice International Holdings and one of the most prominent black businessmen in the United States, has been hospitalized with brain cancer and is in a coma, the company announced yesterday.
Citing a request by Mr.
Lewis's family for privacy, a company spokesman, R. S. Meily, declined to provide any details of the illness or reveal the hospital to which Mr.
Lewis was taken.


Witness, on Videotape, Links Lawyer to Bank
In unusual videotaped pretrial testimony, a dying former official of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International testified yesterday against Robert A. Altman, Clark M. Clifford's law partner, strongly linking Mr.
Altman to B.C.C.I. and its secret control of an American bank.
The Manhattan District Attorney's office arranged for the videotaped testimony because Khalid Sharih, who worked for B.C.C.I. in New York, is dying of cancer of the lungs and pancreas and may not live until Mr.
Altman's trial.


Russia Urges the Security Council To Reconvene on the Iraq Fighting
Uneasy at the renewed attacks on a former Soviet ally, Russia urged today that the Security Council be reconvened to consider the tensions in Iraq.
A statement issued by the Foreign Ministry reiterated Moscow's contention that Iraq was responsible for the conflict and that the solution was for Baghdad to abide by United Nations decisions.
But the statement was muted in its support of the United States air strikes.


James McCallum, 48, A Music-List Publisher
James R. McCallum, the publisher of the Musical America International Directory of the Performing Arts, died on Monday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 48 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a brain tumor, said his brother, John T. McCallum.


Bulls Activate Williams
The Chicago Bulls activated center SCOTT WILLIAMS and placed RODNEY McCRAY on the injured list.
McCray sprained his right knee last Friday against Golden State.
Williams had been placed on the injured list Jan. 8 with tendinitis in his right knee. (AP)


Critics Nominate 25 Books
The National Book Critics Circle yesterday announced the nominations for its annual awards for fiction, general nonfiction, biography, poetry and criticism.


A.T.&amp; T Plans a Phone-Line TV Device
A.T.&amp; T. and a partner announced yesterday that they planned to develop a device that would decipher movies and other video services over telephone lines rather than the thick coaxial cable of the cable-television operator.
A.T.&amp; T. and the partner, Compression Labs Inc., have not developed a prototype or determined a possible price range for the device, but said it would be aimed at both consumers and businesses.
Moreover, for the device to work, the hundreds of central offices of local phone companies would have to be rewired with new hardware and software to raise the carrying capacity of telephone lines nearly 80 times.
Phone vs.
Cable Companies
The A.T.&amp; T. device is one of what is expected to be a growing number of new technologies unleashed by the Government's decision last year to allow telephone companies to carry video services.
The Federal Communications Commission decision pitted phone companies, which have lines into virtually every American home, directly against cable companies, which have lines into about 60 percent of households.


F.B.I. CHIEF PLANS TO FIGHT FOR JOB
William S. Sessions has told associates he will fight for his job as Director of the F.B.I. in the face of a searing internal ethics report that accused him of evading taxes and refusing to cooperate with an investigation of a home mortgage loan.
Several people who talked with Mr.
Sessions in recent days said he was stung and angry over the disciplinary findings included in a memorandum sent on Friday from Attorney General William P. Barr.


Acxiom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


'The Crying Game': The Healing Powers Of a Successful Movie
Less than two years ago, Neil Jordan considered giving up the movie business.
"The movies were getting worse and worse, the business seemed more difficult to get anything through," he said.
"You looked at what was coming out: such paucity of invention. I kept thinking, 'Why not take up something more rewarding?' "
At a virtual creative dead end in films and feeling desperate, Mr.
Jordan, a Dublin-based screenwriter, novelist and director found in a desk a short story that he had written years ago.
"I took the short story out and thought, 'Wait, why haven't I done this as a film?' And the more I wrote it as a film, the more I wanted to make it."


Anderson Is Richer, And Magrane Is Poorer
Injury-plagued JOE MAGRANE of the St.
Louis Cardinals accepted a 10 percent pay cut yesterday, but BRADY ANDERSON of the Baltimore Orioles agreed to a 1993 salary that is more than five times his 1992 income.
Anderson, who came into his own last season, said yes to a salary of $1,855,000.
That amounts to a raise of $1.49 million and represents a 408 percent increase over the $365,000 he earned last season.
In 1992, the outfielder batted .271, hit 21 home runs, drove in 80 runs and had 53 stolen bases while missing only three games.


MPG Investments reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dr. R. H. Edwin Espy, 84, a Leader of Ecumenism
Dr.
R.
H.
Edwin Espy, a former general secretary of the National Council of Churches of Christ in the United States and a leader of the ecumenical movement for more than 40 years, died Sunday at the University of Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 84.
Dr.
Espy, who lived in Doylestown, Pa., near Philadelphia, died of complications from heart surgery, said his brother, Willard R. Espy, of Manhattan.


U.S. SECURITY TEAM STILL INCOMPLETE
Two days before he inherits a series of foreign policy crises, President-elect Bill Clinton has assembled a team of foreign policy advisers but has yet to fill most of his senior defense positions, transition officials said today.
Unlike President Bush, whose only immediate foreign policy crisis upon assuming office in 1989 was how fast the Soviets would leave Afghanistan, Mr.
Clinton must deal with full-blown crises in Iraq, Somalia, the Balkans, Haiti and Russia.


Webber Breaks Nose
CHRIS WEBBER, Michigan's star sophomore forward, broke his nose during practice and was described as questionable for the Wolverines' game tomorrow night at Minnesota.
Webber leads Michigan with an average of 20.4 points, 9.6 rebounds and 3.3 blocked shots per game.


NBD Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SEARS EXTENDS CHILD APPAREL PROMOTION TO SHOES
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company is extending its Kidvantage program, which gives customers a discount for every $100 of children's clothing they purchase plus a warranty if the child wears out a garment before outgrowing it, to include shoes.
While adding shoes to the program, Sears said it would delete toys, accessories and infant furniture.
Some analysts dismissed Kidvantage as a gimmick when Sears introduced it in 1991, but many now say it has helped the company regain some share of the market for children's apparel.


Conversation Piece


Recalling Big Dreams of the First Marine to Die in Somalia
Domingo Arroyo Jr. could not wait to join the Marine Corps.
So early in his senior year at Elizabeth High School, he enlisted as a "poolee" -- one of a small number of recruits who sign up before they are eligible to report to training camp.
While his classmates joined school clubs and teams, Mr.
Arroyo, a chubby teen-ager with a round face, spent his senior year preparing for the Marines.
He went to meetings on what to expect in the Marines.
He jogged and did thousands of sit-ups and push-ups to prepare for basic training.


An Invisible Generation Looks in the Mirror; Search for Nihilism
To the Editor:
To the authors of "The Boomlet Generation" (Op-Ed, Jan. 4), the greatest anxiety the post-baby boom generation suffers from comes not from being misunderstood by its elders or scorned by its successors, but rather from being ignored by advertisers who, in their ruthless game of demographics, slight their generation (which is also mine) in favor of our "noisy, younger siblings."


Hibernia Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rough Times for Rich and Famous
The officials ruined Charles Barkley's day.
Patrick Ewing's was nearly "messed up" by the fans.
It sure is a tough life, having to bear the superstar's cross for a measly five million or so a year, not counting endorsements.
What with Michael Jordan having whole books published on how unspeakably difficult it often is to be Michael Jordan, it has become apparent that being a Dream Teamer has become something like being on the pro tennis tour.
They're all flithy rich and famous and simply miserable trying to cope with the public spectacle of it all.


Bears Scrimmage With Giants for Wannstedt
Even though the Dallas Cowboys' main concern is an impending trip to the Super Bowl, their defensive coordinator is being wooed heavily by both the Giants and the Chicago Bears, with indications that the Bears may be close to gaining the advantage.
Last night, a television station in Pittsburgh, where Dave Wannstedt grew up, reported that he was in Chicago yesterday and that the Bears could make the unprecedented move of naming him as their new coach even as Wannstedt's team was making preparations to meet the Buffalo Bills in Super Bowl XXVII on Jan. 31.
WTAE in Pittsburgh reported that Wannstedt was "about to sign" to replace Mike Ditka as coach of the Bears.


COMPANY EARNINGS: Highlights; NATIONSBANK (N)
Making loans is again becoming a good business, at least for Nationsbank.
After experiencing a decline in lending in 1991 and the first half of 1992, the banking company based in Charlotte, N.C., increased its loans and leases by 3.8 percent in the fourth quarter to $71.8 billion.
Loan demand is beginning to pick up in the Southeast, analysts say, and existing business borrowers are not paying off their loans as quickly.
Even better, the quality of the bank's portfolio has improved sharply.
At year-end, $2 billion of its assets were nonperforming, 1.7 percent of the total.
At the end of 1991, the nonperforming assets were $2.8 billion, 2.5 percent of the total.
Nationsbank has sold off packages of its performing and nonperforming real estate assets.


A Dream for Dieters: Fish Species Can Alter Its Body Size at Will
SCIENTISTS say they have discovered a shape-changing fish that can detect the presence of hungry predators and then turn itself from easy pickings into something much more difficult to swallow.
In a recent report in the journal Science, researchers from the University of Lund in Sweden said that when crucian carp, a relative both of goldfish and the common carp, swam in ponds with carp-eating pike, they quickly began bulking up.
They pile new muscle growth onto their backs until eventually they become hulking enough to make themselves difficult or impossible for a pike to fit in its mouth.


Middle-of-the-Road Fashion Plates
Whether she likes the idea or not, Hillary Clinton is the country's latest fashion icon.
She is neither dowdy nor clothes-crazy.
Like thousands of successful working women, she wears tailored sportswear that sees her through eventful days.
She keeps up with fashion without latching onto the extreme designs of fashion leaders.
So she is not very likely to be seen in a Calvin Klein see-through georgette, but is highly likely to be seen in a Donna Karan long black skirt.
Ms.
Karan is one of the designers whose clothes Mrs.
Clinton has been buying at Barbara Jean Ltd., the boutique in Little Rock, Ark., where she has shopped for 12 years.
Others are Randy Kemper, who made the red blazer and black skirt she wore as Inauguration Week started on Sunday; St.
John Knits, which made the brown knit dress she wore yesterday, and Sarah Phillips, who designed her dress for the inaugural ball.


People's Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An Invisible Generation Looks in the Mirror
To the Editor:
In "The Boomlet Generation" (Op-Ed, Jan. 4), Alexander Abrams and David Lipsky make a case for defining generations by decade of college graduation.
They then go on to characterize the generation that completed college in the 1980's, people who are now between 24 and 32.
As a member of that generation, I am dismayed by how foreign the people described by the authors seem.


Gooden Struck by Dizzy Spell
Four days after his one-car accident in St.
Petersburg, Fla., Dwight Gooden resumed his off-season workouts yesterday and reported some dizziness after a two-mile run.
Gooden said he rested for about 10 or 15 minutes after feeling lightheaded and then finished his training without further interruption.
"After that, everything was normal," Gooden said in a telephone interview with reporters.
"My mom has been all over me to get it checked out, but I think everything is O.K. If I feel dizzy tomorrow, I'll get it checked out."


Wellfleet Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Snapple Escapes the Grip of Rumors
At first, there were only one or two inquiries, by phone and very specific: Was Snapple, soda maker to the New Age, supporting Operation Rescue, the anti-abortion group that tries to shut down abortion clinics?
Odd, thought Arnie Greenberg, a company founder and the chief operating officer, but not especially vexing.
"Eh," he said of his first reaction in early August, emphasizing the syllable with a shrug that brings one floral suspender up near his ear.
But a week or two later his brother came home to Long Island from a trip to the Poconos.
He told Mr.
Greenberg that people were saying, "Your brother's anti-choice."


Murray Phillips, 83, Singer and Teacher
Murray Phillips, a folk singer and songwriter, died on Saturday at his home in Emerson, N.J.
He was 83.
He died of of leukemia, his family said.
Mr.
Phillips was best known for his renderings of authentic American ballads from the Revolutionary War era to the early 1900's.
He appeared at the Blue Note and other clubs and halls in the New York metropolitan area, and he performed on television.
He recorded four albums of children's songs on the RCA label.


Most Markets Open Yesterday
The Government securities market was closed yesterday in the United States in observance of the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
All other financial and commodity markets were open.
Many banks and government offices were closed.


Primitive Bosnian Clinic Appalls Convoy
Leaders of a relief convoy that reached the besieged Muslim community of Zepa in eastern Bosnia over the weekend said today that they had found doctors amputating limbs with a carpenter's saw, giving alcohol to surgical patients in place of anesthetics and cauterizing surgical wounds with a heated wire.
"They were scenes from medieval days," said Larry Hollingworth, a retired British Army colonel who was the principal relief official with the convoy, describing a makeshift clinic at Zepa.
"They had done 36 amputations, and not one of them had an anesthetic. They showed us the instrument they used. It was a carpenter's saw."


Investors Punish Centocor for More Bad News
Wall Street can be unforgiving of biotechnology stocks that fail to deliver on their promises.
That was quite evident yesterday when Centocor Inc. disclosed that it was stopping clinical trials in the United States on its leading new drug for the treatment of sepsis, an often-fatal bacterial infection, and was temporarily suspending sales in Europe.


Johnson Controls Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kuwait Edgy After Iraq Insult
A certain edginess lingered here today after the allied air raids against Iraq and a belligerent speech Sunday by President Saddam Hussein that took aim at the Kuwaiti royal family.
Newspapers here reported that the Government had asked France and Britain to send troops, as the United States had, to affirm their commitment to defend this country.


Review/Fashion; A Summer Softness From 7th Avenue
The fashion world operates according to its own clock.
This week, Seventh Avenue is on summer time, offering the clothes that will be in the stores starting in April to wear during the first big summer weekends..
The big news is that the soft, loose clothes that are pacing fashion for spring continue for summer.
And designers are so pleased with their thin, translucent summer styles -- in chiffon, for example -- that they are planning to continue similar shapes in jersey for fall and winter.


Pending Suits: Their Effect On Budget In New York
As New York State budget analysts prepare Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's budget, which is to be released today, one of their hardest tasks is accounting for unanticipated revenues and unexpected drains on the state treasury.
And one of the biggest unknowns is what effect the dozens of lawsuits pending against the state, like the ones challenging the various hospital surcharges, will have on the budget if the state loses.


British Air Redoing Plan With USAir
British Airways and USAir are said to be preparing a new plan of combined operations in an attempt to overcome opposition of United States carriers to an agreement that was withdrawn last month.
The Financial Times of London reported yesterday that the two airlines would announce an agreement at the end of the week that would give British Airways about a 20 percent voting stake in USAir for an investment of $340 million.
The British carrier is also said to be willing to drop its insistence on veto power over large expenditures by USAir.


Pending Suits: Their Effect On Budget In New York
As New York State budget analysts prepare Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's budget, which is to be released today, one of their hardest tasks is accounting for unanticipated revenues and unexpected drains on the state treasury.
And one of the biggest unknowns is what effect the dozens of lawsuits pending against the state, like the ones challenging the various hospital surcharges, will have on the budget if the state loses.


Hunting for Accord on Alaska Wolves
The great wolf debate swarmed into this small Indian village aboard a squadron of state-chartered airplanes today as Alaska officials sought to convince conservationists and the American public that wolf killing has a beneficial side.
Greeted by putt-putting snowmobiles, barking sled dogs and the howling wind off the swampy Minto Flats, some 30 participants and reporters who had come from the Alaska Wolf Summit conference in Fairbanks were ushered to a school gymnasium.
There, Athabascan Indian speakers, taking time from preparations for a traditional funeral feast and the Miami-Buffalo game on satellite television, told of how their ability to keep moose meat on their families' tables was being threatened by those people from far away who want to protect wolves.


A Final Salute to Iba
Former players of Henry Iba joined his family and friends and coaches from around the country in paying their final respects yesterday to one of basketball's great coaches.
MIKE KRZYZEWSKI of Duke, NORM STEWART of Missouri and DON HASKINS of Texas-El Paso were among the current and former coaches who attended a 40-minute funeral service in Gallagher-Iba Arena in Stillwater, Okla., the site of many victories during Iba's 36 years as the Oklahoma State coach.


Aurora Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


McKay Is Sidelined
For the time being, Coach HERB BROOKS of the Devils will have to find somebody else to play left wing alongside BERNIE NICHOLLS, because RANDY McKAY, who played the position Saturday night in Nicholls's New Jersey debut, will be out for at least five days with a strained right knee.
McKay was injured on a check by Islanders defenseman DARIUS KASPARAITIS.


Suspect in Bronx Slaying Recalled as a Loner
Within the shelter of the Franklin Avenue Armory, Christopher Battiste was a cipher -- a loner who lashed out with angry words and karate kicks at unseen enemies while meandering aimlessly about the drill floor by day and trembling fitfully in his cot at night.
They called him a "yellow," someone who lived in a special section for residents with mental health problems, and in the informal caste system that sets the tone of social life inside the sprawling shelter, yellows are best left alone.
But the man they avoided was very much on their minds yesterday, one day after the police arrested him on charges of bludgeoning 80-year-old Doll Johnson to death on her way to church.


CHRONICLE
Every December PAUL NEWMAN, the president of Newman's Own, producer of salad dressings, popcorn, spaghetti sauce and other foods, and A. E. HOTCHNER, the author and executive vice president of the company, sit down together to divide the year's profits among charities -- until not a cent is left in the coffers.
"Until this year, there has been a mild increase in legitimate charity requests," Mr.
Hotchner said the other day.
"This year there has been an explosion. Instead of the 1,500 we usually get, there were more than 2,500. There was such a frantic quality to the requests, which hadn't appeared before, as if getting something from us meant their survival. Paul and I were shocked."


United Carolina Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


MDS Health Group reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


LaserMaster Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE INAUGURATION: Static on the Coverage; Viewers Are Upset Over HBO's Rights To Inaugural Event
In the middle of one of the most glittering events of the inaugural week, the Sunday concert at the Lincoln Memorial, people watching on CNN and C-Span found themselves cut off from the songs of stars like Diana Ross, Bob Dylan and Kenny Rogers.
Many viewers called the two cable networks to complain, wondering how exclusive rights to an event in so public a place as the Lincoln Memorial could be bought.
They were told that HBO had paid about $1.5 million to the Presidential Inaugural Committee for exclusive rights to tape the performances for transmission Sunday night.


Iona Appliances reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Federal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


United New Mexico Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Centocor stock plunged when it said it was ending domestic tests and suspending sales in Europe of its new drug to treat an often-fatal bacterial infection.
The announcement of a high death rate among patients using the drug also depressed the stock of Eli Lilly, which invested $100 million in Centocor.  [ Page D1. ]
Xerox will divest its financial services operations and take a $778 million after-tax charge against fourth-quarter earnings.
It will also take a $650 million charge involving retirement benefits.
The total charges will bring a large loss for the year.  [ D1. ]


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills normally held on Monday.
But because government offices were closed yesterday for the observance of the birthday of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., the auction was delayed until today.
Traders said that by late in the day Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was at 2.94 percent and the rate on a six-month bill at 3.08 percent.


Critic's Notebook; Robert Shaw Builds a Chorus, and Leads It
It is too easy to forget, when faced with a polished, humane and subtle performance like the one of Berlioz's Requiem that Robert Shaw conducted on Sunday afternoon in Carnegie Hall, that music's grand power comes from small details, that its spontaneity arises from meticulous labor, that its simplicity can be created only by confronting seemingly countless complexities.
This Requiem hid its origins; it had an organic character, with each movement establishing its own pulse and breath.
The performance seemed almost improvised, so natural were its gestures.
Yet behind this performance was a six-day workshop run by Mr.
Shaw in which participants from 36 states sang sustained monotones, walked around in circles, counted beats like first-year music students and clapped rhythms.
Before the Offertorium could create that other-worldly quality, the singers had to learn to sing without accent but with precise articulation.
Before the setting of the "Salva Me" text could seem a matter of devout respiration, Mr.
Shaw tried conducting three beats to the singers' four -- so they would end up feeling only the pulse of the first.
Some early readings focused only on rhythms, sung softly: "one, and, two, and, tree, and" (the "tree" sound being quicker and more precise than an elongated "three").
The singers also, unusually, sang the lines of the piano transcription or joined, in unison, on individual vocal parts.


Music Notes; Probing the Inner Life Of Gershwin the Man
George Gershwin's music is virtually always in the air, but the details of his personal life have remained something of a mystery.
It may well be that at this point, nearly 56 years after the composer's death, it's only the music that matters.
But Gershwin fans interested in peeking behind the scrim erected by the composer's family will have an opportunity to reconsider the composer's life and times in May, when Joan Peyser's biography, "The Memory of All That: The Life of George Gershwin," is due from Simon &amp; Schuster.
The book, like Ms.
Peyser's racy 1987 study of Leonard Bernstein, is a psychobiography rather than a musicological study: hints about Gershwin's private and interior life are gleaned from his letters, from his comments as recalled by his associates and from Ira Gershwin's song lyrics, which Ms.
Peyser says represent a veiled biography of the composer.
Gershwin himself is painted as narcissistic and insensitive, but also insecure and disappointed by his inability to gain a foothold in the "serious" music world.
The Unacknowledged Offspring
But there is also a good helping of gossip, and the section of the book that will undoubtedly be most widely talked about is Ms.
Peyser's discussion of Alan Gershwin, an impoverished songwriter who was born in 1926, whose original name was Albert Schneider and who grew up convinced that he was the composer's son.


An Inaugural Guide
Today 1:30 P.M.
"Salute to Children," Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts (ticket required). (Disney Channel - 3 to 4 P.M. (taped)) 3:30 P.M.
"Salute to Youth," Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts (ticket required). (Disney Channel - 5 to 6 P.M. (taped)) 7 P.M.
"Presidential Gala," Capital Center, with entertainment (ticket required). (CBS - 9 to 11 P.M.) Tomorrow 8 A.M.
Prayer service, Metropolitan A.M.E.
Church (by invitation).
President Bush and his wife, Barbara, receive President-elect Bill Clinton and his wife, Hillary, at the White House. 11:30 A.M.
Inaugural ceremony, west front of the Capitol.
Inovation by the Rev.
Billing Graham.
Vice President-elect Al Gore is administered the oath of office by retired Justice Thurgood Marshall.
President-elect Clinton is administered the oath of office by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist.
Mr.
Clinton delivers his inaugural address.
Private luncheon with Congressional leaders and members of the Supreme Court, at the Capitol. (NBC - 10 A.M. to 2 P.M., CBS, ABC, CNN - 10 A.M. to 1:00 P.M., PBS - 10 A.M. to 2:30 P.M., FOX - 11:30 A.M. to 1:30 P.M.) 2 P.M.
The Clintons and Gores head for the inaugural parade reviewing stand in front of the White House.  2:30 P.M.
The inaugural parade begins following route from the Capitol to the White House. (NBC, CBS, ABC, CNN - 2 to 4 P.M.) 6:30 P.M. - 9 P.M.
The ITT Corporation is holding a "gala reception" in the Sheraton Carlton Hotel. 7 P.M.
National Ball, National Building Museum.
Thursday 9 A.M. - Noon Open house at the White House (ticket required). 2 P.M.-5 P.M.
Reception for Arkansans, White House (ticket required).


Path of U.S. Missiles Brings Debate About Their Ability
The military's cruise missile strike against Baghdad on Sunday has stirred a debate about why American forces sent the low-flying drones north over the heavily defended, densely populated capital to reach their target, an industrial complex southeast of the city.
The Pentagon acknowledged today that one of the 45 cruise missiles fired on Sunday crashed near the Rashid Hotel in downtown Baghdad during the attack, killing two Iraqis, apparently after being shot down by Iraqi anti-aircraft fire.


Guilford Mills Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Teppco Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Center Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Questions for Ms. Baird
Zoe Baird and the Senate Judiciary Committee both get a chance to reclaim their injured reputations this week -- she by giving a candid accounting of why she hired illegal immigrants, the committee by asking the tough questions that will elicit a detailed airing of the episode.
Confirmation hearings on Ms.
Baird's nomination as Attorney General begin today.
Ms.
Baird has been sorely embarrassed by the disclosure that she and her husband employed a Peruvian couple living in the United States illegally; until they made a lump-sum payment this month, they had failed to pay Social Security taxes for the Peruvians, who worked for nearly two years as a baby sitter and driver.


Pending Suits: Their Effect On Budget In New York
As New York State budget analysts prepare Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's budget, which is to be released today, one of their hardest tasks is accounting for unanticipated revenues and unexpected drains on the state treasury.
And one of the biggest unknowns is what effect the dozens of lawsuits pending against the state, like the ones challenging the various hospital surcharges, will have on the budget if the state loses.


Suburban Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Furs and Cars Incite Ire Of the Painfully Correct
IT'S more demanding than special interests.
It's more pious than political correctness.
It's more evangelical than any rainbow coalition.
The painfully sincere tone and rigidly mandated diversity of this week's inaugural events constitute a frightening new movement in American politics: the Religious Left.


Diebold Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Insight; Suddenly Popular
For Ames Department Stores, no news seems to be very good news indeed, The new shares being issued to creditors more than doubled yesterday, after the company emerged from bankruptcy at the end of last year.
Despite a favorable mention in Barron's, analysts saw nothing new to assure them about Ames's longterm prospects.


Dr. Matthew A. Kelly, Professor Of Labor Relations, Is Dead at 79
Dr.
Matthew Arnold Kelly, professor emeritus of industrial and labor relations at Cornell University, died yesterday at New Rochelle Hospital.
He was 79 and lived in Larchmont, N.Y.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.
Dr.
Kelly had for decades arbitrated many labor-management disputes in New York City.
In 1971, he worked to end a citywide strike by police officers.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
N.A.
2.97
3.80
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.94
2.94
3.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.08
3.87
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.22
6.22
6.79
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.34
7.34
7.60
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.42
8.42
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.35
6.67
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer N.A.-Not available because of the observance of Martin Luther King Day Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Classical Music in Review
Curtis Macomber Violinist Kathryn Bache Miller Theater


Pulse Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Newsweek Contends Its 'Time' Has Come
Advertising for Time magazine once urged readers and advertisers to "Make time for Time." Now, its archrival, Newsweek, has prepared a campaign that audaciously asserts "It's time for Newsweek."
The theme will appear in television commercials that start tonight and in print advertisements appearing tomorrow for a special issue of the magazine devoted to the Clinton inauguration.
The issue, available only on newsstands, is due out later this week.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  ALLIES RENEW STRIKES ON IRAQ
Allied warplanes renewed their bombing raids against Iraq as Baghdad continued to defy enforcement of flight bans in both zones.
A1  TIT-FOR-TAT AGAINST HUSSEIN
News analysis: In his final days in office, President Bush has turned to a new policy of tit-for-tat to keep the pressure on Saddam Hussein while Bill Clinton tries to decide how to deal with him.
A1


Gordon W. Fawcett, 81, Paperback Book Pioneer
Gordon Wesley Fawcett, who with his three brothers built a publishing empire that included some of the most popular crime and romance magazines in the nation, died on Saturday at his home in North Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 81.
He died of heart failure, said a son, Dennis Fawcett of Greenwich, Conn.


THE INAUGURATION: The Social Scene
It cost $1,500 to eat a "brace of American birds" with Minnesota wild rice at an inaugural dinner honoring Al Gore, but the biggest of tonight's populist events was almost free.
A can of food for the homeless bought a seat for the rehearsal for the American Gala, and the food bin, like a municipal landfill, was a sociologist's treasure trove.
Inside were guideposts to life in the upper stratum of late 20th century America, or at least castaways from the gourmet aisle at the Georgetown Safeway -- a box of couscous, a bottle of French dressing (fat free), macaroni and cheese with noodles in the shapes of teddy bears.


A First for Kisio
Pittsburgh Penguins wing RICK TOCCHET and San Jose center KELLY KISIO have been added to the rosters for next month's National Hockey League All-Star game in Montreal, the league announced.
Tocchet replaces teammate MARIO LEMIEUX, who is expected to be sidelined at least six weeks while being treated for Hodgkin's disease.
Kisio, a 10-year N.H.L. veteran, will be playing in his first All-Star Game.
The 33-year-old former Ranger leads the Sharks in scoring with 12 goals and 30 assists. (AP)


NS Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


N.A.S.D. Set to Expand Available Data to Public
The board of the National Association of Securities Dealers is expected to announce today that it has approved a plan to make more information publicly available about disciplinary action against brokerage firms and their registered representatives.
Under the proposal, which board members took up late yesterday at a meeting in Carefree, Ariz., the Central Registration Depositary system would provide final abritration decisions and the size of penalties assessed against brokers and brokerage firms.
The public can reach the system through a toll-free telephone number.


Shedding Light On a Morning And a Name
It started with a hotel: the Chelsea Hotel in New York City, where Joni Mitchell was staying and, one bright morning, felt as if "the sun poured in like butterscotch and stuck to all my senses." Those impressions inspired "Chelsea Morning," the song that gave Chelsea Clinton her name.
But to Chelsea's parents, "Chelsea Morning" is a Judy Collins song.
The Collins version came out in the summer of 1969 as a single, and was a modest hit.
It had also appeared a few months earlier on Ms.
Mitchell's second album, "Clouds." Thus began a controversy that played a role in the Clinton campaign similar to Socks the Cat's run-in with photographers.


Pending Suits: Their Effect On Budget In New York
As New York State budget analysts prepare Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's budget, which is to be released today, one of their hardest tasks is accounting for unanticipated revenues and unexpected drains on the state treasury.
And one of the biggest unknowns is what effect the dozens of lawsuits pending against the state, like the ones challenging the various hospital surcharges, will have on the budget if the state loses.


Baker Fentress &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Year Dec 31


First Georgia Holding reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jostens Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Allies to Use Threat of Action on Flight Ban as Way to Press Serbs
The United States, Britain and France plan to delay any Security Council action on the enforcement of a ban on military flights over Bosnia and Herzegovina unless Bosnian Serbs completely reject a peace plan drawn up by international mediators.
Diplomats said they expected the Bosnian Serbs to agree to continue negotiations in Geneva next weekend with Cyrus R. Vance, the former Secretary of State who is representing the United Nations, and Lord Owen of Britain, who is representing the European Community.
As co-chairmen of this joint Balkan peace effort, they have proposed dividing the republic into 10 autonomous regions.
Although the plan denies Bosnian Serbs the independent Serbian state they have staked out in Bosnia, their proclaimed parliament is expected to vote on Tuesday to continue negotiations on the Vance-Owen plan as part of a peace settlement.


Fordham Reaches Bottom In Rout by Marquette
In an attempt to recapture the magic surrounding Fordham's 60-55 upset victory over St.
John's last Dec. 10, the message board in front of Rose Hill Gymnasium yesterday flashed this to Rams fans: "You helped 'em beat St. John's, Now help 'em beat Marquette."
It should have read, "Help 'em shoot," because Marquette (12-2) held Fordham to 32.6 percent accuracy in a 66-40 blowout.
It was the lowest output of the season for the Rams (4-11), who lost to Jackson State, 67-43, on Dec. 29.
Not only that, but this is Fordham's worst start since the 1976-77 team went 5-21 under Dick Stuart.


Patterns
Bloomingdale's Beachhead
Some members of the fashion establishment, who vacationed en masse in Miami Beach over Christmas, may be saying that South Beach is losing its cachet, but Bloomingdale's is betting that its customers aren't so jaded.


Concrete Bunker Dug Up From the Yard of Suspect
The concrete bunker in which Katie Beers was held captive for 16 days was carefully dug up today and removed from the yard of John Esposito, the Long Island man charged with kidnapping the 10-year-old girl.
Parents, making use of a school holiday, took their children to watch, talked of Katie and pointed to the bunker as an illustration of what might happen should a child stray with friend or stranger without parental permission.


Senate Republicans Hire Official Cited in Clinton Passport Search
A State Department official who was demoted for his role in the search of Bill Clinton's passport files during last year's Presidential campaign has been hired by Senate Republicans to monitor State Department activities under the new President.
The official, Steven K. Berry, was Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Legislative Affairs at the time of the search.
On Wednesday, he will go to work for the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, having been hired by Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, the ranking Republican on the committee.


President Riverboat Casinos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Old Kent Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NBB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Barkley Explodes, but It's Knicks Who Sparkle
It was a game that featured the dominant side of Patrick Ewing, and the volatile side of Charles Barkley, who angrily chased a referee after the final buzzer, vaulting over the scorer's table and pursuing the official down the runway to the locker room.
But when the game was over, the Knicks had passed a stress test and had secured one of their most important and satisfying victories of the season, beating the Phoenix Suns, 106-103, at Madison Square Garden.
But this Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Day matinee ended in bizarre fashion.


Wabash National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Good Times Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Gendex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Q&amp;A
Whirlpools
Q.
Are there really ship-swallowing whirlpools in the ocean, like the Maelstrom in the Edgar Allen Poe story?


Xillix Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Empire Blue Cross Also Gets It Right
To the Editor:
Unpopular though the idea may be nowadays, I write in defense of Empire Blue Cross-Blue Shield.


Cowboys Travel Full-Speed Ahead to Super Bowl
Enthusiasm, courage, talent.
All of the things the Dallas Cowboys showed in toppling the San Francisco 49ers by 30-20 on Sunday to earn a Super Bowl XXVII berth are reasons why they are early betting favorites to beat the Buffalo Bills.
"If Dallas doesn't commit any turnovers like they managed against us, they will beat Buffalo," said 49ers offensive tackle Steve Wallace said.
"That is a pretty sound team from top to bottom."


Topics of The Times; Stamps of Secrecy
New York State's Republican-controlled Senate treats as top secret any information about the free mailing privileges enjoyed by its members.
That leaves taxpayers who foot the $3.5 million postage bill for all those promotional newsletters completely in the dark.
A resolution just passed by the Democratic-controlled Assembly would let in some light.
The resolution would require the Senate to do what the Assembly, with a $2.1 million bulk postage bill, does -- keep a public file of the newsletters mailed by individual lawmakers and disclose exactly how much money in postage each lawmaker spends on this dubious perk.


Xerox Sets A Course Reversal
The Xerox Corporation, which invested in financial services operations in the late 1970's and early 1980's when its copying machines business faltered, said yesterday that it was reversing its diversification to concentrate on its revived copier and printer operations.
The company said it would take an after-tax charge of $778 million against fourth-quarter earnings in connection with the revamping, which does not include any current sales but a reorganization to prepare financial service assets for sale.


Courtroom Drama Pits G.M. Against a Former Engineer
In a small Atlanta courtroom, General Motors officials have been witnessing a drama that Hollywood would envy.
A former company engineer, who had previously testified only for the car maker, has told a jury that G.M. knew for years that some of its popular pickup trucks were firetraps but that it refused to fix what he called defective fuel tanks.
In testimony last week, the safety engineer, Ronald E. Elwell, also drew a chilling portrait of G.M. as a company that altered documents, conducted secret tests and ordered employees not to put criticism of its vehicles in writing.
Commentators on Court TV, which is following the trial because of Mr.
Elwell's appearance, quickly dubbed him the "turncoat" witness.


Whitman Announces Bid
Christine Todd Whitman, the Republican who almost defeated Bill Bradley in the 1990 Senate race, announced today that she will formally open her campaign for Governor on Jan. 27.
On the three-stop tour of the state to announce her candidacy, she will be accompanied by the co-chairmen of her campaign, United States Representative Dick Zimmer and Hazel Frank Gluck, who was Transportation Commissioner in the cabinet of former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean.
Ed Rollins, who managed the Presidential campaigns of Ronald Reagan, and, briefly, Ross Perot, will be Mrs.
Whitman's chief campaign adviser.


CHRONICLE
There will be no trip to the Inauguration for Iowa's Republican governor, TERRY E. BRANSTAD, who was to have gone to Washington today for a luncheon with President-elect Bill Clinton and for the swearing-in cermonies.
On Sunday, when Governor Branstad took his 8-year-old son, Marcus, sledding in Des Moines, he collided with another sled.
He was taken to Iowa Methodist Medical Center, where he was treated for two broken facial bones and abrasions, and released.
"I guess maybe I'm a little too old to go sledding," Governor Branstad, who is 46, said later.


For Rangers' Richter, Banishment Breeds Hope of Revival
Mike Richter can chart his downfall.
It didn't start with a particular game or a particularly bad goal he allowed.
It started with the apartment.
That was the first time he really clashed with Coach Roger Neilson.
That was the first time in his romance with the Rangers that he felt as if someone in the organization had slapped him on the wrist.
Richter wanted to live in Manhattan, on the Upper West Side, and Neilson, with the support of president Neil Smith, discouraged the move, citing the temptations of the city.
Richter rented the apartment anyway.
At the time, he didn't think it was a big deal.


Results Plus
N.H.L.
Oates Paces Bruins Adam Oates scored a pair of power-play goals within 47 seconds of the third period and assisted on the Bruins' two other goals yesterday afternoon as Boston beat the San Jose Sharks, 4-3, in Boston.
Oates, third in National Hockey League scoring with 77 points, set up Ray Bourque and Joe Juneau for goals as San Jose lost its eighth consecutive game. (AP) Jets 8, Whalers 7: Evgeny Davydov's goal at 14:13 of the third period snapped a 7-7 tie and Phil Housley had a team record 5 assists as the Winnipeg Jets beat the Hartford Whalers in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, for their seventh straight victory.
Trailing by 7-4 in the third period in front of 7,756 fans at the neutral-site game, the Jets rallied when Hartford's Mark Janssens received a five-minute major for boarding.
Thomas Steen scored twice on the ensuing power play. (AP) SOCCER Finally, Some Referees Egypt and Angola played a scoreless tie yesterday in a World Cup qualifying game delayed a day because the game officials didn't arrive at the stadium in Luanda, Angola. (AP)


Maverick Tube reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pending Suits: Their Effect On Budget In New York
As New York State budget analysts prepare Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's budget, which is to be released today, one of their hardest tasks is accounting for unanticipated revenues and unexpected drains on the state treasury.
And one of the biggest unknowns is what effect the dozens of lawsuits pending against the state, like the ones challenging the various hospital surcharges, will have on the budget if the state loses.


Jailers Say New York Inmates Shoot Themselves, Then Sue
When it comes to con games and contraband and the run-of-the-mill smuggling of hacksaws and handguns, New York City jail officials have seen it all.
Usually the idea is to break out or settle a score.
Now they have uncovered a scheme that startles even them: Inmates are shooting themselves.


Pittsburgh Journal; 'Mouse' That Inherited Pittsburgh
Saying they were starved for local news, sports columns, comic strips, job advertisements, movie listings and obituary notices, Pittsburgh residents lined up in the bitter cold outside news vendors this morning to buy the first copies of The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette to roll off the presses in eight months.
"This is exciting," Laverne Dober, 40, a clerk in a downtown finance company, said as she waited to buy a copy of the city's only major newspaper to survive a long strike by employees.
"We haven't had a hometown paper for so long, it's ridiculous."


Books of The Times; Father Found Can Be Worse Than Father Lost
Family Night By Maria Flook 292 pages. Pantheon Books. $21


Market Place
THE stock market verdict could yet change.
But right now it looks as if Buffalo can confound the football forecasters and finally win the Super Bowl on its third try.
That prediction is based on a theory of forecasting football's biggest game by looking at the performance of the Dow Jones industrial average during the final weeks of the football season.


THE INAUGURATION: A Musical Smorgasbord; 2 Concerts Gel Sounds Of America
Three days before the Clinton Administration was to get under way, it employed popular music in potent symbolism.
The pre-inauguration festivities presented two distinct musical faces: one down home and diverse, invoking roots and heritage; the other glossy and assimilated, a salute to American mass culture.
"America's Reunion on the Mall," a free daytime festival on Sunday and today, brought dozens of performers -- Sioux dancers, Japanese drummers, Louisiana zydeco bands, Memphis soul groups -- to tents on the Mall and to auditoriums in the nearby Smithsonian Institution.


Industries Seek Protection As Vital to U.S. Security
Encouraged by President-elect Bill Clinton's emphasis on economic competitiveness as a critical part of post-cold-war national security, domestic industries are beginning to line up for Government protection against foreign competition, contending that their survival is vital to the nation's economic security.
Federal law gives the President broad powers to limit imports or help domestic industries for national-security reasons, but until now Government and industry trade experts have defined security almost exclusively in military terms.


Bruno's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


7 Are Killed as Commuter Trains Collide in Indiana
Seven people were killed today and dozens of others were injured, 10 critically, when two commuter trains heading in opposite directions sideswiped each other where the tracks converge here to cross a trestle.
The dead had been sitting next to windows when the crash, at 9:35 A.M., ripped gashes in the lead cars of both trains.
Several passengers were trapped in the mangled steel until they were cut free by firefighters, who had to scramble up a steep, snow-covered embankment that hampered rescue efforts.


Clinton Hopes to Curb Tongue in Inaugural Address
President-elect Bill Clinton, whose penchant for verbosity has cast a cloud over each of the crucial speeches in his career, is working to craft an Inaugural Address that is trenchant, uplifting and, if he can manage it, succinct.
This time, his aides said, a premium is being placed on brevity.
Inaugural planners have scheduled 20 minutes for the Wednesday address, but few have forgotten Mr.
Clinton's previous turns in the national speech-making limelight at two successive Democratic National Conventions.


An Invisible Generation Looks in the Mirror; The Turbulent 20's
To the Editor:
Re "The Boomlet Generation" (Op-Ed, Jan. 4): No one can characterize or define the under-30 generation because we are millions strong.


Green Taxis and Clean Buses; Transportation for a New-Age Inaugural
A new Administration is coming to Washington, and everyone wants to join the parade -- including, quite literally, taxis and buses that run on natural gas and electricity.
The taxis are local but the buses are coming by tow truck and flatbed trailer from as far away as Cleveland and Chattanooga, Tenn.
During the campaign, Bill Clinton and Al Gore talked about support for alternative forms of energy, a subject that had long interested Mr.
Gore as a senator.
Now that they are taking office, interest in the alternative-fuel vehicles is intense, at least among purveyors of such transportation.


Classical Music in Review
Aprile Millo Soprano Avery Fisher Hall


CF Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accounts
*
LTV Steel Co., Cleveland, to Meldrum &amp; Fewsmith Commmunications Inc., Cleveland, to handle its corporate and trade accounts, previously at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Houston.
Billings were not disclosed.


Mayo Clinic on a Disk
THE "Mayo Clinic Family Health Book" is something of a best seller in its printed form, with about 500,000 copies published since 1990.
Now it has been converted to an impressive CD-ROM version.
All 1,378 pages of the book are on the disk, Mayo Clinic Family Health Book Interactive Edition, along with 500 illustrations, 45 of them animated, plus, for systems with the right equipment, 90 minutes of sound.


4 Wounded by Bombs in Palestinian Camp
Four bombs exploded in the largest Palestinian camp in Lebanon late Sunday night, wounding four people, including two children, in what security officials said was recurring violence between rival guerrilla factions.
The explosions at the camp, Ain Hilweh in Sidon, 25 miles south of here, were aimed at homes and offices of P.L.O. officials loyal to Yasir Arafat, the officials said.
One bomb went off outside the residence of a senior P.L.O. official, Moeen Shabaytah.
He was not hurt, but two children in a nearby building were injured.
The other three blasts were aimed at offices and houses of members who defected from the faction led by Abu Nidal to Mr.
Arafat's movement.


Stout, Storied Heroes (Cuddly Too)
HERE'S a practical idea that probably won't make President Clinton's Inaugural Address tomorrow.
We should immediately commission the National Institutes of Health to issue a report as soon as possible titled: "Qualifications, Quantifications and Quotients of the Psycho-Cerebral Impact on Minute Homo Sapiens of Intimate Associations with
Ursus Theodoro Stuffus
(and the Emotional Deficits Suffered From Deprivations Thereof): An Analysis."
In other words, what role do stuffed teddy bears play in civilizing society?
Think about it.
Wherever you don't see teddy bears these days, you have problems.
Have you ever seen a teddy bear anywhere near an urban riot?
In a troubled school?
In the arms of a drug dealer?
Populating our prisons?
On an armored personnel carrier in Bosnia?
Stealing food in Somalia?
Or even sitting by Saddam Hussein?


The Halfway Man
What we know is that in two days, the Presidency of George Herbert Walker Bush will be, as they say, history.
What we do not know is whether history will judge him more kindly than the voters did in November.
He came to politics with every advantage of birth and education.
He is unlikely to be remembered as a great President, but rather more as an amiable transition figure.
The lesson of George Bush?
Beliefs count for something.
They animate policy; without them, leadership falters.


COMPANY NEWS
CAPITAL HOLDING CORP., Louisville, Ky., said it had completed the acquisition of Academy Insurance Group Inc., Atlanta, for $117.6 million.
DOW CHEMICAL CO., Midland, Mich., said it had purchased a plastics factory in Yocheon, South Korea, from Sung Hwa Petrochemical Industrial Co.
Terms were not disclosed.


U.S. LEADS FURTHER ATTACKS ON IRAQI ANTIAIRCRAFT SITES; ADMITS ITS MISSILE HIT HOTEL: RAIDS IN 2 REGIONS
Allied warplanes renewed their bombing raids against Iraq today as Baghdad continued to challenge enforcement of flight bans over both northern and southern Iraq.
The new air strikes were the third in six days.
Baghdad said 21 people were killed in the raids today.


Premier Financial Services reports earnings for Year Dec 31


An Inaugural Guide
Today 1:30 P.M.
"Salute to Children," Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts (ticket required). (Disney Channel - 3 to 4 P.M. (taped)) 3:30 P.M.
"Salute to Youth," Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts (ticket required). (Disney Channel - 5 to 6 P.M. (taped)) 7 P.M.
"Presidential Gala," Capital Center, with entertainment (ticket required). (CBS - 9 to 11 P.M.) Tomorrow 8 A.M.
Prayer service, Metropolitan A.M.E.
Church (by invitation).
President Bush and his wife, Barbara, receive President-elect Bill Clinton and his wife, Hillary, at the White House. 11:30 A.M.
Inaugural ceremony, west front of the Capitol.
Inovation by the Rev.
Billing Graham.
Vice President-elect Al Gore is administered the oath of office by retired Justice Thurgood Marshall.
President-elect Clinton is administered the oath of office by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist.
Mr.
Clinton delivers his inaugural address.
Private luncheon with Congressional leaders and members of the Supreme Court, at the Capitol. (NBC - 10 A.M. to 2 P.M., CBS, ABC, CNN - 10 A.M. to 1:00 P.M., PBS - 10 A.M. to 2:30 P.M., FOX - 11:30 A.M. to 1:30 P.M.) 2 P.M.
The Clintons and Gores head for the inaugural parade reviewing stand in front of the White House.  2:30 P.M.
The inaugural parade begins following route from the Capitol to the White House. (NBC, CBS, ABC, CNN - 2 to 4 P.M.) 6:30 P.M. - 9 P.M.
The ITT Corporation is holding a "gala reception" in the Sheraton Carlton Hotel. 7 P.M.
National Ball, National Building Museum.
Thursday 9 A.M. - Noon Open house at the White House (ticket required). 2 P.M.-5 P.M.
Reception for Arkansans, White House (ticket required).


2 Officers Are Hurt When Gunman Fires At Car in Brooklyn
Two undercover narcotics officers were wounded last night when an unidentified gunman opened fire from behind their unmarked car in East New York, Brooklyn, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said.
A bullet grazed one officer in the wrist, and flying glass hit the other officer in the eye, he said.
The officers, whose names were not released because of their undercover assignments, were parked at the corner of Miller and Linden Avenues when the shooting began at 6 P.M., the commissioner said.


Union Planters reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rockwell International Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Standex International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Universal Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday about the Clinton and Gore families ringing a bell in an Arlington, Va., park misidentified the park in some copies.
It is Lady Bird Johnson Park.


Green Party Merges With an East German Group
Anxious to return to its former position of influence in Bonn, the German Green Party has merged with a party that sprang from the human rights movement in the former East Germany.
A spokesman said the new party would offer voters "renewed political strength" in federal and state elections scheduled for 1994.
Its leaders hope that in those elections, it will become the country's third largest party.


A Self-Help Offer of Higher Learning Is Extended to Housing Projects
The William Penn Homes, with a third of its windows boarded up and its gardens and lawns paved over, is about as dilapidated as public housing gets.
For the people who live in the project here, 12 miles west of Philadelphia in one of the nation's most distressed small cities, remodeling their homes is important.
But even more important is a chance to remodel their lives.
"New bricks and mortar are fine," said Ella Thompson, a tenant leader at William Penn, where a Federal overhaul of the project's 300 apartments is planned.
"But you have to mend the families, too, and 'I Have a Dream' can mend broken lives."


A Surge in Earnings Helps Large Banks Breathe a Bit Easier
Five of the nation's 10 largest banks, including several New York institutions, reported higher-than-expected earnings yesterday, leading banking specialists to say that the end is in sight for the industry's troubles with real estate loans.
The billions of dollars of loans, mostly made in the late 1980's for office buildings and other projects in big cities, had seemed so shaky just two years ago that Government officials, bank executives and industry analysts issued dire warnings.
They said the banking industry might be in danger of a rash of failures similar to those that had plagued savings and loans, forcing a costly Federal bailout.


Checkers Drive-In Restaurant reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Justice Dept. Report Accuses F.B.I. Chief Of Repeated Abuses
The Justice Department today issued a scathing report that accused William S. Sessions, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, of repeated abuses of his office and suggested that the President review his fitness to serve.
The department official who wrote the report, Michael E. Shaheen Jr., the head of the department's internal ethics unit, found that Mr.
Sessions had taken advantage of the Government, often for petty financial gain.


Ground Round Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


Arkansas Best reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Vintage Yale
One day last summer, Dick Hart beached his boat on a sandbar off Nantucket and a stranger helped with the landing.
Hart was wearing a shirt with the words "Yale Hockey" on it, a model the coach, Tim Taylor, had worked up as an alumni fundraising device.
The stranger said, "I see we have something in common. I'm Jack Akers." Hart, an investment banker, recognized the name of the chief executive officer of IBM, and soon they were discussing when they had played -- "for Murray," rather than for Yale.
Hart's time was the late 1940's, Akers's the mid-1950's.


Town Mayor For 22 Years Is Facing Recall Vote
Although many people are still unaware of it, there is a municipal election here on Feb. 2 that could close out the career of one of Hudson County's most durable mayors.
Anthony M. DeFino, who became Mayor 22 years ago after his predecessor, John R. Armellino, went to prison for conspiracy to protect underworld gambling, has been forced into a recall election.
The same slate of candidates that he and his fellow commissioners narrowly defeated in 1991, inspired by the closeness of that vote, brought the recall drive.


Excerpts From Barr's Memorandum to Sessions
Following are excerpts from a Jan. 15 memorandum from Attorney General William P. Barr to William S. Sessions, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The memorandum
accompanied a report released today by the Justice Department's Office of Professional Responsibility.
Tax Obligations
I am most troubled by the report's conclusion that you engaged in a sham arrangement for the clear purpose of improperly claiming an exemption from the obligation to pay income tax on your government-provided home-to-work transportation.
The law is clear that senior government officials who are provided chauffeur-driven limousines for commuting from home to work are required to pay income taxes on the value of that fringe benefit.
The value of this benefit can be significant, amounting to several thousand dollars a year.
The obligation to pay taxes on this benefit exists even where home-to-work transportation is independently justified for security reasons.
Thus, throughout the government, agency heads, including those with security details, pay taxes on home-to-work transportation and other authorized personal use of government vehicles.
. . .


IDEX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Changes Are Throwing Sport for a Loop
As the sport of figure skating spins with the rotational speed of a triple toe loop, those gathered at the America West Arena this week for the United States championships are holding on for dear life.
Coaches, choreographers, competitors and judges are struggling to keep up with recent changes in rules, costuming and lighting that are edging the sport toward the world of Ice Capades at a jaunty, unpredictable pace.
"There's a feeling of excitement now, because nobody knows what's going to happen," said John Nicks, who coached Christopher Bowman last year and is coaching the pairs team of Jenni Meno and Todd Sand at the nationals.
"Two separate worlds are coming together very quickly. Champions are no longer maintained by judges for four or five years. Experts are lucky to give you one winner now." Kerrigan Is Favored
That projected winner in Phoenix would be Nancy Kerrigan, who is expected to capture the ladies' senior championships this week, earning one of three United States berths for the world championships in Prague in March.
The United States has only two berths in the other events because of lower placements at the last world championships.


Review/Music; Mannes College Players Pay Tribute to King
There were several musical tributes to the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. on Monday evening, but surely one of the most inviting was the free concert at Riverside Church, in which Kurt Masur conducted a student orchestra from the Mannes College of Music in a Duke Ellington suite that commemorated Dr.
King in its finale.
The large interdenominational church was, in fact, an ideal place to remember Dr.
King and his message: on April 4, 1967, exactly a year before he was killed, Dr.
King gave an antiwar speech there, and it was tempting to imagine him standing at the pulpit.
The concert was an interesting but, from a musical standpoint, only partly successful experiment.
It seemed to be the kind of thing Mr.
Masur has had in mind since he became the music director of the New York Philharmonic, when he spoke of building bridges between New York and Leipzig (where he directs the Gewandhaus Orchestra) and of taking part in New York's musical life beyond the confines of Avery Fisher Hall.
He surrounded Ellington's polystylistic "Trois Rois Noirs," a quintessentially American work, two works by Leipzig masters, Bach's Orchestral Suite No. 3 in D (BWV 1068) and Mendelssohn's "Reformation" Symphony.


Islanders Get Even, And Then Get Mad
That two-game Islander scoring spree and winning streak, the one that was designed to resuscitate the team's playoff possibilities, ended tonight at Nassau Coliseum.
But all was not lost, for the Islanders skated away from this low-scoring, low-impact confrontation with the Boston Bruins with a 2-2 tie.
"We're happy with the style of play," said Islander defenseman Tom Kurvers, who scored the catch-up goal that forced overtime.
"We're not satisfied with the outcome. These are the sort of late-season games we don't just need to learn how to play, we need to learn how to win."


Reardon Joins Reds
JEFF REARDON, the major league career leader in saves with 357, signed a minor league contract with the Cincinnati Reds yesterday.
The 37-year-old Reardon not only had to agree to a minor league contract but also had to agree to shave his beard.
The Reds have a policy forbidding facial hair on players.
Reardon has worn a beard for his entire 14-year major league career, but he said he would shave it to play for the Reds, General Manager JIM BOWDEN said.


Ocean Traffic Control Would Reduce Spills
To the Editor:
Re: "Scottish and Labor Officials Fault Government on Oil Spill" (news article, Jan. 7):


Crown Crafts reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Triad Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Musicland Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cumberland Federal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


AN AFTERNOON WITH -- Maya Angelou; A Wordsmith at Her Inaugural Anvil
It was one of those Southern winter days just short of raining when the sky is so gray that it blurs the horizon and seems to fuse with the grayness on the ground.
The humidity hung thick as mist and had worked its way into Maya Angelou's already aching joints.
"My arthritis is bad today," she said by way of greeting.
"Let's have some wine."
And so she called in that deep, rich voice of hers down to her niece for a bottle of Chateau Ste.
Michelle, a 1990 chardonnay, "and a straw!" and then wrestled -- "No, I don't need help" -- with the pain in her fingers to extract its cork.
Moving into a sun room that had no sun that day but was, instead, a wraparound reminder of the heaviness of the afternoon, she folded her six-foot, 64-year-old frame into a chair of mint-green crushed velvet, poured the wine, stretched her legs and tried to hide her irritation with the pain in her body.


Israeli Parliament Lifts a Ban on P.L.O. Contacts
The Israeli Parliament voted today to lift a ban on contacts with the Palestine Liberation Organization, legalizing meetings with members of the group.
Lawmakers voted 39 to 20 to repeal a 1986 law prohibiting Israelis from meeting P.L.O. members.
The change was supported by legislators from the governing coalition led by the Labor Party, although the Government continues to reject negotiations with the P.L.O.


Bosnian Serbs Moving Reluctantly to Accept Peace Proposal
Alarmed by the possibility of Western military intervention aimed at halting or containing the war here, the Serbian nationalists whose forces have seized two-thirds of this republic appeared to be moving today toward approving the outlines of an international peace plan that would keep Bosnia and Herzegovina intact as a sovereign state.
Delegates to the Serbian nationalist Parliament met to debate the plan in a disgruntled and sometimes angry mood, with many claiming that Western nations were blackmailing Serbia and Serbian nationalists in Bosnia into acceptance of conditions that would amount to a betrayal of their cause.
But the nationalists' principal leader, Radovan Karadzic, backed the plan, and its passage, when the meeting resumes on Wednesday, seemed assured.


A Splash of Vitriol in the Inaugural Champagne
In a city where intrigue and gossip are the coin of the realm, the Presidential Inaugural Committee has been the juiciest target for weeks.
Caterers and party planners, who never criticize clients, can't wait to tell their latest horror stories.
The Inaugural Committee has surrounded its calendar of events with the cloak of secrecy generally reserved for covert operations.
A result is a cauldron of anger that reflects on the man who wanted his inauguration to be inclusive.


Pianist Cancels Appearance
Because of an injury, the pianist Stephanie Brown has canceled her appearance with the violinist Jaime Laredo on Friday at 8 P.M. at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Instead, Mr.
Laredo will be joined by the pianist Joseph Kalichstein and the cellist Sharon Robinson in Schubert's two piano trios, Op. 99 in B flat and Op. 100 in E flat.
Information: (212) 570-3949.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about the resignations of two executives last week at Salomon Brothers misstated the nature of the 1991 departure of John W. Meriwether, the Salomon vice chairman who left the firm in the midst of a scandal involving its bids for Treasury securities.
He resigned under pressure; he was not dismissed.
The article also misstated the compensation paid in 1990 to Lawrence E. Hilibrand, a Salomon official.
He reportedly received $23 million.


Assist Poor School Districts, Cuomo Urges
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today proposed significant changes in the way that New York State distributes aid to schools, offering a plan that would be more generous to poor districts -- including New York City -- stingier to affluent ones and less complicated for everyone.
The Governor announced the plan as part of his annual budget address, in which he also called for reducing state aid to schools by $130 million, the third consecutive year that he has recommended cuts for education.


On Waiting List Before Birth: A Case of Transplant Ethics
In May 1991, an ultrasound examination revealed that a 17-week fetus had a potentially fatal heart malformation.
Thirteen weeks later, doctors at the University of Pittsburgh put the fetus on a list of patients awaiting human hearts for transplant.
At 35 weeks, when the fetus was mature enough to live outside the womb, the baby was delivered and became the world's youngest heart transplant patient.
But the baby died when she was 3 1/2 months old.


Meredith Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Masur Offers Season Schedule
The New York Philharmonic, at roughly the halfway point in its 150th anniversary season, took time out yesterday to announce what it will do for an encore.
The short answer is more of what worked for it this season: included among the programs announced by Kurt Masur, the orchestra's music director, and Deborah Borda, its general manager, are continuations of the thematic Philharmonic Celebrations programs, the Rush Hour and Casual Saturdays sampler concerts, the Children's Promenades and the pre-concert lectures series, all of which were introduced this season.
Ms.
Borda also announced yesterday that the orchestra had renewed its relationship with Meet the Composer, and had appointed Tania Leon to be its Revson Composer Fellow, a two-year post subsidized by the Charles H. Revson Foundation.
She will be the orchestra's new music adviser for the next two season.


CHASE MANHATTAN CORP. (N)
With stronger interest income and higher fees and commissions, the Chase Manhattan Corporation saw a 25 percent gain in earnings in the fourth quarter of last year, compared with the quarter a year earlier, the bank said yesterday.
A major component of the gain was in currency trading revenues, which reached $82 million, up from $58 million.


Tredegar Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Molex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
The main front-page article yesterday, about allied raids on Iraq, referred incompletely in some copies to the regions that were struck.
The attacks were carried out in northern as well as southern Iraq.


Plum Creek Timber L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Market Place
WALL STREET long ago threw aside the old-fashioned world of simple stocks and bonds.
Now, professional mathematicians and computer experts peel away pieces of each market like layers of an onion, creating new and more complex trading instruments to make investing less risky.
Another layer was peeled away yesterday whenthe Chicago Board Options Exchange announced it was creating the first volatility index to measure expectation of future price fluctuations of stocks.
The index, based on the Standard &amp; Poor's 100 index options, will begin being quoted daily next week, and throughout the day in two weeks.


Donors Send Spare Change to Neediest
They are inescapable, jiggling and jangling and accumulating in unstable little piles that inevitably topple onto the floor and roll under the furniture.
It has long been one of the more annoying problems in a commercial culture where the 99-cent suffix reigns: What is to be done with all the change?
Andrew D. Lenney of Manhattan believes he has found the answer.
After years of emptying his pockets at the end of the day onto dressers and tables, he decided last year to take up a new habit.
He now drops his spare change into a jar and every so often donates the collection to charity.
The other day he sent $118 to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Accounts
*
Northwest Airlines, Egan, Minn., as expected, named Fallon McElligott, Minneapolis, as its lead domestic agency, without a formal review.
J.
Walter Thompson New York previously handled the account, with billings estimated at $25 million, until the airline dismissed that agency last month.
Fallon, which previously handled Northwest's regional advertising, will be responsible for strategic and creative development of Northwest's brand and retail advertising in addition to coordinating international advertising. *
Volkswagen United States Inc., Auburn Hills, Mich., to Rapp Collins Communications, Minneapolis, to handle its direct marketing account, previously divided among various agencies on a project basis.
Billings were not disclosed.


Coca-Cola Gives Project to Lowe
Coca-Cola U.S.A. has selected the Lowe Group to help handle the introduction of 20-ounce plastic bottles of its Coca-Cola Classic and Diet Coke brands, patterned after the soft-drink company's contoured 6 1/2-ounce glass bottles.
Billings for the project, which involves the test-marketing of the bottles, were not disclosed.


Review/Theater; A Play On a Film, a Classic of 1945
Theatergoers gather onstage for the prologue of "Children of Paradise: Shooting a Dream," as the opening moments of Marcel Carne's 1945 film are re-enacted.
With a burst of theatricality, the actors offer a vivid approximation of the carnival life on the Boulevard of Crime in Paris in the early 1800's.
Standing high on a distant promontory is Baptiste, the legendary mime, with the American actor Robert Rosen simulating the soulful look of Jean-Louis Barrault.
The play, the work of Theatre de la Jeune Lune, a Minneapolis-based company, soars with ambition in its attempt to create a drama about the making of a film classic dealing with the subject of the theater.
The show is in residence, with its monumental production, for a special two-week engagement ending Jan. 30 at the Yale University Theater here.


Reginald F. Lewis, 50, Is Dead; Financier Led Beatrice Takeover
Reginald F. Lewis, a Wall Street lawyer and financier who was one of the nation's richest businessmen and a prominent corporate takeover dealer, died yesterday in Manhattan, one day after his company announced he was suffering from brain cancer.
He was 50 and lived in Manhattan and Paris.
Mr. Lewis died from a cerebral hemorrhage related to the cancer, his company said.


Boeing Engineers Stage a One-Day Strike


Of Food, Verse And Song
THE CATERERS' ANGER Bill Clinton has sought to please many people on his climb to the Presidency, but some in Washington are decidedly displeased: caterers.
The Living Section, page C1.
THE POET'S QUEST Maya Angelou searches for the words, the lyricism, the voice to mark the moment of political change.
Page C1.
THE SINGERS' JOURNEY Nine chorus members from P.S. 254 in Brooklyn, a mosaic of nationalities, traveled to Washington to perform their "Great Mosaic" song in the inaugural parade.
About New York, page B3.


Jacobs Engineering Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Pop-Up Tutorial on Art for Everyone
The crowds that congregated in bookstores last month -- the ones that weren't lining up for Madonna or Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf -- were mesmerized by a beguiling pop-up book about, of all things,
art.
"The Art Pack,"a $40 feat of what publishers call "paper engineering," is as much a toy as it is a book.
Yet it has sold better than almost any other art book in memory, crossing into the realm of sales usually occupied by racy novels and exposes.


Pillsbury, that staple of home pantries, tries entering the market for store-bought baked goods.
FOR decades, the Pillsbury Company has maintained that "nothin' says lovin' like somethin' from the oven." But in an era when even instant gratification takes too long, Pillsbury products like flour, cake mixes and frosting are frequently relegated to back shelves of home pantries.
So the company is exploring a possible solution to that problem -- a product that comes, already baked, from someone else's oven.
Earlier this month in southwestern Florida, Pillsbury began testing its first ready-to-eat, single-serving snack cakes -- eight varieties of baked goods like Raspberry Ribbon Brownies, Cinnamon Streusel Coffee Cake and Tunnel of Fudge Bundt Cakes -- available in refrigerated cases at supermarkets.


Cheshire Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Iraqis' Gesture of 'Good Intention' Toward Clinton
The cease-fire announcement issued by the Iraqi press agency today said it was meant as an "expression of good intention toward the Administration of U.S. President-elect Bill Clinton and the American people."
The statement said that the cease-fire declaration was taken to give "the new American Administration an opportunity to study the topic of the blockade imposed on the Iraqi aviation" in the north and south of the country, where the allies have imposed no-flight zones to protect the areas' Kurdish and Shiite populations.


Tandy Brands Accessories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kent Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


MAF Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Perez Isn't at a Loss To Ask for Big Raise
Melido Perez was a 13-game winner last year; worse, he was a 16-game loser.
Despite that losing record, the Yankees' pitcher yesterday asked for a raise of $2,635,000, the second-largest raise sought in salary arbitration this year and the fifth largest ever.
Perez, whose creditable 2.87 earned run average indicated that he was better than his won-lost record reflected, earned $1,165,000 last season and seeks a $3.8 million salary this year.
The Yankees submitted a $2.5 million figure as 100 players and their clubs exchanged arbitration numbers.


Svoboda Out for Season
The Buffalo Sabres have lost PETR SVOBODA for the rest of the season after the defenseman suffered a knee injury Sunday against the Edmonton Oilers.
The ligament in Svoboda's right knee was torn during a collision with Edmonton forward CRAIG SIMPSON in the Oilers' 3-2 victory. (AP)


A Surge in Earnings Helps Large Banks Breathe a Bit Easier
Five of the nation's 10 largest banks, including several New York institutions, reported higher-than-expected earnings yesterday, leading banking specialists to say that the end is in sight for the industry's troubles with real estate loans.
The billions of dollars of loans, mostly made in the late 1980's for office buildings and other projects in big cities, had seemed so shaky just two years ago that Government officials, bank executives and industry analysts issued dire warnings.
They said the banking industry might be in danger of a rash of failures similar to those that had plagued savings and loans, forcing a costly Federal bailout.


INSIDE
Hillary Clinton's Role
How influential will Hillary Clinton be, and do her politics differ from her husband's?
A 12-year record in Arkansas offers some clues.
Page A13.
Israel Lifts a P.L.O.
Ban
Israel's Parliament lifted a ban on contact with the Palestine Liberation Organization, legalizing meetings with the group's members.
Page A3.
Some Troops Leave Somalia
The first American combat troops to be withdrawn from Somalia since the military operation began Dec. 9 left in a token redeployment.
Page A3.
Mob Boss Arrested
Anthony Salvatore Casso, called one of the country's most dangerous Mafia leaders, was captured emerging from his morning shower.
Page B1.
Expanding the 'Dream'
A philanthropist's program to keep students in school is now reaching into housing projects, with the help of some colleges.
Education, page B7.
Beatrice Executive Dies
Reginald F. Lewis, who amassed a fortune in corporate takeovers but resisted being identified as a black success story, is dead at 50.
Page A21.


Caviar From Arkansas
If caviar is served in the White House, it deserves to be the American sturgeon variety.
Not only is this caviar less likely to increase a budget deficit than are other kinds, but most of it comes from paddlefish, a type of sturgeon caught mostly in the lower Mississippi River in Arkansas.
Much of the fresh roe, which must be sifted to separate the eggs and lightly salted before packing to help preservation and texture, is processed in Arkansas or across the river in Tennessee, another state important to the new Administration.


RESULTS PLUS
SKIING Tomba Falters Again  Michael von Gruenigen of Switzerland won his first World Cup race yesterday, in Veysonnaz, Switzerland, keeping Alberto Tomba without a victory in a fourth giant slalom this season.
Von Gruenigen, 23, carried over a first-run lead and edged Tomba, the 1988 and 1992 Olympic giant slalom champion from Italy, by .07 seconds.
Tomba was lucky to finish after two rough rides and an amazing recovery from a finish-stretch tumble in the first run.
Lasse Kjus of Norway was third on the hard-packed snow, .20 seconds behind von Gruenigen's winning time of 2 minutes 29.51 seconds. (AP) YACHTING De Ugarte Is Safe  Jose De Ugarte of Spain, a sailor racing solo around-the-world in the Vendee Globe Challenge, avoided near calamity yesterday in the Indian Ocean.
De Ugarte sent out a distress signal Monday night that his sailboat was rapidly taking on water.
But in a radio message yesterday, Ugarte reported that he had found the leak in his 60-foot sailboat, Euskadi Europa, and was able to repair it.
De Ugarte is located about 1,500 miles south of Albany, Australia.
De Ugarte is one of 11 yachtsmen in the Vendee competition, a 24,000-mile nonstop race that began on Nov. 22 from Les Sables d'Olonne, France.


Malcolm X's Lesson
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 6 editorial "When X = Literacy," on how Malcolm X transformed himself by learning to read and write in prison, is most significant in view of the increasing numbers of people taken into custody who are functionally illiterate.


No Headline
"I've seen several transitions before, and let me tell you, they didn't seem nearly this long. There's a direct relationship between the length of the transition and losing. You win, it seems much too short. You lose, it lasts forever." -- JEB BUSH, the President's son.  [ A14:3. ]


French Giant Is Acquiring St. Laurent
The fashion house of Yves Saint Laurent, a symbol of French creativity in haute couture and beauty products, was acquired today by the pharmaceuticals group Elf Sanofi in a transaction that underscored the current difficulties of French luxury industries.
For the whimsical 56-year-old Mr.
Saint Laurent, who presented his first collection 30 years ago and went on to build a group with interests that include clothes, perfume and accessories, the $636 million sale seemed an unlikely denouement.
In effect, a house synonymous with artistic refinement will now be part of the huge state-owned oil conglomerate Elf Aquitaine, which controls Elf Sanofi.
Not Strictly a Choice
Pierre Berge, the chief business associate of Mr.
Saint Laurent and one of the company's major shareholders, was blunt about the reasons for the sale.
"I believe I have placed Yves Saint Laurent in good hands," he said.
"But let's not hide the truth: a solution for the future of the company had to be found."


RMI Titanium reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


PAINE WEBBER GROUP (N)
Shares of the Paine Webber Group fell yesterday as the big securities firm reported an 18.8 percent decline in per-share earnings for the fourth quarter of 1992.
The decline came as revenue from both investment banking and trading declined in the period.
Total revenues, however, excluding interest expense, advanced to $607.9 million, from $585.4 million in the comparable quarter of 1991.


Pickups Safe, Stempel Says In Testimony
The former chairman of the General Motors Corporation, Robert C. Stempel, acknowledged yesterday in an Atlanta trial that some of the company's pickup trucks were more likely than competitors' models to catch fire in side collisions.
But Mr.
Stempel insisted that the vehicles were safe.
"Is there a problem with trucks?" he asked rhetorically.
"No."


TrustCo Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
A.
L.
LEVINE, a shopping center developer from Palm Beach, Fla., has donated $5 million to the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The gift will be used to transform a former sculpture court on the mezzanine of the Lila Acheson Wallace Wing into a gallery for 20th-century painting and sculpture.
Mr.
Levine, who is 81 and president of the Levco Shopping Centers of New Jersey, donated the Picasso painting "Standing Nude and Seated Musketeer" to the Met 24 years ago.
"I kept 50 percent of it at first," Mr.
Levine said, "because I loved it so much. I had it six months a year and the museum had it six months. Now they have it completely."


Justice Dept. Challenges Its Civil Rights Division
In the final civil rights battle of the Bush Administration, the Justice Department has filed legal briefs that take positions opposed by its own civil rights division involving black voters in Alabama and Georgia.
In the Alabama case, the Justice Department told the Supreme Court that the state needed to create only one Congressional district with a black majority, though the Assistant Attorney General for civil rights had said that there should be two such districts.


CHASE MANHATTAN CORP. (N)
With stronger interest income and higher fees and commissions, the Chase Manhattan Corporation saw a 25 percent gain in earnings in the fourth quarter of last year, compared with the quarter a year earlier, the bank said yesterday.
A major component of the gain was in currency trading revenues, which reached $82 million, up from $58 million.


Farrow and Allen Agree He Can Visit Their Son
Mia Farrow will allow Woody Allen to visit their 5-year-old son pending the outcome of their battle for custody of their three children, as part of an agreement that averts a potentially painful hearing at which the two stars were to testify, a lawyer for Mr.
Allen said yesterday.
Mr.
Allen will be permitted to see the son, Satchel O. Farrow, said the lawyer, Elkan Abramowitz, but the terms of the visits were not revealed.
Mr.
Allen has not seen the boy since November, when an earlier, informal visiting agreement broke down.


Corrections
A picture caption on page B1 in some editions on Monday, referring to an article about a dispute between two Greek Orthodox groups, misidentified the clergyman shown before the Weeping Icon.
He was Bishop Vikentios.


Corrections
A chart on Friday showing properties linked to John Gotti that are among those the Federal Government is suing to seize misstated the Government's version of a relationship between two companies linked to him.
According to prosecutors, Mr.
Gotti invested money from the Gambino crime family in Albie Trimming, a garment center business, and used it to create a shell company, Scorpio Marketing, from which he drew money he described as a salary.


Study of Computerized Care Finds Big Patient and Hospital Savings
At a time when spiraling health-care costs are causing headaches from Wall Street to Washington, researchers at the Indiana University School of Medicine are offering a 13 percent solution.
In a 16-month study involving more than 5,000 patients, medical teams using I.B.M.-compatible personal computers to manage health care reduced the average charge per admission by $887, or almost 13 percent, and the length of hospitalization was reduced by almost a day, the researchers reported.


Tidewater Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clinton Rounds Out State Dept. Team
Bill Clinton scrambled to fill out his State Department team today as he prepared to become the first President since Richard M. Nixon in 1969 to take office with United States forces deployed in a hostile situation.
And although Mr.
Clinton announced his nominations for many senior State Department positions today, he has still not named a Pentagon team.


The Pop Life
Traveling Again
Lynyrd Skynyrd, a band that rose to the top of 1970's Southern rock, is going on the road again next month because, as the lead singer, Johnny Van Zant, put it, "It's time, and besides, we just figured it would be a lot of fun."


Husband Shoots 2 and Himself In Dallas Court
An enraged husband shot his wife and then turned the gun on himself today in the hallway of a Dallas courthouse just as they were entering a hearing on a family dispute.
The woman died several hours later.
Within hours of the shootings dozens of state judges in Dallas stopped proceedings in their courtrooms to protest the lack of security.
The shooting was the second in six months in a Texas courthouse, renewing concerns over security in public buildings.


Personal Health
The pharmacy's aisle of cold remedies has come to resemble the profusion of cereal products in supermarkets.
There are more than 200 over-the-counter cold products on the market, and every year several dozen new ones, or more accurately reformulations or relabeling of old ones, arrive on the shelves, further confusion for those whose judgment is already clouded by a cold.
If you add in the array of herbal, homeopathic and vitamin products sold in health food stores to combat cold symptoms, it could take several lifetimes of colds to try each one.


First Savings (S.C.) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Endeavour Lands in Florida After Six-Day Mission


A News Crew Videotapes a Man as He Kills His Ex-Wife


McEnroe Rejects Invitation to Play in Davis Cup
John McEnroe warned everybody that he was swearing off tennis for the first four or five months of 1993, and this week he confirmed his edict by turning down an invitation to reprise his doubles role on the United States Davis Cup team.
McEnroe will definitely not represent the team for the first round of 1993 competition against Australia on March 26-28, but he has not ruled out participating in the later rounds.
Should the United States prevail in Australia, it will face Italy or Brazil in the second round July 16-18.


Pirates Survive Overtime Scare
Jerry Walker broke out of a season-long slump this evening.
The hard-nosed senior scored a game-high 19 points and grabbed 12 rebounds as Seton Hall defeated Villanova, 66-61, in overtime in front of 14,926 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Walker spent his first three seasons at Seton Hall primarily as a low-post player.
This year he has been forced to play on the perimeter due to the presence of Luther Wright, Seton Hall's 7-foot-2-inch sophomore center.
Even as Walker struggled, his teammates continued to feed off his toughness and willingness to take on any challenge.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  WOODY ALLEN FREE TO VISIT SON
Mia Farrow will allow Woody Allen to visit their youngest child, 5-year-old Satchel, pending the outcome of their battle for custody of their three children, one of Mr.
Allen's lawyers said.
Ms.
Farrow has also agreed to Mr.
Allen's demand that their adopted daughter, Dylan, 7, resume psychotherapy, the lawyer said.
In return, Mr.
Allen has agreed, temporarily, not to demand to visit Dylan, whom Ms.
Farrow has accused him of sexually molesting.
B3.
NEW PARADE SPONSOR MAY WITHDRAW


Giants Turn to Plan C and Meet With Reeves
The pressure on the Giants to find a head coach intensified yesterday when their latest choice, Dave Wannstedt, turned them down and instead became the coach of the Chicago Bears.
Hours after the announcement of Wannstedt's decision, General Manager George Young of the Giants met with Dan Reeves, the Denver Broncos' former coach, to discuss the Giants job.
Reeves described talks with Young as "very preliminary." He spoke with a reporter from KCNC-TV, the NBC affiliate in Denver, where Reeves and Young met at the Stouffer Concourse Hotel.


Howe's Lawyers Sue
STEVE HOWE, the Yankees relief pitcher who was given three years' probation last summer for a drug violation, faces a new round in court, over another matter.
Two lawyers who represented the 34-year-old Howe during nine months of court appearances have sued the pitcher for failing to pay their legal fee.
They contend the amount, $31,846.67 plus interest, was due Sept 14.


Clinton Must Keep Health Care Promises
To the Editor:
The health care crisis has become one of the most critical issues facing the incoming Administration in Washington.
It affects all Americans.
But with President-elect Bill Clinton's health plan fast taking shape, there are many worrisome signs.


Comprehensive Care reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The Overview; Clinton, Awaiting Oath, Asks for Help
On the day before he raises his right hand to assume the Presidency, Bill Clinton on Tuesday filled out his national security team, placed white roses on the graves of two of his political idols and appealed for help in enacting the domestic agenda he hopes to make his legacy.
But even as he spent the day polishing his Inaugural Address and making the official rounds of celebrations, Mr.
Clinton and his aides were grappling with the challenges that would be waiting on his desk at the White House: searching for a way to respond to an unexpected overture from President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.


Book Notes
Women and Wolves
Clarissa Pinkola Estes has written a book of fairy tales for adults, a collection of myths and stories that she uses to show how women's true natures have been suppressed and how they can recapture the true, "wild" self that is theirs.


First Virginia Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Illinois Central Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gallagher (Arthur J.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bachman Information System reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bank of New Hampshire reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Schwab (Charles) Corp. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Outer Banks Journal; Is the Human Tide More of a Peril Than the Sea?
The news is not so good these days from the Outer Banks unless you happen to be standing in bundled solitude on a high dune, waist deep in waving sea oats, watching the winter wind whip the gray Atlantic.
The problem is the isolation. It is disappearing.


SafeCard Services reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Tenure for Black Wins Support
The president of Southern Methodist University has recommended that a black law school professor be awarded tenure, overruling the university's provost in a case that had raised complaints of racism among students and faculty.
The case of Ndiva Kofele-Kale (pronounced DEE-va Koh-FAH-lee KAH-lee) received wide attention last fall, when the provost turned down the 46-year-old associate professor for tenure despite the recommendation of the law school faculty.
The provost said Mr.
Kofele-Kale's dossier was lacking.


Hanna (M.A.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Carter-Wallace reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHASE MANHATTAN CORP. (N)
With stronger interest income and higher fees and commissions, the Chase Manhattan Corporation saw a 25 percent gain in earnings in the fourth quarter of last year, compared with the quarter a year earlier, the bank said yesterday.
A major component of the gain was in currency trading revenues, which reached $82 million, up from $58 million.


St. Patrick Parade Sponsor May Quit Over Gay Dispute
The new group that won the fight to sponsor this year's St.
Patrick's Day parade may withdraw rather than face an embarrassing boycott over its inclusion of a gay and lesbian contingent, leaders in the Irish-American community said yesterday.
The withdrawal could put the parade back in the hands of its traditional organizers, who want to exclude homosexuals.
At a meeting on Monday, Charles J. Hynes, the District Attorney and a leader of the new group, told John Cardinal O'Connor that his organization would defer to the Ancient Order of Hibernians if the Hibernians could resolve a dispute within the group over whether it can sponsor parades, said Representative Peter T. King, Republican of Seaford, who attended the session.


UJB Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
Dr.
WALTER H. MUNK, a geophysicist whose research has led to new understanding of the oceans, waves and tides and the rotation of the earth, will receive the Vetlesen Prize at Columbia University tomorrow evening.
The $50,000 award, which has been called the Nobel Prize of earth sciences, was last given in 1987.
It is awarded by the trustees of Columbia in association with the G. Unger Vetlesen Foundation, established in 1959 and named for a founder of the Scandinavian Airlines System.
The award will be presented to Dr.
Munk by MICHAEL I. SOVERN, president of Columbia, at a dinner in Low Memorial Library at the university.


Peoples Heritage Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hospitals Need Medically Trained Interpreters
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 31 news article on the many foreign-born New Yorkers who struggle to communicate with their physicians across the language barrier clearly illustrates the need for strategies to overcome this serious health care challenge.


Cuomo Proposes Spartan Budget With Cutbacks
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today proposed a Spartan state budget that avoids general tax increases by squeezing aid to schools, closing three state mental hospitals, paring the state work force and increasing taxes on hospitals while cutting health benefits for the poor.
In presenting his plan for the fiscal year that begins on April 1, Mr.
Cuomo declared that the state was "not out of the woods yet," proposing that the general fund, which contains most of the state's spending, be allowed to grow only 1.6 percent, to $31.5 billion.


An Inaugural Guide
Today 8 A.M.
Prayer service, Metropolitan A.M.E.
Church (by invitation).
President Bush and his wife, Barbara, receive President-elect Bill Clinton and his wife, Hillary, at the White House. 11:30 A.M.
Inaugural ceremony, west front of the Capitol.
Inovation by the Rev.
Billing Graham.
Vice President-elect Al Gore is administered the oath of office by retired Justice Thurgood Marshall.
President-elect Clinton is administered the oath of office by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist.
Mr.
Clinton delivers his inaugural address.
Private luncheon with Congressional leaders and members of the Supreme Court, at the Capitol. (NBC - 10 A.M. to 2 P.M., CBS, ABC, CNN - 10 A.M. to 1:00 P.M., PBS - 10 A.M. to 3 P.M., FOX - 11:30 A.M. to 1:30 P.M., C-Span - 11:30 A.M. - 2 P.M.) 2 P.M.
The Clintons and Gores head for the inaugural parade reviewing stand in front of the White House.  2:30 P.M.
The inaugural parade begins following route from the Capitol to the White House. (NBC, CBS, ABC, CNN - 2 to 4 P.M.) 6:30 P.M. - 9 P.M.
The ITT Corporation is holding a "gala reception" in the Sheraton Carlton Hotel. 7 P.M.
National Ball, National Building Museum.
Thursday 9 A.M. - Noon Open house at the White House (ticket required). 2 P.M.-5 P.M.
Reception for Arkansans, White House (ticket required).


THE INAUGURATION: Changing of the Guard; Ah, Power; It's Genuine But So Brief
At noon Wednesday, the instant Bill Clinton takes the Presidential oath of office, a little-known Republican spending the holiday at his home in a Maryland suburb will take command of the Labor Department and its 18,000 employees.
The official, Steven I. Hofman, will ascend from his perch as Assistant Secretary of Labor for Public Affairs -- a fancy term for press spokesman -- to be anointed acting Secretary of Labor, providing the Governmental continuity that can come only from someone who has been confirmed by the Senate.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  IRAQ OFFERS A TRUCE
In what it described as a good-will gesture toward President-elect Clinton, Iraq announced a cease-fire and said it would end the impasse over United Nations arms inspections by allowing observers to fly into Baghdad without interference.
A1  DISSENSION ON AIR TARGETS
The confrontation with Iraq has opened fissures among allies, with some distancing themselves from a raid near Baghdad on Sunday.
But Iraq's latest gestures seem to have eased some tensions.
A1


Keystone Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


MBNA Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Alcan Aluminium Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Top American Athletes May Boycott Title Meet
The Olympic gold medalists MIKE CONLEY, MICHAEL JOHNSON and GWEN TORRENCE will boycott the I.A.A.F. world indoor championships in Toronto in March unless the world governing body begins awarding prize money to top finishers, their agent said yesterday.
The athletes, including the Olympic silver medalist MIKE POWELL and other top Americans, are also likely to skip the world outdoor championships in Stuttgart this summer, their agent, BRAD HUNT, said in a telephone interview from his office in Boulder, Colo.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Attorney General; BAIRD APOLOGIZES TO SENATE PANEL FOR ILLEGAL HIRING
Zoe Baird apologized today for hiring two illegal aliens to work in her house, telling the Senate Judiciary Committee, which is holding hearings on her nomination as Attorney General, that she had known she was violating the law.
Her apology seemed to satisfy some Senators, but most expressed cautious support or remained noncommittal, although that did not appear to undermine the likelihood of her eventual confirmation.


The Kid From Kiev Is Causing Quite a Stir
Court No. 8 was suddenly a very crowded place to watch a tennis match.
Young men with Ukrainian flags draped over their heads to block the heavy sun were straining for a clear view.
Young Australian girls were jockeying for elbow room.
"I've got to get ready," said teenager Nicole Howlett as she brandished a smooth, white racquet cover.
"I've got to get him to sign it. He's going to be famous one day, you know."


White House Tenants Offered Musical Mosaic
THE nine Mosaic Minstrels were a bit antsy as they piled on to the bus that was about to take them from their Sheepshead Bay neighborhood in Brooklyn to their first out-of-town gig.
"Why shouldn't we be excited?" asked Shodiah Jones, a 10-year-old fifth grader.
"I mean it's not every day that any bunch of kids gets to sing for the new President of the United States."


THE INAUGURATION: Screen Play; Hollywood Crowd Gives Capital Two Thumbs Up
The current wisdom in Hollywood dismisses movies with political themes and Washington backdrops.
Too somber.
Too boring.
Not enough action.
But the inauguration of Bill Clinton, a real-life drama with plenty of music and parties, has virtually turned Pennsylvania Avenue into Sunset Boulevard.
"I had work to do, and the only place I could actually see my friends from L.A. is here," quipped David Zucker, one of the creators of the "Airplane!" spoofs, as he rushed off to a tour of the Capitol building.


Kellogg Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


JB's Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 21


Hartford Ballet Names New Artistic Director
Kirk Peterson has been appointed artistic director of the Hartford Ballet.
Mr.
Peterson, 43, is a former principal dancer with American Ballet Theater and the San Francisco Ballet, where he was resident choreographer for two years.
He was also assistant artistic director and resident choreographer at the Washington Ballet in 1987 and 1988.
Mr.
Peterson was a co-choreographer of the Broadway musical "Shogun" and has created dances for companies including the Pennsylvania Ballet and the Pacific Northwest Ballet.
He has also taught company classes at Ballet Theater and the San Francisco Ballet.


Tiny Fax Sends (Don't Ask It to Receive)
A Hicksville, L.I., company has developed what it says is the world's smallest fax machine, but size may be its only advantage.
The Pocket Faxxer, made by RTS Electronics Inc., is about the size of a pocket calculator.
Selling for about $400, or $315 or so at discount electronics stores, the Pocket Faxxer has a one-line screen, like a calculator, and a number and letter keyboard, like a calculator.
Unlike office fax machines that both send and receive faxes, the hand-held Pocket Faxxer can only send.
The Pocket Faxxer is also paperless; its smallness, 3 inches by 5, is accomplished chiefly by the absence of a printer.


Bausch &amp; Lomb Chooses Warwick
Bausch &amp; Lomb's personal products division in Rochester said yesterday that it had selected Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore in New York to handle advertising for Clear Choice, a new nonalcoholic mouthwash.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.
Warwick Baker was awarded the account after a two-month review that was narrowed to six finalists.
The others were Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston and, in New York, Deutsch/Dworin Inc., Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss, Masterson Rothberg Advertising and Omon.


Review/Jazz; Nostalgia Served With Grit
"If you like old-time music, that's me," announced Carrie Smith from the stage of Fat Tuesday's, as she introduced a lightly swinging version of "The Man I Love." The veteran jazz and blues singer, who starred on Broadway not long ago in the musical "Black and Blue," tore into the song as if it were a T-bone steak.
She has a large, raw voice with a wide vibrato that oscillates like a breathy tenor saxophone.
As determinedly upbeat as she is unpretentious, she treated the Gershwin standard as a rugged statement of intent, not as a wistful daydream.
Her opening-night performance on Jan. 12 was also Ms.
Smith's debut at the club.
Accompanied by a quartet led by the pianist Roland Hanna, she performed a set that was unabashedly nostalgic for the New York jazz world of the 1940's.


The Reign of King Bill Descends on the Capital
HOW do you know when an Inauguration has crossed that fine line between a populist celebration and the coronation of the Sun King?
When a plaster bust of Bill Clinton gowned as Julius Caesar is sold in the gift shop of the Grand Hyatt Hotel, headquarters of the Arkansas delegation?


Offer Made For Bank in Westchester
A group of high-profile investors, including a corporate takeover specialist and the owner of the Minnesota Twins baseball club, has offered to buy Peoples Westchester Savings Bank, the bank announced yesterday.
The friendly offer, for $30 a share, would amount to $160 million.
The bank has weathered the economic downturn in the Northeast with few problems, and its presence in the affluent New York City suburbs makes it an attractive franchise.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 15
Jan. 8
Jan. 17
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.7
7.1
Distillate production, daily
2.9
3.1
3.0
Gasoline stocks
226.5
220.6
228.5
Distillate stocks
141.7
142.4
139.7
Crude imports, daily
6.4
6.8
5.8
Product imports, daily
1.7
1.8
1.5
Crude stocks
328.1
320.3
333.0
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
84.8
85.0
85.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


I.B.M. Posts $5.46 Billion Loss for 4th Quarter; Critics Find Gold in Woes Of Big Blue
It might be time to change I.B.M.'s nickname from Big Blue to Black and Blue, given the beating the computer giant has taken lately.
Deep cuts in the work force, multibillion-dollar charges against earnings, a plummeting stock price, the loss of its blue-chip AAA bond rating -- a humbling litany indeed for the International Business Machines Corporation, the company once revered worldwide as the epitome of management excellence and technological prowess.
Still, the bad news has been good news for a pair of I.B.M. watchers whose timely critiques of the company's plight are making them the talk of the high-tech community: Mark Stahlman, a New York-based financial adviser, and Charles Ferguson, a consultant from Cambridge, Mass.


Rev. Kent L. Kiser; Pastor, 77
The Rev.
Kent L. Kiser, pastor of Grace Baptist Church in Trenton for the last 33 years, died on Friday at his Trenton home.
He was 77 years old.
He had a heart attack, the family's physician, Dr. Scott Kolander, said.


THE INAUGURATION: The Supreme Court; Supreme Court Asks U.S. if Rackets Law Applies to Anti-Abortion Protests
The Supreme Court asked today for the Government's views on whether abortion clinics can invoke a Federal racketeering law against groups that organize demonstrations and blockades aimed at shutting the clinics down.
On the eve of the inauguration, the request will give the Clinton Administration an early occasion to put its views before the Court in an important abortion-related case.


ITT Shies Away From Consumer Loans
The ITT Corporation announced a reorganization of its consumer lending business yesterday and set aside $693 million to pay for expected losses and another $103 million to cover the costs of closing branches and cutting jobs.
Although problems at ITT's Consumer Financial subsidiary were expected to result in a fourth-quarter loss for ITT, the changes caused its stock to rise $37.5 cents yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange to $71.50 as investors and traders grew more confident that the company's profits would improve this year.


Republic Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Year's Eve Ball Is in Receivership
To the Editor:
A New Year's Day article on predictions for the new year describes Jonathan Starr of Artkraft Strauss as the owner of the ball lowered every New Year's Eve down the flagpole on the roof of One Times Square.


An Inaugural Guide
Today 8 A.M.
Prayer service, Metropolitan A.M.E.
Church (by invitation).
President Bush and his wife, Barbara, receive President-elect Bill Clinton and his wife, Hillary, at the White House. 11:30 A.M.
Inaugural ceremony, west front of the Capitol.
Inovation by the Rev.
Billing Graham.
Vice President-elect Al Gore is administered the oath of office by retired Justice Thurgood Marshall.
President-elect Clinton is administered the oath of office by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist.
Mr.
Clinton delivers his inaugural address.
Private luncheon with Congressional leaders and members of the Supreme Court, at the Capitol. (NBC - 10 A.M. to 2 P.M., CBS, ABC, CNN - 10 A.M. to 1:00 P.M., PBS - 10 A.M. to 3 P.M., FOX - 11:30 A.M. to 1:30 P.M., C-Span - 11:30 A.M. - 2 P.M.) 2 P.M.
The Clintons and Gores head for the inaugural parade reviewing stand in front of the White House.  2:30 P.M.
The inaugural parade begins following route from the Capitol to the White House. (NBC, CBS, ABC, CNN - 2 to 4 P.M.) 6:30 P.M. - 9 P.M.
The ITT Corporation is holding a "gala reception" in the Sheraton Carlton Hotel. 7 P.M.
National Ball, National Building Museum.
Thursday 9 A.M. - Noon Open house at the White House (ticket required). 2 P.M.-5 P.M.
Reception for Arkansans, White House (ticket required).


Rockefeller Center Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Northern Trust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hartford Gives Money to Help Convert Boat Company
The State of Connecticut today gave $1 million in taxpayer money to the giant Electric Boat submarine shipyard in Groton to help the company develop nonmilitary products.
The grant was among the largest given by the state in its yearlong effort to help companies dependent on the military adjust to the drop in military expenditures in the post-cold war economy.


The First Couple: A Union of Mind and Ambition
In Little Rock they have a word for it: Billary.
The man and woman who ran Arkansas for 12 years formed the most seamless political union the state had ever seen.
Bill Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton were both Yale lawyers, both smart, tough, charming, energetic, ambitious.
The business of their marriage and the marriage of their business were so entwined they seemed like a family law firm: Clinton &amp; Rodham (later, in a cosmetic shake-up, Clinton &amp; Clinton).
There was much speculation as to who was the managing partner.


Guards Strive to Fulfill Riley's Dream
In the midst of his team's lost Christmas weekend in Chicago and Milwaukee last month, Pat Riley admitted that his team did not have the kind of penetrating point guard capable of taking apart a press or a halfcourt defense all by himself.
Name-dropping to illustrate his point, he mentioned the 5-foot-6-inch Muggsy Bogues, who will buzz around Madison Square Garden tonight with the rest of the Charlotte Hornets, looking to repeat their road victory against the Knicks here last month.
Riley wasn't saying that he preferred Bogues to his own point guards, Doc Rivers and Greg Anthony, as much as he was just stating a fact.
This is what he has and that is what he doesn't.
If people were going to make the inference that Riley was complaining, well, that was their problem.


An Inaugural Guide
Today 8 A.M.
Prayer service, Metropolitan A.M.E.
Church (by invitation).
President Bush and his wife, Barbara, receive President-elect Bill Clinton and his wife, Hillary, at the White House. 11:30 A.M.
Inaugural ceremony, west front of the Capitol.
Inovation by the Rev.
Billing Graham.
Vice President-elect Al Gore is administered the oath of office by retired Justice Thurgood Marshall.
President-elect Clinton is administered the oath of office by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist.
Mr.
Clinton delivers his inaugural address.
Private luncheon with Congressional leaders and members of the Supreme Court, at the Capitol. (NBC - 10 A.M. to 2 P.M., CBS, ABC, CNN - 10 A.M. to 1:00 P.M., PBS - 10 A.M. to 3 P.M., FOX - 11:30 A.M. to 1:30 P.M., C-Span - 11:30 A.M. - 2 P.M.) 2 P.M.
The Clintons and Gores head for the inaugural parade reviewing stand in front of the White House.  2:30 P.M.
The inaugural parade begins following route from the Capitol to the White House. (NBC, CBS, ABC, CNN - 2 to 4 P.M.) 6:30 P.M. - 9 P.M.
The ITT Corporation is holding a "gala reception" in the Sheraton Carlton Hotel. 7 P.M.
National Ball, National Building Museum.
Thursday 9 A.M. - Noon Open house at the White House (ticket required). 2 P.M.-5 P.M.
Reception for Arkansans, White House (ticket required).


MNC Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cornell Student Found Dead In Fraternity House Chimney
A Cornell University senior who had been missing since early Friday was found dead Monday night, his body lodged in the chimney of a fraternity house.
The body of Terrence Ward Quinn, 21 years old, was discovered after members of Psi Upsilon fraternity prepared to start a fire and Mr.
Quinn's shoes and jeans dropped out of the chimney when the flue was opened, said Harlen McEwen, the City of Ithaca's Police Chief.


Iraq Says It Won't Attack Planes And Agrees to U.N. Flight Terms
Iraq announced today that it had ordered a cease-fire against American planes and said it would end the impasse over United Nations weapons inspections by allowing United Nations observers to fly into Baghdad without interference.
Asserting that the moves were meant as a sign of good will toward President-elect Bill Clinton, Iraqi authorities made it clear they hoped that the Clinton Administration would stop enforcing the ban on flights that has been established over southern and northern Iraq and that the United States would take steps to end the trade embargo imposed on Iraq by the United Nations.
Wariness From Clinton Aides
United Nations officials said that they hoped this would lead to an early resumption of United Nations flights to Baghdad and of United Nations inspections of suspected Iraqi weapons factories and storage sites.
But aides to Mr.
Clinton expressed wariness and said he would continue the Bush Administration's firm policy toward Iraq and would not rule out the use of force if Baghdad refused to comply with the broad range of United Nations and allied demands.


U.S.-Led Raids on Iraq Strain Unity of Gulf War Coalition
The American-led military confrontation with Iraq in recent days appears to have opened up some fissures in the coalition that fought the Persian Gulf war.
This was evident today as the United Nations Security Council met here for the last time during the Bush Administration.
But paradoxically the latest Iraqi conciliatory gestures seem to have eased tensions not only between Iraq and the allies, but within the alliance as well.


Hearty Dishes for Vegetable Lovers
For those who like vegetables, and their ranks grow daily, here are two meatless dishes that provide a hearty meal.
The mellowness of the broccoli and cheeses finds a nice counterpoint in the sharpness of the dressing for the carrots.


Turkish Premier Visits Syria to Mend Old Fences
Facing troubles across the border with Iraq and elsewhere, Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel flew to neighboring Syria today, seeking to persuade Damascus to withdraw its support for Kurdish separatists and reduce tensions on at least one of his frontiers.
Turkish officials said Mr.
Demirel's journey had been arranged weeks before the latest strikes on Iraq by the anti-Iraq coalition led by the United States.
Turkey is a key member of the coalition but has shown increasing unease at the use of its air base at Incirlik by allied warplanes patrolling northern Iraq to enforce a ban on Iraqi flights above the 36th parallel.


No Wavering on Gay Soldiers
In the heat of the campaign, Bill Clinton pledged to issue an executive order to repeal the ban on gay men and lesbians in the military services.
The pledge was not made lightly.
Mr.
Clinton was courting the votes and contributions of homosexuals -- and the approbation of all fair-minded Americans distressed at discrimination and gay-bashing in all areas of society.
But now Mr.
Clinton is meeting stiff resistance from military leaders and soldiers in the ranks.
Some top generals fear that open acceptance of homosexuals will destroy morale and discipline.
Many officers seem to have a visceral aversion to homosexuals.


Interstate/Johnson Lane reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Columbia First Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wine Talk
When President Clinton is toasted today in Washington at the luncheon of the Joint Congressional Inaugural Committee, it will be with sparkling wine from Korbel Champagne Cellars of Sonoma County, Calif.
The table wines at the lunch will be from another California winery, Jekel Vineyards, in Monterey County.
Korbel is marketed by the Brown-Forman Corporation in Louisville, Ky.
Jekel is owned by Brown-Forman.
And who is chairman of the Joint Congressional Inaugural Committee?
Senator Wendell H. Ford, Democrat of Kentucky.


Lam Research reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An Office First For First Lady?
Will Hillary Clinton be the first First Lady to boast an office in the West Wing of the White House?
With the Clintons due to move in momentarily, Bush Administration officials are saying the decision has been made along the lines of a classically Clintonian compromise: Mrs.
Clinton will work in the West Wing, home of the President's Oval Office, but on the second floor instead of the first.


American Home Products (N)
The American Home Products Corporation confused investors yesterday by announcing three types of accounting charges against 1992 earnings.
That probably diverted attention from a solid 13 percent pretax sales growth in the fourth quarter in the New York-based company's core pharmaceuticals business.
But the 3 percent drop in net income that resulted only added to the whirlpool effect already sucking most drug stocks downward.


Late Selling Pushes the Dow Down 18.92
A late round of selling swept blue-chip stocks lower as the benefits of a bond rally were confined largely to those companies most sensitive to interest rates.
Although Big Board advances led declines slightly, a continuing selloff in medical, food, beverage and other consumer growth stocks knocked the major market averages down.


Bad News
Like many other restaurant stocks, Foodmaker had advanced smartly, by about 40 percent, since October.
But the stock's plunge after Washington state officals traced a food poisoning outbreak to the company's Jack-in-the-Box restaurants illustrates how vulnerable such stocks can be.
"An isolated situation," the company called it, as investors in other sizzling restaurant issues must hope.


Loyola Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Walt Whitman and Diversity's Promise
Cane in hand, hat set at a rakish angle, Walt Whitman wandered Manhattan in the 1840's enthralled by the sights and sounds of America being made.
Broadway was less than idyllic then: hogs rooted in the gutters; bands of child prostitutes loitered at intersections.
But for Whitman, nothing could dim the miracle of the city.
He wrote ecstatically about the "numberless crowded streets" and the "immigrants arriving, fifteen or twenty thousand a week" and "the teeming nation of nations" taking shape as he watched.


Piper Jaffray Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Synopsys Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


C.D. Yields To Decline This Week
Yields offered by banks on money market accounts and certificates of deposit will be lower in the week beginning today.
In the New York market, banks posted lower yields on both money market accounts and C.D.'s, while outside the local area, the decline was evident primarily in certificates of deposit.
Auction as Portent
At the Treasury's weekly auction of three- and six-month bills, average discount rates slipped for the third consecutive week.
Many traders and investors regard the Treasury's auction as a harbinger of deposit rate changes that banks put into effect in the weeks ahead.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a sports article yesterday about Mike Richter, a Rangers goaltender currently assigned to the minor leagues, misattributed a quotation.
The passage, which follows, was spoken by Richter, not by Neil Smith, the team's general manager: "It's like they're saying, 'If you start hanging around with a lot of guys who do drugs, even if we don't think you would ever do them, we don't want you to be in that kind of situation.' And it's the idea of the drinking and staying out late, but I'm not doing that."


Monster Sighted in Central Park Loch, er, Lake


In His Own Words
PRESIDENT-ELECT BILL CLINTON
In an address yesterday to governors and former governors
"When the same values that are fundamental to the American character are fundamental to governing, values like opportunity and responsibility, work, and family, and community, government seems to work pretty well.


2 Jurors Dismissed in Glen Ridge Sex Abuse Trial
The judge in the Glen Ridge sex assault trial dismissed two jurors today because of problems stemming from a daily prayer group.
But he rejected a defense motion for a mistrial, saying he was convinced that comments made by the two jurors would not influence the remaining jurors.
Judge Benjamin R. Cohen ordered the dismissals late this afternoon after he spent two days last week interviewing all 15 jurors individually in his chambers.
Judge Cohen said today that the focus of much of his questioning was a daily prayer group organized by Ronald Simpson, who was one of the jurors he discharged.


THE INAUGURATION: Family Affair; First Relatives Take First Sip of Fame
For Arkansans, Virginia Kelley has become an unreconstructed, unapologetic advertisement for the virtues of perseverance, speaking one's mind and devil take the hindmost.
But until her son, Bill Clinton, takes the oath of office as President of the United States on Wednesday, the joking, belly-laughing horse-racing fan is holding her peace, publicly.
"No remarks till after the inauguration," she said hastily as a reporter approached her at the Arkansas State Society gala.
As she moved away, she regained her grin, her self-possession and the crowd of friends who wanted to grab her arm, hug her and, as one enthusiastic matron said, "be your bodyguards."


Futuristic Lessons From a Public TV Station
The over-30 generation vividly remembers the temperamental 16-millimeter movie projectors and grainy, outdated films on the Belgian Congo that constituted a media experience in yesterday's classrooms.
Nowadays, even such modern gadgets as the VCR are headed for educational extinction as teachers turn to personal computers, interactive videodisks, CD-ROM and state-of-the-art multimedia software to create lesson plans for the 21st century.
Computer-literate students can point and click their way through history, geography or math.


Microcom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Marines Leave Somalia, a Signal to the U.N.
On a sand-swept airfield under a broiling noonday sun, more than 200 United States Marines marched in formation today onto a plane bound for California, the first American combat troops to be withdrawn from Somalia since the military operation here began on Dec. 9.
By day's end, 556 troops had departed, a token but symbolic redeployment on the eve of the inauguration of President-elect Bill Clinton.
After President Bush announced the Somali operation in November, his spokesman said he thought United States participation could be substantially ended by the end of his term, but Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and other officials dismissed the possibility.


Delta Computec Inc. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Next Test for Nets? The Bulls
When Chuck Daly was told today that he needed two victories to become the 15th coach in National Basketball Association history to win 500 games, he wanted to know if that total included the playoffs.
No, he was told, his 498-318 mark concerned only the regular season.
"Then, I've already passed it, so forget it," said Daly, who compiled a 71-42 record in the post-season in his nine years as the most successful coach in Detroit Piston history.


Johnny Carisi Memorial
A memorial service for the jazz trumpeter and composer Johnny Carisi is to be held on Sunday at 7 P.M. at St.
Peter's Lutheran Church, Lexington Avenue and 54th Street.
Mr.
Carisi died on Oct. 3 at age 70.


Meditrust reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lukens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


COMPANY BRIEFS
COMPAQ COMPUTER CORP., Houston, has cut prices of its Contura notebook computers as much as 16 percent.


Review/Music; Celebration of Black Culture
"The Boys Choir of Harlem and Friends," a two-and-a-half-hour extravaganza that opened a limited engagement at the Richard Rodgers Theater yesterday, is a wholesome family entertainment that wants to be many things to many people.
Part variety show, part inspirational pageant, this rambling celebration of black culture takes in everything from Scott Joplin to rap, from old-time vaudeville to the poetry of Maya Angelou.
At the show's center is the 35-voice Boys Choir of Harlem, the chorus founded in 1968 by Walter J. Trumbull that has grown into a New York cultural institution.
The choir, whose members range in age from 8 to 18, sings material that runs from Duke Ellington standards ("It Don't Mean a Thing," "Take the 'A' Train") to "Byede Mandela," by the South African actor and musician Tsepo Mokone, to a choral arrangement of Villa-Lobos's "Bachianas Brasileiras." Wearing sequin-crusted baseball caps, the choir even performs a rap number, "The Joy of Singing," that turns into a pop-gospel anthem.


Harris Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Stride Rite reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 27


Hirsch Sparkles in Debut, but Messier Is Hurt as Rangers Tie
The kid with the orange hair and the white helmet and the heavy heart did his best to change the Rangers' fortunes.
Corey Hirsch, making his first National Hockey League start on the same day his grandfather was buried, stood in front of the Rangers' goal tonight and provided New York with more than a good chance of winning its first road game in eight games.
It wasn't enough.
Despite 30 saves by Hirsch in an extremely impressive debut, the Rangers only managed to muster a 2-2 tie with the Detroit Red Wings in Joe Louis Arena.
And they were hit with more news in the aftermath: Captain Mark Messier was taken to the hospital after the game to have X-rays taken on what could be a broken right hand.


BANC ONE CORP (N)
Banc One, the nation's 10th-largest banking company, reported much improved results, largely on the basis of a sharp drop in its provision for loan losses.
John B. McCoy, chairman and chief executive, said that as a percentage of total loans, troubled loans and foreclosed real estate had fallen to the lowest levels in three years.


Food Notes
Recipes From Clinton
The Clinton Community Garden, a cooperative effort on West 48th Street between Ninth and 10th avenues, was started in 1978 by residents of the neighborhood, formerly known as Hell's Kitchen.
Now 110 gardeners each tend about 40 square feet.


Charles White Hired
CHARLES WHITE, who won the Heisman Trophy in 1979 as a running back at Southern Cal, was hired yesterday as the Trojans' running backs coach.
"Charlie was the toughest, most intense running back I've ever coached," said JOHN ROBINSON, hired to succeed LARRY SMITH as the Trojans' head coach earlier this month.
"Somehow, I always feel better with Charlie White standing next to me."


ARABS PROTESTING ATTACKS ON IRAQ
Saudi Arabia, the launching pad for the Persian Gulf war against Iraq two years ago, has signaled a growing unease about developments in the region, echoing the chorus of Arab criticism that the allied forces are applying a double standard when they punish Iraq.
King Fahd, whose country's military airports were used by American, French and British airplanes that raided Iraq over the past week, reportedly told his Cabinet late Monday that United Nations Security Council resolutions should be applied forcefully to all countries, including Israel and Yugoslavia.


Georgia Architecture College Survives 2 Inquiries
A Georgia art and architecture college that was the scene of student and faculty unrest last year has withstood two inquiries into the status of its accreditation.
The Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, which accredits colleges in the South, and the National Architectural Accrediting Board, which accredits the nation's schools of architecture, have both decided to continue the accreditation of the Savannah College of Art and Design.


Dining Well When Dining Out in Warsaw (Yes, Warsaw)
A group of diners gathered to celebrate a friend's birthday in the Swietoszek restaurant, noted here for its reliable Polish cuisine and elegant interior, and pulled out all stops to mark the occasion.
They ordered caviar, Champagne and other trimmings now easily available in Warsaw for the first time since World World II.
But when the main course was served, two diners, who had ordered turkey in orange sauce, found their meal inedible.
The dish, described on the menu as "moist and delicious," was as stringy and chewy as a work boot.
They summoned the waiter.


If Only Christopher Had Known of Army Spying
To the Editor:
The suggestion that Warren M. Christopher, President-elect Bill Clinton's nominee for Secretary of State, was aware of covert United States Army intelligence operations that targeted civilian groups and prominent dissenters in the late 1960's (news article, Jan. 12) is wrong.


Candy's Tortilla Factory reports earnings for Year to Oct 10


Haemonetics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Bombay Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Smith Corona Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clinton Woolsey Dies; Neuroscientist Was 88
Dr.
Clinton Nathan Woolsey, a neuroscientist at the University of Wisconsin at Madison, died Thursday at Meriter Hospital in Madison.
A resident of Madison, he was 88.
The university said he had died after a brief illness,


When Inmates Carry Guns
With guns increasingly available everywhere else, it may come as no surprise that they are becoming available inside New York City jails.
There should be no controversy about gun control there.
Yet the City Correction Department, incredibly, hesitates over serious gun control measures.
The problem came to light after a guard in a Rikers Island jail suffered a gunshot wound while on duty earlier this month.
Authorities arrested a guard for smuggling the gun to an inmate planning a strange scam: He hoped to have himself shot and then sue the city for damages.
Further inquiries identified 16 guns smuggled into city jails, some by guards, since 1987.
It's a fair assumption that many more contraband guns are never discovered.


I.B.M. Posts $5.46 Billion Loss for 4th Quarter; 1992's Deficit Is Biggest in U.S. Business
The International Business Machines Corporation reported a record $5.46 billion loss for the fourth quarter yesterday and offered little optimism that its business would improve anytime soon.
The size of the computer giant's losses were striking, with the deficit of $4.97 billion for all of 1992 the biggest annual loss in American corporate history.
But bad as the numbers were, they were in line with analysts' expectations, after I.B.M. announced last month plans to take the huge fourth-quarter charge against earnings to trim its work force and streamline operations.


Kodak's Goal: A Leaner Company
The Eastman Kodak Company said yesterday that it would cut research and development costs, lay off 2,000 people, mostly in its headquarters city of Rochester, and work closely with a new advisory committee of outside directors in an effort to improve its financial performance.
The announcement preceded 1992 earnings results that Kay R. Whitmore, Kodak's chairman, predicted would "fall far short of expectations." Nevertheless, investors reacted positively, driving the price of Kodak stock up 50 cents a share to close at $49.375.
Volume was heavy, with 5.9 million shares traded on the New York Stock Exchange.


Supertex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Psicor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dealing With Drug Dealers: Rehabilitation, Not Jail; Hynes Tries Alternative Approach Intended to Stop a Problem by Curing an Addiction
In 15 years of selling cocaine and heroin in the doorways and abandoned buildings of Brooklyn's pervasive Borough Park narcotics mart, Guillermo Rios developed an entrepreneurial sense of a good deal, even as he indulged his own deep addiction.
Mr.
Rios, who once managed seven tidy street outlets, had to hurriedly put his deal-maker's sense to good use 20 months ago when he was caught, fix in hand, selling drugs to undercover detectives.
At the arraignment, District Attorney Charles J. Hynes of Brooklyn offered him a deal he never expected:


Bridge
An English boy who is selected to play cricket for his school wears a special cap to mark his status.
When he is older, he may earn a county cap, or even an England cap.
International caps, for playing in a single match against another country, are highly prized in any activity, although the cap is usually an imaginary one.
Danish bridge organizers have long been intrigued by this concept, and have for many years kept track of caps won by their players.
Their leading cap winner, with an astonishing 439, is Stig Werdelin, closely followed by Steen Moller with 403.
This, says Svend Novrup, bridge columnist for The Politiken, a Danish newspaper, is a record for Denmark in any activity, and might well be a world record -- if only because few countries keep such statistics.


Forest Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mayors Vote to Move Meeting to New York This Summer
Heeding an appeal by Mayor David N. Dinkins, the executive committee of the United States Conference of Mayors decided today to hold its annual meeting in New York City this summer.
Playing host to the meeting is more a bragging right than an economic boon -- only 1,000 people are expected to attend.
But the meeting, to be held June 18 to 23, will give Mr.
Dinkins a chance to polish the city's image while adding luster to his own amid what is expected to be a tough re-election campaign.
The New York City primary is Sept. 14.


Books of The Times; Thurgood Marshall, on the Bench and Off
Dream Makers, Dream Breakers  The World of Justice Thurgood Marshall  By Carl T. Rowan  Illustrated. 475 pages.
Little, Brown. $24.95.
Thurgood Marshall
Warrior at the Bar,  Rebel on the Bench
By Michael D. Davis  and Hunter R. Clark
Illustrated. 400 pages. Birch Lane Press/ Carol Publishing. $24.95.


Comerica reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE INAUGURATION: The Confirmation Hearings; Trade and Commerce Nominees Discuss Conflict of Interest Issues
Mickey Kantor, President-elect Bill Clinton's nominee to become the United States trade representative, announced today that he would remove himself from a broad range of issues to avoid conflicts of interest.
And the nominee for Commerce Secretary, Ronald H. Brown, broadened slightly his own policy on conflicts of interest.
The Senate Finance Committee voted unanimously this morning to recommend approval of Mr.
Kantor's nomination to the full Senate.
But a vote on Mr.
Brown by the Commerce Committee was not scheduled even though he submitted written answers today to questions from committee members.


Abuses by Serbs the Worst Since Nazi Era, Report Says
In its final global human rights report, the Bush Administration said today that Serbian forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina were conducting a campaign of "cruelty, brutality and killing" unrivaled since Nazi times.
The survey of 189 countries issued by the State Department described a Serbian policy of terror against civilians that made "a mockery" of the Geneva Convention.
The Serbs' "ethnic cleansing" campaign includes widespread and systematic rape and murder and the systematic shelling and starvation by siege of large cities, the report said.


Tokyo Journal; Prince and His Bride-to-Be: Their Special Story
With unusual candor for the imperial family, Crown Prince Naruhito of Japan and his fiancee today gave the first detailed account of the six years it had taken the Prince to persuade her to marry him.
On a golden winter afternoon, the handsome couple talked comfortably about how worried the Prince had been that his fiancee, Masako Owada, might never find happiness in giving up her career as a Foreign Ministry diplomat to take up the demanding roles of consort and then Empress.


THE INAUGURATION: The Social Scene; A Night of 1,000 Parties, One for Every Cause
There was a young man standing in front of the venerable Willard Hotel this evening dressed as a stalk of broccoli.
He was protesting animal rights and vegetarianism.
The Capitol loomed behind him as guests poured in to the Animal Ball at the behest of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals.
Next to him a friend sported a sign that read "Artichoke Liberation Front."


Real Estate
MARION MERRELL DOW INC. is moving forward with a $276 million project for its new headquarters here that is expected to transform the deteriorating section of southern Kansas City.
The giant pharmaceutical company plans to consolidate its offices and expand its laboratories on a 325-acre site.
Marion already owns about 160 acres there, which it purchased in the 1960's.
The company built five buildings there, the first in 1965.
It will spend $15 million to $20 million to buy 160 more acres.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Five of the nation's 10 largest banks, including Citicorp, Chemical and Chase, reported higher-than-expected earnings, prompting banking experts to say they see the end in sight for the banking industry's difficulties with troubled commercial real estate loans made in the 1980's.  [ Page A1. ]
I.B.M. posted a $5.46 billion fourth-quarter loss, mostly because of costs to trim staff and streamline operations.
The company also announced a $4.97 billion loss for the year, the biggest annual loss in American corporate history, and said it saw no prospects for improvement soon.  [ D1. ]  Bad news is good news for two men vying to become America's leading I.B.M. basher.  [ D1. ]


Mr. Clinton's Day, and America's
It is left now to William Jefferson Clinton to wrest this inaugural week from the power brokers and glitzmeisters and remind the country what a Presidential inauguration is and means: a simple, majestic ceremony signifying the peaceable transition of power and the durability of union.
No one begrudges the joy of grateful Democrats who have endured 12 years of political privation.
And there have been genuine touches of unforced populism to leaven the pageantry, not least Monday's moving "Faces of Hope" luncheon -- Mr.
Clinton's reunion with 53 ordinary Americans he had met and embraced in his campaign.


Twin Disc Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


F.B.I. Arrests A Mafia Boss In New Jersey
On the run for 32 months but still portrayed by Federal agents as one of the most dangerous Mafia leaders in the country, Anthony Salvatore Casso was captured yesterday by the F.B.I. as he emerged from his morning shower in a hideaway in New Jersey.
Known in the underworld by his nickname of Gaspipe, Mr.
Casso, the reputed acting boss of the Lucchese crime family, was apparently traced through his use of a cellular telephone to a split-level house in Mount Olive, N.J., a placid township 55 miles from his usual turbulent haunts in Brooklyn.


Fortune Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hunt Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 29


Review/Dance; Youthfulness and Classicism In 2 Ballets by Robbins
For all the quiet of its unfolding, "The Goldberg Variations" is Jerome Robbins at his most ambitious.
Mr.
Robbins has taken the monumental and difficult Bach score and rendered it in dance in the work, which was presented by the New York City Ballet on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater.
Fresh from two encounters with Chopin, in the romantic "Dances at a Gathering" and "In the Night," Mr.
Robbins abandoned storytelling for a go at muted architectonic splendor.
"The Goldberg Variations" is a difficult ballet to watch through, given its even measure and length.
With the first phrase of the score, sensitively performed here by Jerry Zimmerman, it was tempting to heed George Balanchine's observation that dancegoers may simply close their eyes and listen to the music at City Ballet.
But the spare simplicity of the dance's opening statement of theme, performed with a good mix of lyricism and grandeur by Simone Schumacher and Alexandre Proia, lures one into the ballet's outpouring of group and small-ensemble dances and of carefully joined styles that range from Baroque dance to gentle acrobatics.


Nike and C.A.A. In Marketing Pact
Nike Inc. yesterday became the second giant consumer-product marketer to formally become involved with Creative Artists Agency Inc., the Beverly Hills, Calif., talent agency.
Nike, the maker of athletic footwear and apparel based in Beaverton, Ore., and C.A.A., which has become identified with its powerful chairman, Michael Ovitz, said they would jointly develop sports-related entertainment projects involving sporting events and sports programming.


Imcera Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHEMICAL BANKING CORP. (N)
Chemical Banking, the nation's third-largest banking company, said its operating results improved sharply last year but that its net was down because of a $625 million charge for merger-related restructuring.
Still, the bank insisted, the merger was a roaring success.
"Our strong earnings for both the quarter and the year clearly validate the merger of Manufacturers Hanover and Chemical," John F. McGillicuddy, chairman and chief executive, said in a statement.


At A Glance; Highlights of the Proposed Budget
For the fiscal year that begins April 1.
TAXES AND FEES Raise the state's cigarette tax by 21 cents per pack, to a total of 60 cents per pack.
Worth $180 million.


Bond Prices Surge on Hopes For an Untested President
Bond prices were propelled higher yesterday, the day before the inauguration of Bill Clinton as President, on rising confidence in the chances for deficit reduction and visions of nothing more than moderate economic growth.
But the mood in the market remains volatile, which means that if the confidence of investors and traders is not rewarded, the gains of yesterday and the last week could be lost just as quickly.
But if long-term bond rates remain this low or move lower, the economy could get a lift, bringing another rush of homeowners refinancing their mortgages.


President for Seahawks
DAVID BEHRING, the 37-year-old son of the Seattle Seahawks' majority owner, KEN BEHRING, was named president of the National Football League team yesterday.
KEN BEHRING told a news conference that the appointment will give the Seahawks' owners a more direct hand in day-to-day operation of the club.
David Behring owns 1 percent of the team.
TOM FLORES has been president of the Seahawks for the last four seasons and last season also assumed duties as coach.
Flores will remain as coach. (AP)


Mayors' Conference to Meet in New York This Summer


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
N.A.
4.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.03
2.94
3.75
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.13
3.08
3.84
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.23
6.22
6.69
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.30
7.34
7.59
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.33
8.42
8.74
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.35
6.65
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer N.A.-Not available because of the observance of Martin Luther King Day Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


In Hiring Coaches, Specter of New York May Mean No Sale
Roger Neilson wanted to make one telephone call before the scheduled news conference that would announce his appointment as the coach of the Rangers.
"It was to my lawyer," said Neilson. "I'd reconsidered. I wanted out."


When 'Native American' Meant WASP
To the Editor:
"P. C. 1841 A.D." (Topics of the Times Jan. 10) has President William Henry Harrison's inaugural ball all wrong.
"Native American" in those days did not mean redskins, but white Anglo-Saxon Protestants.


Dover Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Digital Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Treadco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rollins Truck Leasing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Public Service Enterprise reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Harland (John H.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Public &amp; Private; The Sins Of Zoe Baird
It's been easy for people to be single-minded and sure about the sins of Zoe Baird.
The first woman chosen to be Attorney General was caught with her child care down -- her sitter and the sitter's husband, who drove Ms.
Baird to and from the office, were illegal aliens.
And taxes had not been withheld from their wages.
If you looked at the law, it was easy to say that this cast doubt on her fitness to be the highest-ranking law enforcement official and to head the Immigration and Naturalization Service, which is under the purview of the Department of Justice.


Borden Chemicals/Plastics L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


FIRST INTERSTATE BANCORP (N)
Reducing nonperforming assets by more than half and cutting expenses as well, the First Interstate Bancorp, based in Los Angeles, returned to profitability for the quarter and the year.


Police Arrest 14 During Drug Sweep in Red Hook
Fourteen men were arrested last night by a police task force combating drug gangs in the Brooklyn neighborhood where a school principal was killed in crossfire a month ago.
Anti-narcotics officers picked up the suspects in about a dozen apartments in three buildings at a housing project in Red Hook, the police said.
The men were charged with either the sale or possession of cocaine and heroin.


S&amp;T Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Talk of Vienna; In Post-Modernist Vanguard, Vienna as 'Gomorra' in Opera
This is the height of the ball season in Vienna.
From New Year's Eve through a giddy procession of Carnival festivities, the Viennese twirl their way toward Lent.
It is the ultimate time of year for those who think of Old Vienna in terms of waltzes, Sacher tortes and gobs of billowy whipped cream.
But there, in the midst of this weepy excess, was Heinz Karl Gruber, the longtime wild man of the Viennese post-modernist musical vanguard, on Monday night conducting the world premiere of his new opera. (His first opera, actually, even though he just turned 50 years old.)


Former Hermes Executive Will Head Oxxford Clothes
Oxxford Clothes Inc., the Chicago-based maker of pricey hand-sewn men's suits, named Chrys Fisher president and chief executive yesterday, less than a month after Mr.
Fisher resigned as head of the American operations of Hermes, the Paris-based luxury-goods company known for its ties and scarves.
Mr.
Fisher, 47, replaces Jack McDonald, who is retiring.
He said at the time of his resignation from Hermes late last month that he was seeking a management position with an equity stake, which Oxxford offered him.


Girl Held in Bunker Says Captor Talked of Suicide
Sipping soda and munching on potato chips, Katie Beers told the police after her rescue from an underground bunker that John Esposito had threatened to commit suicide shortly before he led the police to her, according to excerpts from her questioning by investigators.
"He told me that he was going to hang himself and leave a note on him and the police would find me," she told a detective on Jan. 13, the same day Mr.
Esposito led investigators to the bunker beneath his garage where he had held the 10-year-old girl captive for 16 days.


60-Minute Gourmet
Of all the cuts of beef available to home cooks, my preference is for the least-expensive varieties like shoulder, breast and skirt steak.
These lean and more healthful cuts have a more compelling texture to my taste, as well as better flavor -- that is, if you cook them properly.
Skirt steak, sometimes called hanger steak or butcher steak, is one of my favorites.
I first sampled it as a boy working in Les Halles, the old food market in Paris.
Butchers used to start their day at around 4 A.M. with a seared skirt steak, fresh bread and a glass of red wine.


First Security reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An Invisible Legacy
Nelson A. Rockefeller spread miles of asphalt, built modern campuses and raised skyscrapers for state workers.
Hugh L. Carey saved New York City from bankruptcy.
Now Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, less than 22 months from the 1994 gubernatorial election, is hoping to construct a different kind of legacy, an invisible legacy built by balancing budgets and improving fiscal practices during a relentless recession.
In proposing his 1993-94 budget today, Mr.
Cuomo declared his first significant victory in the form of a $184 million surplus in the 1992-93 budget.
He urged the Legislature not to interpret the surplus as a harbinger of recovery, noting that it resulted largely from decisions by New York investors to take capital gains in December rather than risking higher Federal tax rates under President-elect Bill Clinton.


THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Last Day in the White House; 'Over and Out,' Bush Says, Then Goes to Walk the Dog
It was "kind of a last supper, I guess," said Thomas L. Ashley, one of the five guests at a small dinner given by George and Barbara Bush in the family dining room at the White House on Monday night.
"There was no whimpering and no finger-pointing, and we laughed quite a bit.
"But when we said goodbye, it was choke time for all of us. No one is crazy enough to think you can turn your back on a half-Presidency, having been rejected by the voters, and go back to Houston, Tex., with a happy heart."


Horizon Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Third Down, Coach to Go For Giants
IN the Giants' search for a new coach, it's now third down.
If General Manager George Young throws another incompletion, he'll have to punt.
Having been rejected by both Dave Wannstedt and Tom Coughlin, the Giants' stature as one of the National Football League's flagship franchises keeps shrinking.
And Young's reputation as one of pro football's most competent general managers keeps dwindling.


Reprieve for New York on Water Filtering
On its last full day in business, the Bush Administration yesterday announced that -- at least for now -- New York will not have to begin filtering its drinking water, a process that could have eventually cost the city $5 billion.
Federal laws require most large cities to filter their water.
But because the bulk of New York City's water supply runs from the pristine reservoirs of the Catskills and Delaware County, the city has always managed to avoid building a filtration plant.


Prime Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Little Sun Shines In On Rainy Santa Anita
The sun finally shone on Santa Anita yesterday after the strangest and stormiest run of California weather since the track opened 59 years ago outside Los Angeles.
But racing will still be suspended for the next two days so that the horses can get back to training before resuming the season on Friday.
"We've had 20 inches of rain since we opened the season on Dec. 26," Jane Goldstein, director of communications for Santa Anita, reported by telephone.
"It's rained almost every day since then. We've had 'off' tracks every day since Dec. 29, days when the track could not be listed as fast. And we've canceled races because of track conditions for the first time since we opened in 1934."


Microwave Cooking
I always think of pork as winter meat, meat with rich flavor meant to be set off by winter vegetables and robust seasonings.
Pork used to have a lot of fat, which was welcome in cold climates in times of no central heating.
But today, pork, "the other white meat," particularly the fatless tenderloin, is as good for you as chicken.
To me it has more flavor than chicken and deserves to be appreciated in its own right.
It requires new techniques for cooking if the absence of fat is not to render it tasteless and dry.
The microwave, which cooks it quickly in a humid environment, keeps the meat moist and tender and needs no fat, preserving the meat's healthfulness.


Mary Lazar Former Editor, 60
Mary Lazar, the wife of the literary and talent agent Irving P. (Swifty) Lazar, died last Thursday in Beverly Hills, Calif.
She was 60.
She died of cancer, her family said.


Rene Pleven, 91, Prime Minister Of France Twice in Early 1950's
Rene Pleven, a top official in the Free French movement in World War II who served twice as Prime Minister in the 1950's, died on Jan. 13 in Paris.
He was 91.
His family said he died of heart failure.


Corrections
The "How They Do It" chart in Your Money on Saturday, about the tax deductibility of home offices, misidentified one deductible cost.
It is mortgage interest, not mortgage insurance.


Germantown Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


People
*
John Karlson was named to the new position of new-business manager and partner at Carmichael Lynch Advertising, Minneapolis.
He was previously a management supervisor at Chiat/Day, Los Angeles. *
Mark S. Grody was named to the new position of executive vice president and general manager at Ogilvy Adams &amp; Rinehart, Los Angeles.
He was previously president of his own firm there, Mark Grody Associates.


Kuwaitis Express Gratitude Toward Bush, Concern About Clinton


REN Corp.-USA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE INAUGURATION: Bowing Out; Citizen Bush Goes Home And Says He Is Satisfied
Leaving behind a capital where he exercised power for much of his life, George Bush, ex-President and private citizen, today returned to the city where he began his political career as a young man, proclaiming himself satisfied.
"All I can say is it's been one hell of a ride, and we are very, very lucky people, Barbara and George Bush, your neighbors. Thank you," Mr.
Bush told a crowd of several hundred well-wishers who gathered to welcome him at Ellington Field, a former Air Force base on the edge of the city.


Orion Pictures reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


William Bentinck-Smith, Harvard Historian
William Bentinck-Smith, an administrator and historian of Harvard University, died Tuesday at the Nashoba Community Hospital in Ayer, Mass.
He was 79 and lived in Groton, Mass.
He died of heart failure, said his wife, Phebe.


Harrah's Chosen as Operator Of Casino on Missouri River
Harrah's Casino Hotels said yesterday that it had been chosen to build a $50 million, 1,550-passenger riverboat casino in North Kansas City, Mo., for operation on the Missouri River beginning in the second quarter of 1994.
The ship will have about 900 slot machines and 55 gaming tables.
Harrah's is a subsidiary of the Memphis-based Promus Companies, with interests in hotels and gaming.
Promus is currently building two casino riverboats for a complex in downtown Joliet, Ill.
It will begin construction in March of a riverboat for Vicksburg, Miss.
And it is in exclusive negotiations with the City of Shreveport, La., for a riverboat casino there.


AT HOME WITH/David Hockney; Acquainted With the Light
Had David Hockney painted a century earlier, he might have moved from dreary northern England to sun-blasted Provence, but instead it was to Los Angeles that he famously migrated in 1964.
"I was brought up in Gothic gloom," he said of his youth in the industrial city of Bradford.
"All the buildings are absolutely black, and it rains practically every other day.  I'm a bit like van Gogh. He's a northerner who went to the sun. He thought there was more joy in the sun, and I tend to think that as well."


Primary Dealer Records a Big Loss
The last three years have been banner ones for the 39 primary dealers that are the heart of the $2.3 trillion Government securities market.
According to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the dealers as a whole made about $800 million in profits in 1990 and a record $1 billion in 1991.
Moreover, they accumulated profits of $900 million through September and could be looking to another record year.


A Change of Power, but Barely a Break in Stride
Today was the day of Bill Clinton's dreams, the day he and his party finished the arduous climb to a "joyful mountaintop of celebration," but like all Inauguration Days, it was more than that.
It was a day when the nation committed itself once more, with the recital of a simple 18th-century oath, to what the new President felicitously termed "the mystery of American renewal." The solemn magic of the moment, in this most telling of national rituals, lies in what it symbolizes: the unquestioned acceptance by victor, vanquished and public alike of the continuity and legitimacy of governance.


Corrections
A brief report in Business Day yesterday about the earnings of the Chemical Banking Corporation misstated the year in which the company took a $625 million charge against its earnings for a merger-related revamping.
It was 1991.


Primary Dealer Records a Big Loss
The last three years have been banner ones for the 39 primary dealers that are the heart of the $2.3 trillion Government securities market.
According to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the dealers as a whole made about $800 million in profits in 1990 and a record $1 billion in 1991.
Moreover, they accumulated profits of $900 million through September and could be looking to another record year.


Cuomo's Plan to Divert School Aid Comes Under Fire
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposal to divert state aid from wealthy to poor school districts came under attack today from officials in New York City's suburbs, which would bear the brunt of the cuts needed to make the plan work.
In Nassau, Suffolk, Rockland and Westchester Counties, where about 80 percent of the school districts would lose aid under the plan, school officials predicted that Mr.
Cuomo's proposal would lead to teacher layoffs, larger classes, fewer courses and higher property taxes.


The Inauguration: Serious and Not So
DOWN TO BUSINESS As President Clinton's new team set about governing, the swirl of ceremony was almost an intrusion.
Page A11.
CONFIRMING A CABINET The Senate confirmed new Secretaries of State, Defense and the Treasury, and agreed to move quickly on 11 other Cabinet posts.
Page A12.


Airport Financing In Portland, Ore.
The Port of Portland, Ore., is selling $115 million of revenue bonds for Portland International Airport, with a majority of the financing in securities that for some investors may be subject to the Federal alternative minimum tax.
For $85 million of bonds subject to the tax, initial yields range from 4 percent for an issue due in 1995 to 4.85 percent in 1998, 5.5 percent in 2003 and 5.7 percent in 2005.
Longer maturities are tentatively priced to yield a maximum 6.25 percent for a bond due in 2023 and 6.086 percent for one due in 2013.


Ukraine Needs Reassurance From West; Real Russian Threat
To the Editor:
Yes, Ukraine ought to relinquish its 1,656 nuclear warheads in its own interest (editorial, Jan. 11).
Not to do so will arouse suspicions in Poland and Germany and harm Ukraine's integration prospects with the West.


Transactions
Baseball  National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Agreed to terms with Ramon Caraballo, second baseman; Jose Oliva, third baseman; Troy Hughes, outfielder, and Michael Potts, Dennis Burlingame and Shawn Holman, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Agreed to terms with Joe Oliver, catcher, on a one-year contract.


Tigers Release Bergman
The Detroit Tigers have ended a nine-year association with backup first baseman and designated hitter DAVE BERGMAN.
Manager SPARKY ANDERSON said Bergman had written to him during the winter about coaching, but he said the team's coaching ranks are full for the moment.


Major Comeback for Unisys Following Big 1991 Losses
The Unisys Corporation, a once-troubled maker of big computers, reported strong earnings gains for the fourth quarter yesterday at a time when other producers of large computers are struggling.
The fourth-quarter earnings surge brought net income for the year to $361 million, a striking comeback from 1991, when the company reported a $1.4 billion loss and cut staff and manufacturing operations.


Critic's Notebook; As Rock Beat Fades, Clinton's Presidency Opens on a Soft Note
"We march to the music of our time," President Clinton said today in his Inaugural Address.
But the rock-and-roll Presidency that some feared and others hoped for has already begun to look like what radio stations call "adult contemporary" or "lite" rock, sticking to plush, cautious tunes that wouldn't risk anything like excitement, much less rudeness.
On cable television on Sunday, the Clinton media brain trust came close to hipness, booking the rapper L. L. Cool J. for may be history's first pre-Presidential rap.
But on network television, in "An American Reunion," the CBS-TV variety show on Tuesday night, it was back to musical diversions direct from the Jimmy Carter era.
None other than Barry Manilow, unhipness incarnate, was the first big star trotted out for a program that featured ballads, ballads, ballads.
It made the average Grammy Awards telecast sound avant-garde.


Critic's Notebook; In the Inaugural of Inclusion, All the Arts Are In
The few Americans who were not invited to any of the entertainments of recent days and had to make do with the tube had both a broader and closer view of this populist pageant than any of the nobs on the A-list.
You didn't have to be there to notice that the theme was inclusion.
There were Beltwayers from the talk shows and bicoastals from television specials. (When in his inaugural speech Mr. Clinton said there is nothing wrong with America that what is right with America cannot cure, some viewers might have wondered into which category he was putting the Senators and other biggies in the reserved seats over which the camera panned from time to time.)


H.F. Ahmanson &amp; Co. (N)
H.
F.
Ahmanson &amp; Company, the nation's largest savings and loan operator, had lower earnings of $15.5 million in its fourth quarter as a result of an increase in loan-loss provisions for troubled assets of $93 million.
But the company saw a decline in its nonpaying loans in the period of $111 million, the first dip in seven consecutive quarters.
The decrease in Ahmanson's nonperforming assets to $2.2 billion shows that the innovative strategy of the company to sell off its troubled portfolio is paying dividends.
"They're really moving the stuff," said Jonathan Gray, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein.
Ahmanson's loan agents get a bonus for helping sell homes as well as mortgages.
In December alone, the company sold $168 million in real estate.


Carpenter Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wheaton Topples Chang With Humble Approach
A year ago, a David Wheaton victory over Michael Chang would not have been considered an upset.
But the last 12 months have taken a toll on the young man from Minnesota.
As he celebrated his 6-4, 6-3, 1-6, 6-3 decision over the sixth-seeded Chang in the Australian Open on Wednesday, it was clear that this was more than another second-round victory.


Emerson Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bankers Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Exodus to a Brooklyn Neighborhood Slows to a Trickle
Just as tinted glasses conceal his dark eyes and bushy brows, silence hides parts of the tailor's bittersweet tale about his brother's efforts to join his family in Brooklyn.
Since last fall, he says, his brother has repeatedly gone to Syria's security forces to apply for permission to travel -- a right only last year afforded Syrian Jews.
But day after day, he says, the request has gone unanswered.


Children's Place Mats That Teach
Sitting at the dining table has never ranked as a favorite activity of young children.
Generations have grown up practicing the eat-and-run style of dining -- nibbling a few bites, running away to play, and repeating the pattern until their parents' patience is worn out.
But thanks to Amy Kallman Epstein, children now have an incentive to remain at the table, and parents have reason to rejoice at the calm that ensues, however fleetingly, at mealtime.
Ms.
Epstein is the creator of Read a Mat, the educational place mat that is becoming a fixture of modern childhoods.


Iraqis Show Plant Destroyed by U.S. Missiles
As an Iraqi cease-fire went into effect, yellow Caterpillar tractors continued today to plow through mangled concrete and twisted metal at Al Nida General Establishment for Dies and Molds.
American warships on Sunday fired about 40 Tomahawk cruise missiles at the complex, which American officials have said shelters a nuclear arms site.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Wildflower Seeds
Q.
This year I would like to try growing wildflowers.
Which would you suggest and where can I buy seed? -- Larraine Albright, Harrisburg, Pa.


Becton Dickinson reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


HOME IMPROVEMENT
Installing molding requires time, skill and meticulous craftsmanship.
For these reasons, professionally installed molding is expensive.
But amateurs with the time and patience to undertake molding projects on their own can learn the skills required without too much trouble, and save money.
Probably the most important skill is joining molding at corners.
On outside corners -- for example, where molding is used to surround a window frame or lies against a projection into a room -- the ends of pieces are mitered; that is, they are cut at an angle so that when the pieces are placed together they form the corner. (When two pieces are mitered to form a right-angle corner, 90 degrees, each is cut to an angle of 45 degrees.)


New Sponsors for Irish Parade Meet but Announce No Decision
Threatened with a crippling boycott of this year's St.
Patrick's Day parade over the inclusion of a gay group, the parade's new sponsors held a 2 1/2-hour emergency meeting yesterday, but they did not say whether they would pull out of the event.
A spokesman for the St.
Patrick's Day Parade Committee Inc. told a throng of reporters after the gathering that his group was still waiting for the local, state and national arms of the traditional sponsor, the Ancient Order of Hibernians, to clarify their positions in the dispute.


Sanitation Dept. Reports a Series Of Truck Thefts
A dozen big white garbage trucks owned by the city have been stolen in the last five months for reasons that no one seems to be able to fathom, the Sanitation Department said last night.
Anne Canty, the department's director of public affairs, described the vehicles as "your standard, 25-cubic-yard rear loader that most New Yorkers would recognize easily."


Exabyte Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


ASK Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Data General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


U.S. Set Back in Vote on W.H.O. Chief
A Japanese doctor, Dr.
Hiroshi Nakajima, won a key vote yesterday for re-election as head of the World Health Organization despite a vigorous diplomatic campaign by the United States and its European allies to unseat him.
By an 18-to-13 vote, the W.H.O.'s executive board recommended Dr.
Nakajima over a rival candidate, Dr.
Mohammed Abdelmoumene, an Algerian favored by the United States, Canada and the European Community.


Freda Corp. reports earnings for 13wks to Aug 29


A Symposium On Gardening
Five garden professionals will discuss garden design at a daylong symposium on Saturday at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx.
The use of native plants in the landscape will be discussed by Peter Olin, director of the Minnesota Landscape Arboretum.
The integration of traditional styles in contemporary garden design will be covered by Sarah S. Boasberg, a designer of residential gardens in Washington.


Conner Peripherals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Letterman's No. 1 Question: Where?; New York City and Los Angeles Are Weighed for New Show
If this were a late-night talk show and we had limped through the monologue and the first commercial and it was time for the top 10 list, the No. 1 question would be (drum roll, please): Now that David Letterman has decided to switch networks, will he also switch cities?
Boosters on both coasts are already debating whether Mr.
Letterman -- whose frantic, neurotic humor has had an unmistakable New York City flavor since he went on the air 11 years ago -- would be as funny if he packed up and headed for Los Angeles. 10.
Earthquakes!
He wouldn't have a lot of his biggest running gags.
No car-swallowing potholes, no "radioactive steam" billowing from city streets (or from a pipe behind his desk), no Connecticut state police to hand out "greeting cards" that look suspiciously like speeding tickets, no "shoulderless" Merritt Parkway on which to hand them out, no Donald J. Trump to lay carpet in his Rockefeller Center office when NBC dawdled.


Foreign Affairs; Shaping Change
Candidate Bill Clinton promised "to focus like a laser beam" on domestic problems.
The priority was correct; the promise, unrealistic.
Yesterday in his Inaugural Address, President Clinton set aside the pledge and said that "To renew America, we must meet challenges abroad as well as at home."
But the chaotic world awaiting the new President will demand almost all his attention.
And that he must resist.


At Motorola, Quality Is a Team Sport
Anyone looking for the thrill of victory and the agony of defeat would have been disappointed.
But there was no absence of enthusiasm at an all-day Olympics of sorts held by Motorola Inc.
Today's championship round of a yearlong contest highlighted the successes of employee teams from around the world in improving the quality of things the company does and makes for itself and others.


American Savings of Florida reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Raids on Iraq: Few Choices for Clinton
The American-led air strikes launched against Iraq in the final days of the Bush Administration were too small to deliver a punishing military blow to President Saddam Hussein's Government.
But they were large enough to cause problems between the United States and its allies, limiting the options for the Clinton Administration.
With open disagreement among the anti-Iraq coalition of the Persian Gulf war, it may be more difficult for Washington to muster support for broad allied military action against Iraq should President Clinton deem it necessary.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.25
4.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
3.03
3.73
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.11
3.13
3.81
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.25
6.23
6.73
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.33
7.30
7.62
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.33
8.33
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.33
6.35
6.66
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Dance; Balanchine's One-Act Compression of 'Swan Lake'
George Balanchine's one-act version of Tchaikovsky's "Swan Lake" is more a gloss upon the standard four-act 19th-century classic than the digest it appears.
The latest Swan Queen in the New York City Ballet to deal with the production's ambiguities is Kyra Nichols, who came off more than splendidly on Sunday afternoon at the New York State Theater.
It was startling to realize that Miss Nichols, with a wide repertory behind her, had never danced the role before; it was equally clear that this debut was worth the wait.
Here was the most lyrical Odette the City Ballet has seen in years, poignantly defined through the clarity of form and phrasing that are the ballerina's trademarks.
Yet qualities that usually bring into relief a diamond-faceted dazzle in Miss Nichols's style were now transformed into a different expressiveness.


Pop and Jazz in Review
B-52's  Radio City Music Hall


Lilly Is Reducing Earnings After Setback for Centocor
Eli Lilly &amp; Company said yesterday that it would reduce fourth-quarter after-tax earnings by at least $26.5 million, or 9 cents to 11 cents a share, to reflect a severe setback in its alliance with Centocor Inc.
Lilly had invested $100 million in Centocor last July, gambling on the success of Centocor's Centoxin drug for sepsis, an often fatal bacterial infection.
It made the investment despite earlier warnings by Federal regulators questioning the effectiveness of this type of drug.


Private Colleges Upset Over Cuomo Aid Cuts
Officials at private colleges throughout the state say Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposal to cut Tuition Assistance Program grants and other college student aid will hurt students at private colleges disproportionately.
The Governor has proposed cuts in TAP grants to incoming freshmen, although the levels for students already receiving them remain the same.
The grants are given to students attending any college or university in the state, public or private, but private schools say many of their students rely on this source of money to help them afford the relatively steep tuition of private education.


CLINTON TAKES OATH AS 42D PRESIDENT, URGING SACRIFICE TO 'RENEW AMERICA'
William Jefferson Clinton became the 42d President of the United States today, and in an Inaugural Address striking in its appeal for sacrifice, he told Americans that if they assume greater responsibility for their country's future, "there is nothing wrong with America that cannot be cured by what is right with America."
The 46-year-old Governor of Arkansas, virtually unknown to most Americans 18 months ago and a long shot for the White House, took the oath of office under a stunningly blue sky from Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist.
President George Herbert Walker Bush, who once seemed sure to win a second term, watched stoically from his seat on the Capitol steps.


Eleanor Hibbert, Novelist Known As Victoria Holt and Jean Plaidy
Eleanor Hibbert, a prolific and popular novelist whose books, written under the pen names Jean Plaidy, Victoria Holt and Philippa Carr, sold more than 100 million copies, died on Monday aboard a Mediterranean cruise ship.
She was believed to be in her 80's.
She died on the Sea Princess between Athens and Port Said, Egypt, while on her annual winter trip, said Julie Fallowfield, her agent in the United States.
The cause of death was not disclosed.


Brinker International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
The Mad Hatters The Wetlands


Homeless Man Was Treated Before Slaying
The homeless man charged with bludgeoning an 80-year-old Bronx woman to death on Sunday had been treated for psychiatric problems at New York City hospitals twice in the last two months, according to officials familiar with his medical history.
But, they said, he had failed to return for treatment for his drug abuse, which doctors said had worsened his mental illness.
And the officials acknowledged that there were few, if any, mechanisms to follow up on the treatment recommended for the man, Christopher Battiste, who lived in a city-run shelter in the Bronx that provided no psychiatric programs on the premises.


Throw Away the Crutch of Bilingual Education; Family Does It Better
To the Editor:
I believe the bilingual system operated by New York City (news article, Jan. 4) should be abandoned, for at least two reasons:


Grow Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Museum Enshrines a Simpler Era's Dreams
NEIL SAKOW was bouncing around the floor, singing the 1960 Kennedy campaign song written to the tune of "High Hopes." Then he broke into an impromptu two-step, finishing with a frantic wave of an original campaign flag.
"Frank Sinatra did that song first," he said, catching his breath.
"But I don't think he does it as good as me."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS -- ADVERTISING
WHO makes the media choices for advertisers is beginning to be scrutinized as closely as the choices themselves.
The reason, of course, is the growth of independent services outside traditional advertising agencies that handle tasks like media planning and buying.
These services thrive by promoting themselves as specialists, offering a Gerber-esque promise that because media are their business, their only business, clients gain far more in efficiency and savings than might be lost by unbundling, or separating, media from other account functions.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Israel (Cachao) Lopez  Radio City Music Hall


Fidelity Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Innovex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Economic Scene
THERE may be a way for the United States Treasury to put a bit more zing in the recovery while still reducing the budget deficit.
And Bill Clinton's advisers know it.
Skeptical?
Join the throng.
Economic free lunches have been viewed with a jaundiced eye ever since the more zealous supply-siders promised that the big tax cuts of the early 1980's would pay for themselves in an orgy of revenue growth.
But Washington is not above sampling a low-cost hors d'ouevre or two.
And the latest to be added to the menu is almost certain to prove a tempting morsel: a proposal to stimulate private investment and save on Federal interest outlays by shortening the average maturity of Government securities sold to the public.


Israelis Accept Schedule For Return of Artifacts From the Sinai to Egypt
More than a decade has passed since Israel ended its occupation of Sinai and returned the wilderness to Egypt as part of a peace treaty.
Now the Israelis are about to clear up some unfinished business by handing over thousands of pottery shards, gold ornaments, ancient tombstones and other archeological artifacts they had discovered under the desert sands.
An Egyptian delegation visited Israel this week to survey the material, which is stored at several universities and the Israel Museum in Jerusalem, and to work out details for its return according to a schedule that would give Israeli archeologists two more years to complete studies that have been slowed by a lack of money.


Audrey Hepburn, Actress, Is Dead at 63
Audrey Hepburn, the actress who epitomized Hollywood chic in the 1950's and 60's, died yesterday at her home in Tolochenaz, near Lausanne, Switzerland.
She was 63 years old and had undergone surgery for colon cancer in November.
Her death from cancer was announced by Unicef, the United Nations Children's Fund, for which she had been a special ambassador since 1988.


A Shrine to Rockwell's America
The structure is up, the paintings are being installed, and the Norman Rockwell Museum in Stockbridge, Mass., will open on April 3.
Designed by Robert A. M. Stern, the $4.4 million, 27,000-square-foot building will contain the country's largest collection of original art by the celebrated illustrator, who died in 1978.
The museum's entrance, shown in the drawing above, is crowned with a lantern-shaped cupola and framed by four classical wood columns.


Signet Banking reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Donnelly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Russia Battles Inflation With Financial Controls
Shaken by a new surge of inflation that has sent prices up by more than 30 percent in three weeks, the Government moved today to impose tighter financial controls by restricting low-cost industrial credits, raising bank interest rates and issuing bonds to finance the budget deficit.
But at a news conference today, Deputy Prime Minister Boris G. Fyodorov conceded that the battle over economic policy in Russia is still far from over.


Champion International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Seeking a Perfect 6 At a Precocious 12
The figure-skating coach went to a coaches convention in Canada.
Where was the harm in that?
But when Frank Carroll returned last May from his week in Ottawa, he found that his 12-year-old protege, Michelle Kwan, had conspired with her father against him.
In Carroll's absence, Kwan had taken the skating test to qualify for seniors competitition.
Not surprisingly, she had passed.


A Touch of Designer Taste
At a recent party for Betty Sherrill, the chairwoman of the Winter Antiques Show, people milled around Bill Blass's perfectly appointed Sutton Place apartment, nibbling on smoked salmon and caviar napoleons and oohing and aahing at the sophisticated decor.
The bedroom, with its working fireplace and collection of antique miniature staircases, was a center of attention.
If a guest particularly liked the lamps that were flexed over wall-to-wall bookcases, he or she was in luck.
Although the lamps are custom made, they are not one of a kind.


CHRONICLE
ATTALLAH SHABAZZ, the eldest of Malcolm X's six daughters, says that there may never be an official holiday declared to honor her father, but that people should keep his memory alive anyway.
"We don't need legislation to light a candle of celebration," Ms.
Shabazz said Tuesday at Ball State University in Muncie, Ind., The Associated Press reported.
She spoke one day after the national holiday commemorating the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.


Herman's Picks Account Finalists
Herman's Sporting Goods Inc. said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its estimated $25 million to $30 million account, previously handled in-house, to two candidates from four.


CHRONICLE
Ever since he arrived in the United States after having been expelled from the Soviet Union in 1974, ALEKSANDR SOLZHENITSYN has refused to accept the hundreds of degrees, honors and awards that all sorts of institutions and universities have tried to bestow upon him.
So officers of the National Arts Club, on Gramercy Park, considered it a coup when the Nobel laureate agreed to let them give him a medal of honor for literature at the club's 25th-annual literary awards dinner Tuesday.
But that doesn't mean he agreed to leave his home in Cavendish, Vt., where, his wife, NATALYA SOLZHENITSYN, explained, he lets nothing divert him from his writing.


A Year After Shooting, Officer Struggles Back
The bullet came from the darkness of the stairway.
It hit the police officer above the left eyebrow.
The explosion was the loudest noise he had ever heard.
The impact slammed him against the wall 10 feet away and he dropped his service revolver.
He groped around frantically for the gun, sure the berserk tenant was going to come down to finish the job.


Reeves and the Giants: It's Still Third and When
Dan Reeves was packing his bags in his Denver home last night, but where was he going?
Three people with knowledge of the talks between Reeves and the Giants, including a member of the Denver Broncos' coaching staff, said yesterday that the Giants had offered Reeves their head-coaching job.
A fourth person close to the situation said that although the job might have been offered, there was still a way to go before any agreement was reached.


Virginia Winning Streak Is Stopped in a Rout
The Virginia Cavaliers brought the longest winning streak in the nation to the wrong place, at the wrong time, against the wrong team tonight.
Virginia's perfect record, the last among major colleges, came undone in the face of North Carolina's overwhelming second-half effort in an 80-58 Tar Heel victory at the Smith Center.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
American Airlines reported a $200 million fourth-quarter loss and a $935 million loss for the year.
The carrier warned that it might shut some unprofitable hubs and cut its fleet.  [ Page D1. ]
Tenneco's chairman said he had brain cancer but that it was treatable and that he would remain on the job.  [ D1. ]


American Air Parent's Loss Wider
The AMR Corporation, parent of American Airlines, yesterday reported a fourth-quarter loss of $200 million and warned that it might have to shut some of its unprofitable hubs and cut its fleet to curb losses.
The quarterly deficit, larger than some analysts had expected, widened from $125 million in the period a year earlier, when Persian Gulf hostilities had sent jet-fuel prices soaring and passenger traffic plunging.


Fort Wayne National reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ryan's Family Steak Houses Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


Ukraine Needs Reassurance From West; Real Russian Threat
To the Editor:
Yes, Ukraine ought to relinquish its 1,656 nuclear warheads in its own interest (editorial, Jan. 11).
Not to do so will arouse suspicions in Poland and Germany and harm Ukraine's integration prospects with the West.


BHA Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Arkansas Wins One, Loses One
Vanderbilt 102, Arkansas 89
NASHVILLE, Jan. 20 (AP) -- Billy McCaffrey scored 28 points, including 4 straight on technical fouls following the ejection of Arkansas Coach Nolan Richardson, as No. 19 Vanderbilt beat the eighth-ranked Razorbacks, 102-89, tonight.
Vanderbilt (14-3 over all, 4-1 in the Southeastern Conference) led, 57-54, with 15 minutes 50 seconds left in the game when Richardson was ejected for arguing a noncall on an apparent charge and a three-second violation called against his team.


THE INAUGURATION: An American Event; From Afar, New Hope For Change
Two thousand miles from the nation's Capitol, workers in offices on Market Street here gathered around televisions and radios today to hear the promise of a new Presidency.
For Americans everywhere, who stepped back from the rush of the day to observe the rush of history, Inauguration Day marks the start of an uncharted journey, not only for their leaders but also for themselves.
That seemed especially true of today's ceremony.


CLINTON SET TO END BAN ON GAY TROOPS
Refining a compromise on a volatile issue, President Clinton plans to issue an executive order that would lift the ban on homosexuals in the armed forces, but he will delay the directive for several months to give the Pentagon a chance to draft it, Clinton transition aides said today.
In the meantime, the military will be directed less formally to stop asking recruits about their sexual orientation and discharging people from the armed services when they are found to be homosexuals.
These are the two points that would be the main practical effect once an executive order is in effect.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section yesterday about some Washington caterers' unhappiness with their treatment by the Presidential Inaugural Committee misidentified a co-executive director of the committee.
He is Rahm Emanuel.


Primary Dealer Records a Big Loss
The last three years have been banner ones for the 39 primary dealers that are the heart of the $2.3 trillion Government securities market.
According to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the dealers as a whole made about $800 million in profits in 1990 and a record $1 billion in 1991.
Moreover, they accumulated profits of $900 million through September and could be looking to another record year.


Northwest Corp. (N)
The growth in the Norwest Corporation's fourth-quarter earnings of $138 million, more than 24 percent, was driven primarily by mortgage and finance-company subsidiaries.
Those units had particularly strong growth, up 53 percent, to $58 million.
But profits from its banking business, which is concentrated in the upper Midwest, grew 12 percent, to $82.3 million.
For the quarter, the company's return on equity -- a key measure of profitability -- was 19.6 percent, among the highest for large banks.


Family Discounts Help Ease Costs
With the price of adult lift tickets ranging from $30 to $40 and children's tickets going for $20 to $30, it could cost a family of four as much as $140 a day just to use the snow.
But parents may find that by reading the fine print on lift ticket price lists, by planning ski trips in tandem or as a family group, the costs drop significantly.
Last year, during the school break in February, Patricia and Russell Steenberg of Westfield, N.J., took a condominium at Attitash, N.H., for a week of skiing with their three children.
By buying two One Pass tickets, the Steenbergs not only saved money, they also had the flexibility of being able to ski at eight other ski areas in the region.


Human Ancestors to Take Center Stage at Natural History Museum


Freddie Mac Share Price Hits Record
Shares of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation hit a record high yesterday after it disclosed that an investor group including Warren E. Buffett had enlarged its stake to 9 percent of the mortgage corporation, also known as Freddie Mac.
Freddie Mac shares closed at $49.75, up $1.625, in trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


No Headline
"There is nothing wrong with America that cannot be cured by what is right with America." -- PRESIDENT CLINTON.  [ A1:5. ]


Wisconsin Offers Tax-Exempt Issue
Wisconsin is offering $279.2 million of tax-exempt general obligation refunding bonds through underwriters led by Bear, Stearns.
Noncallable through maturity, they are priced to yield from 2.5 percent for a bond due in 1993 to 4.7 percent in 1998, 5.4 percent in 2003 and 5.9 percent in 2009.
As a comparison, the taxable equivalent bond yield for an investor in a 28 percent tax bracket, less local taxes, ranged from about 3.47 percent in 1993 to 8.19 percent in 2009.


Unthinkable Made Legal
By making it now licit for individual Israelis to have contact with groups officially branded here as terrorist, the Israeli Parliament may have hastened the day when the Government will enter into direct peace negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Not that long ago, the very idea would have seemed outlandish.
But in fact, in all but name, those discussions are already under way in the Middle East peace talks, which, while alive, are hardly well these days.


Raymond James Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 24


Mr. Cuomo's Welcome Austerity
In his proposed budget, Gov.
Mario Cuomo tries to make up for past fiscal sins by going straight, or mostly straight.
He tries fewer gimmicks and makes more stringent cuts.
He wants a fairer allocation of school aid, and if there's no income tax cut, there's no income tax increase either.
The Governor's welcome overall answer to years of mismanagement in New York State -- his own and the Legislature's -- is to get more serious than ever about reforms and the need for intelligent ways to tighten the belt.
Several of his proposals can't be assessed without more information and study; others sound sensible and worth pursuing.


INSIDE
Serbs Accept Peace Pact
The Serbs' parliament in Bosnia voted reluctantly for a plan intended to keep the nation whole.
Page A3.
U.S.
Setback at U.N.
Agency
Opposed by Washington, the head of the World Health Organization won a key vote to keep his post.
Page A8.


Kansas City Southern Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Quotation From St. Paul
The passage of Scripture quoted by President Clinton yesterday near the end of his Inaugural Address came from St.
Paul's letter to the Galatians 6:9: "And let us not be weary in well-doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not."


The Ex-Commissioner Seems Content to Stay Clear of Controversy
It was advertised as an event in which Fay Vincent would talk about baseball for the first time since he was forced to resign as commissioner four and a half months ago.
Vincent, however, taking a cue from one of his predecessors, had little to say about the game or why he is no longer a part of it, giving baseball only the slightest passing glance on his way to a life in which he says he is now totally at peace.
Vincent was in New York last night to be honored by the Baseball Assistance Team at the charity organization's fourth annual banquet.
Before the dinner, Vincent, a reluctant participant in a news conference, declined again and again to be drawn into discussions on a myriad of issues that have troubled baseball.


'We Force the Spring': Transcript of Address By President Clinton
Following is a transcript of President Clinton's Inaugural Address yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times:
My fellow citizens, today we celebrate the mystery of American renewal.
This ceremony is held in the depth of winter, but by the words we speak and the faces we show the world, we force the spring.
A spring reborn in the world's oldest democracy that brings forth the vision and courage to reinvent America.


A Busy Perot Misses Speech
For Ross Perot, the pomp and speeches of Inauguration Day took a back seat to a pretty normal business day.
Mr.
Perot spent much of the morning in his Dallas office making and returning phone calls on business matters, said a spokeswoman, Sharon Holman.
Ms.
Holman said Mr.
Perot did not watch the Inaugural Address and was meeting with guests visiting from out of town when President Clinton spoke just after noon.
Mr.
Perot planned to watch a tape of the speech later.


An Architect Abroad, Fitting In on the Floors of Nepal
This city, which dates to the 12th century, has no street names or numbered addresses.
Instead, each house has a name.
In Timila House, a four-story brick and timber structure with lavishly carved doors and shutters near the palace square, lives Erich Theophile, a 34-year-old American architect.
"Here, you reinvent the wheel," said Mr.
Theophile, who in his five years in Nepal has renovated and furnished his own quarters while also helping restore five Nepalese temples in his job as a program director of the Katmandu Valley Preservation Trust.
The group, from Cambridge, Mass., works with Nepal's Department of Archeology to preserve the country's architectural heritage.


Accounts
*
Premier Brands, London, to Delaney Fletcher Slaymaker Delaney &amp; Bozell, London, to handle the long-inactive Cadbury's Drinking Chocolate account in Britain.
Delaney Fletcher, which already handles other Cadbury drinks, was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $2 million, without a review.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH CO., New York, named Kenneth M. Bertaccini, president and chief executive at AT&amp; T Consumer Products in Parsippany, N.J., to the new position of senior vice president and chief quality officer.
He will be based in Basking Ridge, N.J.
BOSTON TECHNOLOGY INC., Wakefield, Mass., a telecommunications company, named John C. Taylor president and chief executive, succeeding David S. Gergacz, who will remain as an adviser.


Ukraine Needs Reassurance From West
To the Editor:
"Ukraine: Barrier to Nuclear Peace" (editorial, Jan. 11) suggests that the United States and its allies "isolate Ukraine and deny it economic help" if it does not ratify the Start I nuclear arms treaty.
This would be like placing a man with a fever into a freezer: it might alleviate the symptom, but would not cure the patient.


Santa Fe Pacific Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pacific Telesis Net Up 81.6%
Pacific Telesis Group, the regional Bell company that provides telephone service in California and Nevada, said yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings rose 81.6 percent, to $287 million, or 71 cents a share, from $158 million, or 40 cents a share, a year earlier.
But much of the quarterly rise was caused by one-time restructuring charges in 1991 of $122 million for early retirement and other work force reductions.
Without the charges, earnings would have risen only 2.5 percent.


Parole Advised for Woman Who Killed Abusive Partner
Gov.
William F. Weld today recommended commuting the life sentence of a woman convicted of murdering her former boyfriend in 1986, saying he accepted her defense that she had acted after she had been stalked and battered for months.
It is the first time that a governor of Massachusetts has proposed pardoning such a killer based on evidence that she was a victim of battering.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  BOSNIA SERBS BACK PEACE PLAN
The self-styled parliament of Bosnian Serbs voted overwhelmingly but reluctantly to approve an international peace plan that would keep Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single state.
A3  RAIDS ON IRAQ: MIXED RESULTS
News Analysis: The allied air strikes against Iraq in the final days of the Bush Administration were too small to deliver a punishing military blow to Saddam Hussein's Government.
But they were large enough to cause problems between the U.S. and its allies, limiting options for the Clinton Administration.
A10


Boise Cascade reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reputed Crime Boss Is Said to Have Stored Cash in Hideaway
While eluding a police manhunt for two and a half years, Anthony Casso, the reputed acting boss of the Lucchese crime family, stored $340,000 and internal Federal Bureau of Investigation documents on his case in a hideaway in New Jersey, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
Mr.
Casso, who was captured on Tuesday in Mount Olive, N.J., was ordered held without bail in Brooklyn yesterday on charges of murder, racketeering and extortion.
Known in the underworld by the nickname, Gaspipe, Mr.
Casso pleaded not guilty at an arraignment in Federal District Court in downtown Brooklyn.


A Dawn of Promise
Now, at long last, Bill Clinton of Arkansas is President Clinton, and it is time to take him at his word.
In a ceremony of sweeping dignity, he capped a campaign fueled by promises of many kinds with two crowning pledges to the American people.
The 42d President said he would bring a new dawn of compassion and a higher standard of ethical behavior in Washington.
In word and symbol, this was an inauguration that said America can no longer assault its children and its helpless poor with the twin barrels of ideology and indifference.
The President's clear-eyed social prescription felt like a soothing balm after the bootstrap exhortations of the Reagan years and the myopic theorizing about private charity that passed for social policy under President Bush.


Steep Tariffs on Steel Expected Next Week
The Commerce Department is likely to impose broad steel-import tariffs averaging up to 25 percent next Wednesday, American steel industry officials and trade experts said today.
The move would follow action by the department late Tuesday imposing tariffs up to 167 percent on a narrow category of imported steel products.
A dozen American steelmakers are seeking steep tariffs on $2.5 billion worth of annual steel imports from 19 countries.
They contend that foreign rivals are violating American antidumping law by routinely charging less for steel in the United States than in their home markets.
The latest dispute involves flat-rolled steel used in auto-body panels and plate steel used in construction.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Maxus Energy Corp., a Dallas-based oil and gas producer, is offering $100 million of 9 1/2 percent notes due in 2003 at 99.25 to yield 9.62 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The notes are noncallable for seven years and rated Ba-3 by Moody's, BB by S.&amp; P. and BB+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
Orange County, Fla., is tentatively offering $121 million of tax-exempt hospital revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 6.2 percent for a bond due in 2024 through Lehman Brothers.
Serial bonds are priced to yield from 4.5 percent in 1997 to 6 percent in 2008, with another long maturity due in 2013 priced to yield 6.138 percent.
The issue is insured by the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corporation and rated triple-A by Moody's and S.&amp; P.


Review/Theater; Theda Bara Seeking a Jewish Matchmaker
Back in the days before Madonna and Jean-Claude Van Damme, there were Theda Bara and Tom Mix.
Tom Mix was clean and wholesome. Theda Bara wasn't.
She was the Vamp.


Galley &amp; Lord Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Rain Soaks U.S. Art in Amsterdam
A leak in the roof of the Stedelijk Museum has damaged several large paintings, among them four works by prominent American artists.
Museum officials said the damaged American works were "Red Curve II," "Blue Green Red I" and "White Triangle With Black Curve," by Ellsworth Kelly, and "Unexpected Death of Blinky Palermo in the Tropics," by Julian Schnabel.


Problem-Solver Relishes Redoing Westchester
Sal J. Prezioso, the man charged with bringing order to Westchester County's cumbersome system of overlapping local governments, will celebrate his 80th birthday on Valentine's Day.
He will celebrate it, that is, assuming he can squeeze it into his schedule of 12-hour days and 6-day weeks. (He has not taken a vacation in seven years, he said, and he is proud of it.)
"It's amazing," said Dr.
Edward J. Mortola, the former chancellor and president of Pace University, who turns 76 next week and who brought Dr.
Prezioso to Pace in the 1970's.
"I see no change in his constitution or his ability to work over the past 20 years. No one thinks in terms of age when they think of Sal." Westchester 2000
Instead, what many think of is an accomplished problem-solver who has served five Westchester County executives, three New York governors, one mayor of Yonkers and the Rockefeller family, although he has never held elected office.
He also found time to earn a doctorate in education from Columbia University and to teach public administration at Pace for 13 years, ending in 1990.
It was his resume, as well as his reputation as a mender of badly damaged political fences, that earned Dr.
Prezioso the unenviable job that he has held since 1986: executive director of Westchester 2000, a nonpartisan partnership of government and business that is taking a sweeping look at how the county and its municipalities govern themselves.
The project has solicited the ideas of hundreds of people, most notably taxpayers and academics.
Among the questions Dr.
Prezioso must address are why, for example, does the town of Greenburgh, population 83,000, need seven police departments -- one for each of its six incorporated villages and one for the town?
Why is there a town of Ossining and a village of Ossining?
Why must the village of Mamaroneck be in the town of Mamaroneck and the town of Rye, which is separate from the city of Rye?
After seven years of overseeing the collection and analysis of data from the smallest school board to the upper echelons of county government, Dr.
Prezioso will issue the group's recommendations in late September.
He will then try to persuade local governments to take the bitter medicine that he is expected to prescribe for the county's 6 cities, 17 towns and 22 villages.
That is most likely to include the recommendation -- unthinkable to many residents -- that some villages and towns should cast aside long-held differences and merge.
"No one wants to give up the throne," Dr.
Prezioso said.
"But we cannot afford to have that many kings." Fierce Identification
The problem, Dr.
Prezioso said, is that with revenues shrinking and expenditures rising, it has become an unjustifiable luxury to maintain the quilt of sometimes redundant jurisdictions that is the hallmark of Westchester governance.
Simplifying such interlocking relationships will be no mean feat, in part because Westchester residents, like others throughout the New York metropolitan region and the nation, fiercely identify with the communities where they live.
In Elmsford, an incorporated village of 3,900 that is within the town of Greenburgh, there was talk in the mid-1980's of absorbing the village government into that of the much larger town.
The residents of Elmsford shot the proposal down, said Arthur DeAngelis, the village mayor.
"They wanted their own control," Mayor DeAngelis said of Elmsford residents.
"In our village, the police know everyone. When they see kids on the corner and something happens, they know what kids were in the area that could have done it. We'll go to the parents and they take disciplinary action. A small village, you can do that."
If consolidation is necessary, Mayor DeAngelis said, then why not eliminate Greenburgh's government, which he believes has been rendered unnecessary by the six "self-sufficient" village governments within the town.
Not surprisingly, the Greenburgh town supervisor, Paul Feiner, disagrees.
He says Greenburgh's government is needed to oversee an unincorporated section of town, as well as to administer townwide services like tax collection and painting street lines.
It would, he said, be too costly for the villages to handle the town functions on their own.
"I don't think Westchester really needs a county government," Mr. Feiner counters.
And so it goes.
While agreeing with Dr.
Prezioso that Westchester government has become too costly and layered, Dr.
Anthony Cupaiuolo, a professor of public administration at Pace, cautioned against too much consolidation.
He said many villages sprang up within towns because many residents felt that they were losing control of their own destinies.
"It's grass-roots democracy in action," said Dr.
Cupaiuolo, director of the Michaelian Institute for Sub/Urban Governance at Pace in White Plains.
"A village of 3,000 people -- they elect a mayor! They elect a board of trustees! People can actually show up at the village hall and yell and scream about how government is operating.
"It's a question of efficiency versus responsiveness," he added.
Dr.
Cupaiuolo said he would very likely support some of Dr.
Prezioso's proposals like consolidating services between municipalities, which has been done elsewhere in the region.
Consolidation, he said, would save money without disrupting a community's sense of identity.
Resistance Expected
"It's very sensitive and delicate material," said Sy J. Schulman, former president of the Westchester County Association, a collection of corporations that is a sponsor of Westchester 2000.
"People are ambivalent. On the one hand, they complain about taxes. On the other hand, they are proud of local government. They don't realize that pride has a price."
Dr.
Prezioso, whose recommendations would be subject to the approval of the individual governments, said he would demonstrate that the plans, custom-tailored for each municipality, have been exhaustively studied and were workable.
"I expect a battle," he said.
"I know quite well there's going to be resistance to change."
Asked why he would want a job with such aggravation, Dr.
Prezioso said that retirement, to say nothing of a vacation, "is for sick people."
"There is," he said, "a sincerity of purpose on my part to seek the attention of people, to show them what they're up against so that they can control the future."
Told that that sounded a bit stiff, he said, with humor: "My chemistry is enhanced! My whole body vibrates with excitement in terms of moving people into certain directions!"
Dr.
Cupaiuolo, who was hired at Pace by Dr.
Prezioso, says that his former supervisor's enthusiasm is genuine.
"He has no need to do this in terms of some ulterior motive," Dr.
Cupaiuolo said.
"Ultimately, he wants to see citizens well-served."


Essay; Clinton's 'Forced Spring'
President Clinton's Inaugural Address has been handed in for grading.
Strengths:
1.
Theme.
Simple, direct and fitting: "renewal," used eight times, backed up with "reborn," "revitalize" and even "re-invent." He wanted to get the point across of a nation born again, subtly evoking Lincoln at Gettysburg, and the new man drove it home.


Laurel Savings Association reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Streaking Nets To Face Bulls
The Nets, who are on a five-game winning streak, will try to end a seven-game losing streak tonight when they take on Michael Jordan and the defending champion Chicago Bulls before a sold-out crowd at Byrne Meadowlands Arena in East Rutherford, N.J.


Newmil Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Place for Parties on Wall Street
It was one of those obviously brilliant ideas: transform the former New York Cocoa Exchange, a high-ceilinged, 7,000-square-foot space that had been in disuse for years, into a gleaming white-painted room to serve as an espresso bar and restaurant by day and a place to entertain at night and on weekends.
It's called Dean &amp; Deluca Wall Street, and it is the latest venture of the company known for its food stores and simple, stylish coffee bars.
"People were always asking us to have parties in our store, and we couldn't," said Jack Ceglic, the design director of Dean &amp; Deluca Inc.
So he designed a marble-floored expanse that is equipped with sophisticated light and sound systems.


Algonquin Mercantile reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25


Books of The Times;   Empire-Building in the Peacetime Army
Buffalo Soldiers  By Robert O'Connor  324 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22


Global Marine reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kyrgyzstan Is Planning Embassy in Jerusalem
In an unusual break with international practice, the mostly Muslim republic of Kyrgyzstan in Central Asia has decided to establish an embassy in Jerusalem, not Tel Aviv, the Israeli Foreign Ministry said today.
The announcement came during a three-day visit here by Askar Akayev, President of the former Soviet republic, and was praised by Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
"I believe this is what has to be done by all countries that have diplomatic relations with Israel," Mr.
Rabin said after meeting Mr.
Akayev.


Cardinal Distribution reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Knape &amp; Vogt Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Great Western Financial Corp. (N)
In a redoubled effort to sell its troubled real estate assets by cutting asking prices, the Great Western Financial Corporation further wrote down the value of its troubled commercial loans to 50 percent, which resulted in increasing its loan-loss provisions to $335 million in the fourth quarter.
That provision led to an unexpected loss of $97.3 million.
"If we want to reduce the level of problem assets in a weak real estate market -- and we do -- we feel it is necessary to be more aggressive in reducing the carrying value of those assets," said James F. Montgomery, Great Western's chairman.


Money Market Funds Slow Their Fall in Latest Week
Yields offered by tax-exempt and taxable money market funds were down in the latest reporting week, but the declines were not as severe as those posted a week earlier.
The latest survey by The Money Fund Report shows tax-exempt yields down sharply for the week that ended Tuesday, affected by money flowing into funds from recent huge redemptions of municipal bonds.


New President Named at Bozell
Joan H. Walker has been named president at Bozell Public Relations in New York, effective immediately, succeeding Fred Thompson, 46, who left to pursue other interests, the agency said.
Ms.
Walker, 45, was previously managing director of marketing communications at the Nynex Corporation in New York.
Before that, she was an executive vice president at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi in New York.


Deposit Guaranty reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Judges in Dallas Continue Shutdown Over Security
Frustrated and angered by Dallas County's slowness in securing the courts, state and county judges here refused to reopen their courtrooms today and vowed to keep them closed until metal detectors or X-ray machines were installed.
The protest began Tuesday after a man shot his estranged wife, a bystander and then himself in the hallway of a county courthouse.


Koss Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BMC Software reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Infant Administration Tackles Full-Grown Workload
Two hours after Bill Clinton took the oath of office, before the new boss had arrived and before the parade had even begun, his senior economic aides met at the White House for the first time.
Shortly after that, his communications staff did the same.
In many ways, the official ceremonies were almost an interruption to the work the new Clinton Administration faces.
Within his first three weeks, Mr.
Clinton has determined to forward a budget to Congress, deliver a major economic address, act to expand abortion and gay rights and cope with international hostilities on several fronts.


Adults Who Take Piano Need Teachers With the Right Touch
Anna Chang was haunted all her life by a road not taken when she was 6.
That is, until she decided to stop trying to tune out the music inside her head and play it instead.
For Mrs.
Chang, her 40's are the time to get serious about piano lessons.
She is not alone.
Piano manufacturers like Baldwin and Steinway and used-piano dealers say that while families with young children are still the largest group of first-time piano buyers, adults buying for themselves have emerged as the next strongest market.
Steinway and Baldwin sometimes let piano teachers use their showrooms for student recitals, and the programs often feature adults as well as children.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Toots Thielemans  S.O.B.'s


Ukraine Needs Reassurance From West; Real Russian Threat
To the Editor:
Yes, Ukraine ought to relinquish its 1,656 nuclear warheads in its own interest (editorial, Jan. 11).
Not to do so will arouse suspicions in Poland and Germany and harm Ukraine's integration prospects with the West.


James R. Venable, 92 Leader of Klan Group
James R. Venable, a Georgia lawyer and white supremacist who organized a major Ku Klux Klan faction in 1963 and headed it for nearly 25 years, died Monday in Lawrenceville, Ga.
He was 92 and lived in a nursing home in Lawrenceville.
He suffered from Alzheimer's disease, cancer and pneumonia, his family said.


Calendar: Gardens and Valentines
Garden Talks
The National Arts Club, 15 Gramercy Park South; (718) 549-3200.


State Parole Board Gives Jean Harris Her Freedom
Jean S. Harris was granted freedom to resume her life today, 13 years after the killing of her lover, Dr.
Herman Tarnower.
A three-member panel from the New York State Board of Parole approved her release after interviewing the 69-year-old former girls'-school headmistress for two hours as she sat in a wheelchair in a patients' lounge at the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla.
A cardiologist was at her side during what was described as an emotional moment.


No Worry in Clinton's Hoarseness Treatment
To the Editor:
"Clearing Clinton's Throat," William Safire's Jan. 14 column, contains misleading statements about the side effects of inhaled corticosteroids.
The inhaled corticosteroid Vanceril, used by President Clinton for treatment of swollen vocal cords, is most commonly prescribed for asthma.


Martin Rosenblum, Judge, 90
Martin Rosenblum, a former judge and a lawyer for more than 50 years in Middletown, N.Y., died on Tuesday at University Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 90 and lived in Middletown.
Judge Rosenblum died of heart failure, said his daughter, Constance Sage Rosenblum of Brooklyn.


Now, What About Iraq?
Baghdad's decision to stop shooting at American planes as a "good-will gesture" to President Clinton is welcome.
So is its agreement to stop obstructing U.N. flights.
But neither gesture represents progress.
They are just the latest example of Saddam Hussein's "cheat and retreat" defiance.
On the main issues -- providing full information on weapons programs, respecting Kuwait's new borders and compensating neighbors for war damage -- matters stand exactly where they did three weeks ago, except that now the White House is occupied by Bill Clinton instead of George Bush.


Nationsbank Lifts Debt Offering
The Nationsbank Corporation increased its debt offering, to $400 million from $350 million, because of strong investor demand, which was tied to the concern's report of higher fourth-quarter profits Monday.


Review/Theater; Laughs That Mask the Fears of Gay Manhattan
Jeffrey, the title character of Paul Rudnick's wildly funny new comedy at the WPA Theater, is a gay man in his mid-30's who, exhausted from negotiating safe sex, decides to become celibate.
It's not that he hasn't had his share of adventure.
Jeffrey estimates he has had 5,000 sexual encounters but remained H.I.V. negative.
"I'm not promiscuous," he declares. "It's such an ugly word. I'm cheap."


Throw Away the Crutch of Bilingual Education; Family Does It Better
To the Editor:
I believe the bilingual system operated by New York City (news article, Jan. 4) should be abandoned, for at least two reasons:


Michigan Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE INAUGURATION: Pomp, Patriotism and Primping; Far More Than 10,000 Maniacs Revel in Capital as Bubbles Banish Fatigue
As President Clinton took the oath of office, the fate of the nation symbolized by a single right hand held high, a hush came over the beauty salon of Gabriel DeBakey, the First Lady's inaugural evening hair dresser.
"You handsome sucker!" yelled Stanley Hurwitz, one of Mr. DeBakey's hair stylists.


Barkley's Harangue Costs $10,000 and One Game
All the guy did was berate an official after a close game, scrambling over the scorers' table and haranguing the man all the way into the dressing room area, and all of a sudden the National Basketball Association wants to make a big deal of it.
As big, anyway, as a $10,000 fine and a one-game suspension that will cost Charles Barkley of the Phoenix Suns an additional $30,000 or so, one eighty-second of his annual salary.
And all that, mind, for an incident at Madison Square Garden Monday afternoon in which Barkley didn't so much as spit on a little girl, let alone threaten the official with a roundhouse or a metal chair.


Surgery for Humphries
Quarterback STAN HUMPHRIES, who helped the San Diego Chargers become the first 0-4 team to reach the National Football League playoffs, had arthroscopic surgery to repair partly torn cartilage in his left shoulder.
The 20-minute procedure was performed on Tuesday by Dr.
GARY LOSSE.
The Chargers' trainer, KEOKI KAMAU, said the procedure "went well, almost better than expected."


Country Cachet in the City
If you yearn for Adirondack twig chairs and furnishings with carved deer heads and painted grizzly bears, forget about trekking upstate for the real thing.
Just head for ABC Carpet and Home, the home furnishings emporium at 888 Broadway (at 19th Street), and poke around the latest boutique on the fourth floor.
It's called Toad Hall -- after the house in the classic children's book "Wind in the Willows."


Picking Up the Perks Of Presidential Power
IT'S not just the country that must adjust to the idea of a President Clinton.
Bill Clinton himself is still feeling the shock.
Shortly after the new President took his seat in the reviewing stand at the Inaugural Parade yesterday, a uniformed military officer walked over and saluted him.
Mr.
Clinton froze before he realized that his new status as Commander in Chief required him to salute back.


Throw Away the Crutch of Bilingual Education; Enriching Experience
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 4 article on bilingual education makes the assignment of children to bilingual classes seem arbitrary and trivial.
You do not address the complexity of child language development in one language, let alone two, nor do you cite the decades of research on the demands of academic language, even in children as young as those you mention.


Stanley H. Katz Is Dead at 70; Pioneer in Advertising Industry
Stanley H. Katz, a leading figure in the advertising industry in the United States, died on Tuesday as he traveled to his home in West Orange, N.J.
He was 70.
Mr.
Katz died of heart failure, the Katz family said in a statement released through FCB/Leber Katz Partners, Mr.
Katz's former firm.


Defiance Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE INAUGURATION: Fashion Statements; Challenge to the Party Dress: Combat Boots and Bodysuits
The beaded evening gown may still be the standard at inaugural events, but the youthful spirit that blew into Washington this week has brought an alternative dress code.
Just as Hillary Clinton and Tipper Gore have brought to the fore relatively unknown designers like Sarah Phillips, Connie Fails and Pat Kerr, so has the fashion-conscious elite from New York and Los Angeles injected its own favorites.


Bancorp Hawaii reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


More Donors to Neediest Honor a Slain Principal
The life and death of Patrick Daly, the elementary school principal who inspired thousands of children in the Brooklyn neighborhood of Red Hook, continues to weigh heavily on the minds of contributors to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Since The Times published an article last month on people who donated to the fund in his memory, dozens of others have followed suit.
Members of the Kaufman family of Wilton, Conn., said they were deeply moved by the story of Mr.
Daly, who had dedicated his career to the troubled neighborhood before he was shot on Dec. 17 when he walked into the crossfire of what the police said was a drug dispute.


Review/Music; Confident Young Violinist In a Challenging Recital
Christian Tetzlaff, who has said he would prefer a committed audience to a large one, got both on Saturday evening for his New York recital debut at the 92d Street Y. The program began 20 minutes late because of the line at the box office.
Mr.
Tetzlaff, a no-nonsense 26-year-old German violinist with a flourishing career in Europe, is known in this country chiefly for his ravishing interpretation of Schoenberg's prickly Violin Concerto, which this listener first heard in Cleveland four years ago. (With all the labels that now record the Cleveland Orchestra, surely one should record it in the Schoenberg with Mr. Tetzlaff; his acuity in this piece is ideally matched by the orchestra's music director, Christoph von Dohnanyi.)


Audio King Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cincinnati Bell reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Farewell to 80's Eclecticism As a Dealer Prepares for the 90's
In the dark wood-paneled library, Juan Portela was getting ready to sit for a portrait with his dogs.
"Tais-toi, stay, good girl," the antiques dealer whispered gently to Olivia, a pug.
Minny, a Lhasa apso, flopped down.
Olivia sat tall, cocked her head and stole the photographer's attention.
"I hope I don't end up looking like an accessory," Mr.
Portela said.
Pretty doubtful, one might say, but even if he did, Mr.
Portela would be in good company.


Throw Away the Crutch of Bilingual Education; Essential to Progress
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 4 report is consistent with other articles and editorials you have run against bilingual education.
This one creates the false impression that bilingual education programs in New York City are of questionable value, contribute to a high Latino dropout rate and are filled with children who don't need bilingual education.
Wrong on all counts.


Scientists Set to Give Up on Galileo's Antenna
After repeated failures to jolt free the Galileo spacecraft's stuck main antenna, engineers have abandoned all realistic hope of deploying the antenna on the craft's mission to Jupiter.
They have begun preparations to salvage the mission by making the most of a weaker, slower-transmitting small antenna.
A disappointed Dr.
William J. O'Neil, project manager at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., said in an interview yesterday, "There is really nothing left for us to try."


Biogen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


General Electric Co. (N)
The General Electric Company's earnings of $1.34 billion for the fourth quarter of 1992, up 6 percent from a year earlier, were within the range of analysts' predictions, althought toward the lower end of the range.
John F. Welch Jr, the company's chairman, said G.E.'s level of profitability "is particularly rewarding in light of slow growth in the United States and around the world." Mr.
Welch said the profits were produced by "strong, double-digit earnings increases" at its financial services, power generation and medical instruments operations.


First of Amer reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


THE INAUGURATION: The New Cabinet; Senate Confirms First Nominees Of Clinton Team
Without opposition, the Senate today confirmed three of President Clinton's Cabinet nominees.
The senators moved quickly on two because of their critical national security roles and on the third because he is a longtime friend and colleague.
Warren M. Christopher was confirmed as Secretary of State, Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin as Secretary of Defense and Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas as Secretary of the Treasury.
All were accepted on voice votes within three hours of Mr.
Clinton's signing their nomination papers, shortly after he took his own oath of office.


Place for Parties on Wall Street
It was one of those obviously brilliant ideas: transform the former New York Cocoa Exchange, a high-ceilinged, 7,000-square-foot space that had been in disuse for years, into a gleaming white-painted room to serve as an espresso bar and restaurant by day and a place to entertain at night and on weekends.
It's called Dean &amp; Deluca Wall Street, and it is the latest venture of the company known for its food stores and simple, stylish coffee bars.
"People were always asking us to have parties in our store, and we couldn't," said Jack Ceglic, the design director of Dean &amp; Deluca Inc.
So he designed a marble-floored expanse that is equipped with sophisticated light and sound systems.


Corrections
A sports article yesterday about the United States figure skating championships in Phoenix misstated the Saturday television broadcast times.
ABC-TV will carry live coverage from 4:30 to 6 P.M. and from 9 to 11 P.M., Eastern time.


First Commerical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Slowing of Exodus From Syria Worries Those Longing to See Relatives


Home Video
Parents who are stumped about what to get their children at the video store have a new book to consult, "Great Videos for Kids: A Parent's Guide to Choosing the Best," from Citadel Press.
Compiled by Catherine Cella, who reviews children's videos for several publications, the guide describes and rates more than 450 titles from distributors as large as Disney and as small as Homespun Video of Woodstock, N.Y.
Categories include folk and fairy tales and tapes based on books, family topics, education and music.
In the appendix are lists of bests: best detective stories, best videos encouraging nonviolence, best videos for the first day of school, best videos with positive female roles, best videos with creative problem-solving, among others.
Finally, there are the names, addresses and phone numbers of 80 suppliers of children's programming.


I.B.M. FORMING UNIT FOR MULTIMEDIA DEVELOPMENTS
I.B.M. said yesterday that it was creating a 150-person operation, Fireworks Partners, to pursue the multimedia computing business worldwide.
The multimedia field, which is small but growing fast, combines computer, video and communications technologies.
In recent years, the International Business Machines Corporation and many other companies have been working to meld these technologies for both commercial and consumer uses.
Among the projects under development is NBC Desktop News, a joint effort of I.B.M., NBC and the NuMedia Corporation, to provide news and specialized information on personal computers.
I.B.M.'s new unit will be headquartered in Somers, N.Y., and will have an office in Mountain View, Calif.


Knicks' Offense Makes a Special Appearance at Home
After what seems like a season of cliffhangers, the Knicks were the beneficiaries of a much-needed blowout last night as they defeated the Charlotte Hornets, 114-91.
It was the highest point total of the season for the Knicks, surpassing the 113 they scored in a 26-point victory over Boston on Dec. 18.
Since then, only five of New York's 15 games have been decided by more than 4 points.


Corrections
An article on the Health page yesterday about the placing of fetuses on a waiting list for heart transplants misstated an affiliation of Dr.
Arthur Caplan.
He is director of the Center for Biomedical Ethics at the University of Minnesota, not the University of Pittsburgh.


Katie Beers Likes New Home, Official Says
Katie Beers is flourishing in her new foster home and has begun attending school, the Suffolk County District Attorney said today after the arraignment of John Esposito on kidnapping and sexual-abuse charges.
Katie is "in good health, eats everything that's in sight and sucks up love like a sponge," said the District Attorney, James M. Catterson.
"In fact, she's started to use a computer and says she may be thinking about writing her memoirs."


Corrections
A map on Saturday with an article about the arrest of the reputed head of the Sicilian Mafia mislabeled the region that is the home of another organized crime gang, the 'Ndran gheta.
It is Calabria.


Devils Relax, And Then Regret It
It was for only seven or eight minutes in the second period that the Devils let their intensity fall tonight against the Canadiens, but it was enough to cost them dearly.
The Canadiens took advantage of the letdown and scored three times for a 3-2 triumph before a noisy crowd at the Forum.


For Al Gore, More for Less
Bill Clinton and Al Gore both raised their right hands and solemnly swore today, but Mr.
Gore swore to a little more.
While the Vice Presidency is famous for its modest powers, the oath of office for Mr.
Gore was the more comprehensive.
Mr.
Gore pledged that he would "support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion, and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties of the office on which I am about to enter."


Matlack Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
TRANSIT FARE CARDS FACING DELAYS
The automated fare system due to open early next year in the city's buses and subway stations has encountered delays and cost overruns because of design flaws and equipment delivery problems, transit officials said.
For buses, the system will be delayed by at least until December 1994, the officials said.
In the subways, it is still to begin in some stations in December and in all major stations by March 1994.
But a Transit Authority report warned that further delays could postpone those dates as well.
B3.
REPUTED CRIME BOSS'S REPUTED CACHE


PARENT &amp; CHILD
CHILDREN'S self-esteem is not a single image like a snapshot.
It's more like a scrapbook filled with mental pictures that reflect their willingness to take reasonable physical, social and intellectual risks.
The images in that scrapbook are gathered from memories of earlier successes and failures, and from the ways adults important in their lives responded to both.
Children's feelings about themselves also color how they interpret the world around them.
Those with high self-esteem who do well at an important task are likely to attribute their success to skill and effort.
Those with low self-esteem who succeed may often say that the task was easy or they were just lucky.
They anticipate failure and distrust their own accomplishments.


The Saga Continues
Track and field's London-based world governing body plans no further disciplinary action against BUTCH REYNOLDS but is considering a libel suit against him, a top International Amateur Athletic Federation official said yesterday.
Reynolds, the world record-holder in the 400 meters, last month won a $2.73 million judgment against the federation.
The federation banned him for two years after he tested positive for a banned anabolic steroid in 1990.
The runner maintained his innocence, contested the ban in United States courts and ran in the United States Olympic trials last June.
For that, the federation added four and a half months to Reynolds's suspension, extending it until the end of 1992.


Throw Away the Crutch of Bilingual Education; Family Does It Better
To the Editor:
I believe the bilingual system operated by New York City (news article, Jan. 4) should be abandoned, for at least two reasons:


Albert Hourani, 77, Acclaimed Mideast Scholar
Prof.
Albert Hourani, a reknowned scholar and author on Middle Eastern history, died Sunday in Oxford, England.
He was 77 years old.
Professor Hourani lectured at Oxford University from 1958 to 1980.
One of the earliest members of St.
Antony's College, Oxford, he was instrumental in developing the Middle East Center there and in building its collection of papers on the Middle East.
He was named director of the center in 1958.


Rangers' Cavalcade Of 'Stars' Heads West
In a city where sport is as much about star-gazing as athletics, there should be some disappointment among those holding tickets for Saturday night's game between the Rangers and the Los Angeles Kings.
Brian Leetch, winner of last season's Norris Trophy as the league's best defenseman, continues to sit on the sideline with an arm ailment stemming from a neck injury.
Mike Richter, once the Rangers' star goaltender, is with the Binghamton farm team trying to regain his confidence and form.
Aleksei Kovalev, the flashy young Russian winger, was demoted to Binghamton today and will play in the minors for three games.


Bridge
Very few players ever have the pleasure of playing one event and emerging with two titles.
It happened a week ago at the Tri-State Regional Championships in Port Chester, N.Y., when James Gleick of Brooklyn and Judy Goulding of Manhattan entered for the Stratified Pairs Flight C and won not only that title but also Flight B, normally the preserve of more experienced players.
The even more unusual feat of winning three titles was achieved at the end of the tournament by Peter MacCuaig of Danbury, Conn., and John Rose of Garrison, N.Y.
They won Stratified Pairs Flights A, B and C.


Santa Fe Pacific Pipeline reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Market Place
IN December, the airline industry seemed to have turned the corner from a period of low traffic, unstable pricing and rising fuel prices.
A series of fare increases raised prices by about 10 to 15 percent, and there were signs that more people were flying.
Last week, however, the industry seemed again to be in disarray as several carriers battled each other to get people out of January ruts and flying to sunny islands or snowy ski slopes.


For Gores, a Homecoming of Sorts
It was not long after Bill Clinton performed the first official act of his Presidency that Vice President Al Gore performed his.
Mr.
Clinton had just signed an executive order on ethics requirements and a document officially sending 19 Cabinet and other appointments to the Senate.
He had begun shaking hands and chatting with Congressional leaders who had assembled in the President's Room, just off the Senate Chamber on the Capital's second floor.


Richard Waring, 82, Actor in 'The Corn Is Green'
Richard Waring, the actor who created the role of Morgan Evans, the rude Welsh coal miner who is transformed by a sympathetic teacher in the Broadway production of "The Corn Is Green," by Emlyn Williams, died on Monday at the City Island home of his former wife, Kathy Waring.
He was 82.
He died of natural causes, Mrs. Waring said.


Different Drums
Once again, yesterday, the Dow headed one way, Nasdaq the other, for the sixth time in 13 trading sessions this year.
The surge of money between market sectors and exchanges has accounted for heavy trading, even on days when the averages barely budged.
On 11 days, Nasdaq fared better.


Place for Parties on Wall Street
It was one of those obviously brilliant ideas: transform the former New York Cocoa Exchange, a high-ceilinged, 7,000-square-foot space that had been in disuse for years, into a gleaming white-painted room to serve as an espresso bar and restaurant by day and a place to entertain at night and on weekends.
It's called Dean &amp; Deluca Wall Street, and it is the latest venture of the company known for its food stores and simple, stylish coffee bars.
"People were always asking us to have parties in our store, and we couldn't," said Jack Ceglic, the design director of Dean &amp; Deluca Inc.
So he designed a marble-floored expanse that is equipped with sophisticated light and sound systems.


Westinghouse's Earnings Tumble by 33.6% in Quarter
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation reported a 33.6 percent decline in its fourth-quarter earnings yesterday and ended 1992 with a loss of $1.291 billion for the year.
The loss, which was expected, was largely a result of the deficits racked up by Westinghouse's troubled financial services subsidiary.
It compares with a loss of $1.086 billion in 1991, also largely as a result of financial services losses.


Dow Falls 14.04 as Volume Remains Heavy
It was generally a Clinton kind of market yesterday, with larger stocks continuing downward but smaller issues eking out some gains.
At the close, the Dow Jones industrial average pierced 3,250 for the first time since mid-November, falling 14.04 points, to 3,241.95.
Volume remained heavy, at 268.8 million shares, and Big Board decliners outnumbered gainers by more than 9 to 8.


CST Entertainment Imaging reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Primary Dealer Records a Big Loss
The last three years have been banner ones for the 39 primary dealers that are the heart of the $2.3 trillion Government securities market.
According to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the dealers as a whole made about $800 million in profits in 1990 and a record $1 billion in 1991.
Moreover, they accumulated profits of $900 million through September and could be looking to another record year.


William LeMassena, Actor, 76
William LeMassena, a character actor in many Broadway and Off Broadway productions, died on Tuesday at his home in New Suffolk, L.I.
He was 76.
He died of lung cancer, said his companion, Marian Tuthill Connolly.


Circle in the Square Struggling to Survive
The Circle in the Square Theater, spiritual parent to the Off Broadway movement and progenitor of New York's growing nonprofit theater boom, is struggling for survival.
Its season, which was supposed to start in November, has now been postponed until April, amid speculation in the theater industry that its doors will not reopen at all.
Officials at the Circle insist that the company is merely going through a difficult stretch.
Yet with a deficit of $1.5 million, a subscriber list that has shrunk to 8,533 from 22,000 over the last two decades and financial losseson two of its last three productions, the Circle in the Square is clearly experiencing more than the difficulties afflicting other companies in the recession.


'Bill' Tries On 'William J.' for Size
His penmanship may still be sloppy, but the new chief executive tried today to give his signature a more Presidential style: he changed it from Bill Clinton, which he used as Governor of Arkansas, to William J. Clinton.
"I think it's for historic purposes," said Dee Dee Myers, the White House press secretary.


Home Video
Parents who are stumped about what to get their children at the video store have a new book to consult, "Great Videos for Kids: A Parent's Guide to Choosing the Best," from Citadel Press.
Compiled by Catherine Cella, who reviews children's videos for several publications, the guide describes and rates more than 450 titles from distributors as large as Disney and as small as Homespun Video of Woodstock, N.Y.
Categories include folk and fairy tales and tapes based on books, family topics, education and music.
In the appendix are lists of bests: best detective stories, best videos encouraging nonviolence, best videos for the first day of school, best videos with positive female roles, best videos with creative problem-solving, among others.
Finally, there are the names, addresses and phone numbers of 80 suppliers of children's programming.


A Party Place on Wall Street
It was one of those obviously brilliant ideas: transform the former New York Cocoa Exchange, a high-ceilinged, 7,000-square-foot space that had been in disuse for years, into a gleaming white-painted room to serve as an espresso bar and restaurant by day and a place to entertain at night and on weekends.
It's called Dean &amp; Deluca Wall Street, and it is the latest venture of the company known for its food stores and simple, stylish coffee bars.
"People were always asking us to have parties in our store, and we couldn't," said Jack Ceglic, the design director of Dean &amp; Deluca Inc.
So he designed a marble-floored expanse that is equipped with sophisticated light and sound systems.


Home Video
Parents who are stumped about what to get their children at the video store have a new book to consult, "Great Videos for Kids: A Parent's Guide to Choosing the Best," from Citadel Press.
Compiled by Catherine Cella, who reviews children's videos for several publications, the guide describes and rates more than 450 titles from distributors as large as Disney and as small as Homespun Video of Woodstock, N.Y.
Categories include folk and fairy tales and tapes based on books, family topics, education and music.
In the appendix are lists of bests: best detective stories, best videos encouraging nonviolence, best videos for the first day of school, best videos with positive female roles, best videos with creative problem-solving, among others.
Finally, there are the names, addresses and phone numbers of 80 suppliers of children's programming.


Fierce Defense Is Making the Bills Even Better
The low point for the Bills' defense occurred in Week 2.
Buffalo was caught in a track meet with the San Francisco 49ers' offense.
When the game was over, the teams had combined for 1,086 yards.
And there were no punts, a first in the National Football League.
The whole thing was pretty much a blur for Bills linebacker Darryl Talley, who spent much of the day dropping into coverage or rushing the passer, both to no avail.


CCB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Witness Says Woman Began 1989 Sex Acts
A young man who pleaded guilty in the Glen Ridge sex assault case last June began the defense's trial presentation today, testifying that the mildly retarded young woman at the heart of the case initiated the entire affair.
The witness, Paul Archer, said the young woman, who was 17 at the time, propositioned his four former high school football teammates and voluntarily committed the March 1989 sex acts that the state considers an assault.


Few Haitians Test U.S. Sea Barricade
After weeks of anticipation that the inauguration of President Clinton would be accompanied by a new wave of Haitian emigration, only one boat carrying would-be refugees was intercepted by Coast Guard ships massed in waters near here today.
The wooden boat, carrying 163 people, was intercepted about 20 miles offshore near the northern town of Cap-Haitien.
Diplomats and Coast Guard officials said they hoped the low tally meant that word that summary repatriations of people picked up at sea by an unusually large deployment of 22 Coast Guard and Navy vessels had discouraged Haitians from fleeing their country.


First Tennessee reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hemming and Hawing, Bosnia Serbs Back Peace Plan
The self-styled parliament of the Bosnian Serbs voted overwhelmingly but reluctantly today to approve an international peace plan that would keep Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single state.
Approval of the plan, 55 to 15, with one abstention, cleared the way for peace talks to resume this weekend in Geneva.
The co-chairmen of the talks, Cyrus R. Vance for the United Nations and Lord Owen for the European Community, had warned that rejection of the plan would cause the collapse of the talks and increase the likelihood of Western military intervention in the 10-month war in Bosnia.


Lindros's Day in Court
ERIC LINDROS, surrounded by a mob of television and newspaper photographers, strode into court yesterday morning in Oshawa, Ontario, to face trial on charges arising out of a barroom incident.
The grim-faced Philadelphia Flyers rookie was accompanied by his lawyer as he entered the courthouse located in a shopping plaza.


Throw Away the Crutch of Bilingual Education; Guarantees Failure
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 4 article on bilingual education is extremely interesting to me as a professional historian who has done most of her research and writing on immigrant children and the public schools.


Tenneco's Chief Has Brain Cancer
Michael H. Walsh, a high-profile executive who has led the nation's 25th-largest industrial company, Tenneco Inc., into a profitable recovery, said today that he was suffering from brain cancer.
But he said it was treatable, would not interfere with his ability to function and that he would remain on the job.
Mr. Walsh, 50, has been chairman and chief executive at Tenneco for 18 months.


MagneTek Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Report on Melee in Belmar Criticizes Resort and MTV
A commission investigating the civil disturbance that erupted last summer in Belmar after a two-day concert and sports event today criticized the seaside resort and the event's sponsor, MTV, for not providing enough security at the event.
The commission, which said that a "comparatively small core group of violent, lawless youth were at the heart of the unrest," also cited traffic gridlock and racial tensions as factors that contributed to the melee.


Rome Journal; Wounded Lion of Italian Politics Pounces on Foes
As scandals swirl around his party and Mafia informers seek to link him to their world of crime, Giulio Andreotti, Italy's enduring political eminence for more than four decades, wants to set the record straight, and even to go on the offensive.
Mr.
Andreotti was Prime Minister seven times until his Christian Democratic Party's electoral decline last year.
Up until last year, he had served in every Italian government since 1948, a pillar of Italy's polarized politics, a prominent, anti-Communist player on the Western stage -- and, most Italians assume, an intimate of all the secrets that Italians equally assume lie behind every political act.


62 Rebounds By Celtics Sink Hawks
Celtics 121, Hawks 106
BOSTON, Jan. 20 (AP) -- Robert Parish grabbed 15 rebounds in a lopsided third quarter as Boston took advantage of Kevin Willis's sore back, and the Celtics went on to a 121-106 rout of the Atlanta Hawks tonight.


Primary Dealer Records a Big Loss
The last three years have been banner ones for the 39 primary dealers that are the heart of the $2.3 trillion Government securities market.
According to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the dealers as a whole made about $800 million in profits in 1990 and a record $1 billion in 1991.
Moreover, they accumulated profits of $900 million through September and could be looking to another record year.


January High Noon: Hail Meets Farewell
At 11:30 sharp this morning, the Marine Band played "Hail to the Chief" for George Bush for the last time.
He walked through the archway on the West Front of the Capitol and, unsmiling, walked down to his chair on the inauguration stage, hardly acknowledging the lawmakers, Supreme Court Justices and others already seated.


THE INAUGURATION: A Part of the Parade; One Family Rises Early to Partake of History
Three and a half hours into her vigil along the inaugural parade route, Brenda Waller tried to move her shoulders in the crush so her husband, Don, could hear her say: "You know what we've become? We've become those people we see on TV. You know, when we say, 'Why are those people out there?' "
The 41-year-old housewife from Newport News, Va., shrugged.
"I don't know," she mused.
"I guess to be a part of history." And to see her oldest son, 15-year-old Andy, in his 15 nanoseconds of fame as the second trumpet from the right, third row, of the Denbigh High School Marching Band -- the 47th of about 200 acts to trail President Clinton down Pennsylvania Avenue.


Automating Transit Fares Runs Afoul
The automated-fare system due to open early next year in New York City's buses and subway stations has encountered delays and cost overruns because of design flaws and equipment delivery problems, transit officials said yesterday.
The subway's fare-card system is still set to begin in some stations in December 1993 and in all major stations by March 1994, the officials said.
But a Transit Authority report warned that further delays could postpone those dates as well.


Coast Savings Financial reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


No Longer Standouts But Still Contenders
Has the Big East really slipped as badly as some say it has?
Or is all the sniping aimed at the nation's most televised conference born out of jealousy as recruiting warfare intensifies?
Perhaps the truth lies somewhere in between.


Republic New York Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


49ers' Young Discusses Rift With Steinberg
Most of the time, STEVE YOUNG and his agent are on the same page.
Not this time.
Young interrupted a golf vacation on Tuesday to make clear that LEIGH STEINBERG was speaking for himself when the agent questioned whether it was in Young's best interest to stay with the San Francisco 49ers.


Brooktree Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Maya Angelou: 'On the Pulse of Morning'
A Rock, A River, A Tree
Hosts to species long since departed,
Marked the mastodon,
The dinosaur, who left dried tokens
Of their sojourn here
On our planet floor,
Any broad alarm of their hastening doom
Is lost in the gloom of dust and ages.
But today, the Rock cries out to us, clearly, forcefully,
Come, you may stand upon my
Back and face your distant destiny,
But seek no haven in my shadow.
I will give you no hiding place down here.
You, created only a little lower than
The angels, have crouched too long in
The bruising darkness
Have lain too long
Face down in ignorance.
Your mouths spilling words
Armed for slaughter.
The Rock cries out to us today, you may stand upon me,
But do not hide your face.
Across the wall of the world,
A River sings a beautiful song,
Come, rest here by my side.
Each of you, a bordered country,
Delicate and strangely made proud,
Yet thrusting perpetually under siege.
Your armed struggles for profit
Have left collars of waste upon
My shore, currents of debris upon my breast.
Yet today I call you to my riverside,
If you will study war no more. Come,
Clad in peace, and I will sing the songs
The Creator gave to me when I and the
Tree and the rock were one.
Before cynicism was a bloody sear across your
Brow and when you yet knew you still
Knew nothing.
The River sang and sings on.
There is a true yearning to respond to
The singing River and the wise Rock.
So say the Asian, the Hispanic, the Jew
The African, the Native American, the Sioux,
The Catholic, the Muslim, the French, the Greek
The Irish, the Rabbi, the Priest, the Sheikh,
The Gay, the Straight, the Preacher,
The Privileged, the Homeless, the Teacher.
They hear. They all hear
The speaking of the Tree.
Today, the first and last of every Tree
Speaks to humankind. Come to me, here beside the River.
Plant yourself beside me, here beside the River.
Each of you, descendant of some passed
On traveller, has been paid for.
You, who gave me my first name, you,
Pawnee, Apache, Seneca, you
Cherokee Nation, who rested with me, then
Forced on bloody feet,
Left me to the employment of
Other seekers -- desperate for gain,
Starving for gold.
You, the Turk, the Swede, the German, the Eskimo, the Scot,
You the Ashanti, the Yoruba, the Kru, bought,
Sold, stolen, arriving on a nightmare
Praying for a dream.
Here, root yourselves beside me.
I am that Tree planted by the River,
Which will not be moved.
I, the Rock, I, the River, I, the Tree
I am yours -- your passages have been paid.
Lift up your faces, you have a piercing need
For this bright morning dawning for you.
History, despite its wrenching pain,
Cannot be unlived, but if faced
With courage, need not be lived again.
Lift up your eyes upon
The day breaking for you.
Give birth again
To the dream.
Women, children, men,
Take it into the palms of your hands,
Mold it into the shape of your most
Private need. Sculpt it into
The image of your most public self.
Lift up your hearts
Each new hour holds new chances
For new beginnings.
Do not be wedded forever
To fear, yoked eternally
To brutishness.
The horizon leans forward,
Offering you space to place new steps of change.
Here, on the pulse of this fine day
You may have the courage
To look up and out and upon me, the
Rock, the River, the Tree, your country.
No less to Midas than the mendicant.
No less to you now than the mastodon then.
Here, on the pulse of this new day
You may have the grace to look up and out
And into your sister's eyes, into
Your brother's face, your country
And say simply
Very simply
With hope
Good morning.


Commerce Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Modine Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Corrections
An article on Monday about Bill Clinton's arrival in Washington for the inauguration, and the Quotation of the Day on Monday, taken from an appearance at Monticello, rendered several words incorrectly in Mr.
Clinton's comment about Thomas Jefferson.
Asked if he would name Jefferson to a position in his administration if he could, Mr.
Clinton replied, "If Thomas Jefferson were alive today, I would appoint him Secretary of State, and then I would suggest to Senator Gore that the two of us resign so he could become President."


COMPANY BRIEFS
ARMCO INC., Parsippany, N.J., said it would consolidate its Bowman Metal Deck division with its Empire-Detroit Steel division and shut a steel fabricating plant in suburban Pittsburgh this spring, resulting in about 125 job losses.
QUANTUM CHEMICAL CORP., New York, said it would move its corporate offices to Cincinnati by the end of the year.


Aspect Telecommunications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Licensor Lists Grow For Two Films
Two films will be the subjects of elaborate marketing and licensing plans timed to coincide with their coming releases.
Surge Licensing Inc., the exclusive worldwide licensor of the Teen-age Mutant Ninja Turtles, said that more than 20 companies, from fast-food chains to apparel manufacturers to publishers, would introduce merchandise and marketing campaigns tied to the characters' third movie, "Teen-age Mutant Ninja Turtles III: The Turtles are Back . . . in Time," due March 19 from New Line Cinema.


Ameritech Corp. (N)
The Ameritech Corporation's fourth-quarter earnings of $335.5 million, or $1.25 a share, were higher than the average Wall Street estimate of $1.23 a share, an analyst survey by Zacks Investment Research showed.
But the 68 percent rise in net income compared with the corresponding period last year was mainly a result of a one-time charge for early retirement and other work force reductions, totaling $141 million, that the Midwestern regional Bell company took in the fourth quarter of 1991.
Had there been no restructuring charge, the 1992 fourth-quarter earnings would have slid about 1.4 percent.


Throw Away the Crutch of Bilingual Education
To the Editor:
As a New Yorker of Puerto Rican descent who attended public school before the so-called bilingual programs began, I was upset by your Jan. 4 report on the bilingual educational bureaucracy.


MISSTEPS BY CHIEF OF F.B.I. DETAILED
In what reads more like a tell-all book than a Government document, the Justice Department ethics report on William S. Sessions, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, paints a biting, gossipy picture of the backstairs life of a high Government official abusing his public office for private convenience and personal gain.
Whether it was ordering his bodyguards to fly a load of firewood from Poughkeepsie, N.Y., to Washington, commissioning the F.B.I. technical staff to build a $22,478 cabinet for his office or taking reimbursement for days he spent touring the French countryside on his way to an police conference in Dijon, the incidents in the report stand out for their numbers and the small scope of each one of them.


Sports of The Times; Buffalo's Haunting Refrain
Aseed has been planted in the minds of the Buffalo Bills and a question grows and echoes from it: "Are you ever going to win a Super Bowl? Are you ever going to win a Super Bowl? Are you ever going to win a Super Bowl?"
This, in the opinion of Fran Tarkenton, an expert in that doleful refrain.


Genentech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Russell Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Events: Antiques Shows All Around Manhattan
Nine-Day Show
Seventh Regiment Armory, 643 Park Avenue, at 66th Street; (212) 665-5250.


Clorox Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Marko Rothmuller, 84, Baritone And a Writer of Sephardic Songs
Marko Rothmuller, an operatic baritone and composer, died on Wednesday at his home in Bloomington, Ind., where he was distinguished professor emeritus of music at Indiana University.
He was 84.
He died of natural causes, the university said.


Knicks Hit Road in Improved Spirits
On the whole, the Knicks don't mind going to Philadelphia.
It's true that the 76ers, whom the Knicks will play Friday night at the Spectrum, are no longer the pushovers they appeared to be earlier in the year.
They have won their last three games in a row, six games in a row at home and six of their last nine games over all, and have improved their record to 15-20.


Uncovered Short Sales Decline 8% on Big Board
Reversing a 10-month trend, the number of shares sold short and not yet covered on the New York Stock Exchange fell almost 8 percent in the period from mid-December to mid-January, the Big Board reported yesterday.
At the end of the period on Jan. 15, short interest fell sharply to 931.8 million shares.
That was the lowest level since September.
In the previous period, short interest surpassed the billion mark for the first time.


Tennis; Capriati Is Able to DefeatA Virus, and Then Labat
Jennifer Capriati was lying in bed on Wednesday afternoon, and the prospect of putting on her tennis clothes the next day was growing less appealing by the thermometer reading.
"There were a couple times when I felt really bad, and I said, like, there's no way," Capriati explained as only Capriati can.


Corrections
A brief report in Business Day on Wednesday about the earnings of the Chemical Banking Corporation misstated the change in its net income for all of 1992, compared with 1991.
Chemical's earnings rose sevenfold, to $1.09 billion last year from $154 million in 1991.


Kennametal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


When President Jackson Moved In
The most famous White House open house is undoubtedly the one held by Andrew Jackson on March 4, 1829.
About 20,000 people poured into the Executive Mansion that day, breaking china and glassware, standing in muddy boots on chairs, ripping down drapery, trampling on rugs and breaking the furniture.
But contemporary newspaper accounts were, to say the least, restrained.
The Washington City Chronicle March 7, 1829 How a paper that did not support Jackson described the reception.


Thousands Show Up to Greet White House's New Tenants
They wandered around the Rose Garden in blue jeans and business suits, furs and frayed jackets, tight running pants and tight party dresses, and they peered through the window of the Oval Office even before President Clinton got there.
Most called their host "Mr. President," though many greeted him as "sir," and a few blurted, "Hi, Bill!"
Although it turned a bit chaotic, with at least 1,000 more people showing up than Mr.
Clinton had time to meet, he opened his new house this morning to 3,000 Americans, most of whom offered him a handshake or a hug and a hearty congratulations.
But they also gave him their business cards, homemade snacks, historic coins, paintings and a few seconds' worth of advice on everything from soothing his hoarse voice to running the country.


SETTLING IN: Presidential Appointees; 14 Major Clinton Nominees Are Confirmed by Senate
The Senate today approved 14 major appointments by President Clinton, including Ronald H. Brown as Commerce Secretary after he agreed to sever all ties to his former law firm and to remove himself from all decisions that might give the appearance of a conflict of interest.
Among the others confirmed today were Donna E. Shalala as Secretary of Health and Human Services, Robert B. Reich as Labor Secretary, Federico F. Pena as Transportation Secretary and Leon E. Panetta as director of the Office of Management and Budget.


Will Razorback Royalty Root Out the Rogues?
THE hugging is over. The backstabbing is back.
In his Inaugural Address, Bill Clinton noted that intrigue and calculation rule the capital, where "powerful people maneuver for position and worry endlessly about who is in and who is out, who is up and who is down."


Much Outrage, Little Sympathy On Main Street
Behind the counter at a pet store in a middle-class Washington suburb, Carolyn Williford had drawn herself up in outrage at the notion that Zoe Baird might become Attorney General after hiring illegal immigrants to care for her toddler.
"She thought she could do something illegal and get away with it," said the 45-year-old assistant manager at Doctor's Pet Center in Hyattsville, Md.
"I don't think it's fair. I raised my kids while I was working. I worked days. My husband worked nights at the post office. Our in-laws filled in when they had to. This makes me mad."


Moynihan Sorts Out U.S. Prosecutor Candidates
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan is moving swiftly to recommend nominees for two of the nation's most visible law-enforcement jobs -- the United States Attorney posts in Manhattan and Brooklyn -- as the first Democratic President in 12 years prepares to put his stamp on the country's justice system.
A selection committee helping the Senator is interviewing more than 40 contenders for the two Federal prosecutors' jobs and two other United States Attorney positions upstate.
The four offices are now held by Bush or Reagan appointees who are stepping down or by officials filling in on an interim basis.


Champion International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


AST Research reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Walsh in a Rules Violation
Stanford has reported a National Collegiate Athletic Association rules violation committed by Coach BILL WALSH while on a recruiting visit in Connecticut.
The university said yesterday that it informed the Pacific-10 conference of the minor infraction and that the conference reported it to the N.C.A.A.


May Stores Moving Merchandise Staff to St. Louis
The May Department Stores Company announced yesterday that it would move its New York merchandising office to its headquarters in St.
Louis.
The company said all 430 employees of the May Merchandising Company would be offered jobs in St.
Louis.
It said it would retain its office on the Avenue of the Americas in Manhattan to give its buyers and executives a place to hold meetings when they are in New York.
Closer to the Stores
David C. Farrell, the company's chairman and chief executive, said the relocation would bring May's trend-spotters and style arbiters closer to their counterparts in each of May's department store chains, including Lord &amp; Taylor, Filene's and Hecht's.
The move will be completed June 14.


In a New Slovakia, Fears Are Both New and Old
Wedged into one of the most strategic corners in this unstable region, Eastern Europe's newest small nation has been gripped by uncertainty and foreboding in its first few weeks of independence.
Slovaks are frantically withdrawing their money from local banks, anticipating that the widely rumored end of the joint currency with the Czech Republic will mean a sharply devalued Slovak crown.


Outside of Alternative Radio, Who's Heard of Mojo Nixon?; Rocking at the Helm
To the Editor:
I was pleasantly surprised by "Might as Well Book Mojo Nixon" (editorial, Jan. 11), your critique of the inaugural rock arrangements.
Was this influenced by the younger generation's succession at your publishing helm?


Upturn Continues in Most Areas, Fed Reports
With the notable exception of California, the economy showed continued improvement in December and early January, with sizable gains in retail sales augmented by better activity in factories and residential construction, a survey published today by the Federal Reserve Board said.
But the survey found that over all employers were moving slowly in adding to payrolls as they tried to squeeze still more productivity from current workers.
The cost of health benefits was repeatedly cited as a deterrent to hiring.


For Children
Chinese Folk Artists
Asian American Arts Center  26 Bowery Street, at Bayard Street  Chinatown  (212) 233-2154  Recommended for all ages  Sunday
The Year of the Rooster starts tomorrow with the Chinese New Year.
The rooster is an inauspicious, fickle character that is considered a functionary, possessing no fancy powers.
But the New Year will nevertheless be celebrated with an auspicious traditional festival from 1 to 3 P.M. at this neighborhood cultural center.


Convicted Jockey Still Barred
Jockey PHIL RUBBICCO, convicted of being the ringleader in a fixed race in 1986, was denied reinstatement for a second time yesterday by the Louisiana State Racing Commission.
On a 5-4 vote, the commission refused to issue a license to Rubbicco, who rode No Le Hace to the winner's circle in the 1972 Louisiana Derby and to a second-place finish behind Riva Ridge in that year's Kentucky Derby.
Rubbicco was banished after his conviction in 1987 on one count of sports bribery and one count of conspiracy.
Authorities said he offered two jockeys bribes totaling $1,300 to alter the outcome of the final race of the Fair Grounds season on March 19, 1986. (AP)


THE MEDIA BUSINESS -- ADVERTISING
EARLIER this week, in introducing Crystal Pepsi clear cola, the Pepsi-Cola Company asserted, "The world is thirsty for change." So must Pepsi be, as evidenced by a decision to substantially change advertising introduced only a year ago for the flagship Pepsi-Cola brand.
The changes -- as typified by a new theme, "Be Young. Have Fun. Drink Pepsi." -- return the nation's No. 2 soft drink to its familiar focus on youthful exuberance.
In new commercials, which will begin running during Super Bowl XXVII on Jan. 31, the so-called Pepsi generation of energetic, photogenic youngsters -- interspersed with youthful oldsters -- supplants a much more mainstream campaign, directed at consumers 30 and up, intended to broaden the brand's appeal.


Pacific Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Art; On the Move: The Johns Evolution
It seems that an awe-inspiring exhibition reviewing some aspect of Jasper Johns's oeuvre has almost become a requisite of the New York art season.
Last year, the Gagosian Gallery devoted an exhibition to "According to What," the artist's complicated 1964 masterwork; in 1991, there was a retrospective of his drawings at the Whitney Museum of American Art, while 1989 brought a show of his "Map" paintings, again at Gagosian.
Now it's the turn of Leo Castelli, Mr.
Johns's first and still his primary dealer, the only one with whom Mr.
Johns has ever had exhibitions of new paintings.
Mr.
Castelli is celebrating their 35-year association with an astonishing mini-retrospective of the artist's work in his gallery in SoHo.


Outside of Alternative Radio, Who's Heard of Mojo Nixon?
To the Editor:
If the hall monitors have taken over at the Clinton Administration, as "Might as Well Book Mojo Nixon" suggests (editorial, Jan. 11), they could look to The Times for guidance.
The cool kids have taken over the newspaper of record -- certainly at Styles of The Times, which has been providing counterpoint to the moneyed and society activities by chronicling the latest clubs, underknown artists and underground social phenomena.


Barnum's Jumbo Is Back In Museum's Center Ring
Awe just isn't what it used to be.
A century ago, it was enough that Jumbo was the biggest animal anyone had ever seen.
Certainly that was sufficient for Phineas T. Barnum, who first displayed the six-and-a-half-ton elephant in 1882.
Then he unabashedly mounted an international tour of Jumbo's 13-foot-high skeleton after the elephant died in a much-ballyhooed railroad accident in 1885.
But this is 1993, and when the American Museum of Natural History shows that same skeleton to the public today for the first time in 15 years, Jumbo will be surrounded by a historically relevant and environmentally correct presentation.
The exhibition, "Jumbo: The World Famous Elephant," is at once a celebration of "the life and times of a fabulous piece of Americana," said Lisa Breslof, the project coordinator, "and a show that fosters conservation, natural history and biodiversity."


Quaker Oats reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reeves on Golf Course as Giants Hold the Phone
If everything goes the way the Giants expect, Dan Reeves will become their head coach, two people in the team's front office said yesterday.
But Reeves was on a golf course in southern California yesterday, a contract was not yet signed and nothing seemed likely to be completed before early next week.
"I think it's going to get done," one person in the organization said.
"But everything is subject to change, and you never know until everything is signed. Nobody wants it done any more than we do." The other source said simply, "It looks like there's no problem."


Money Fund Assets Down
Total assets of the nation's 609 retail money market mutual funds decreased $675.1 million, to $386.65 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 378 taxable retail money market funds grew by $184.5 million, to $304.03 billion.
Assets of the 231 retail tax-exempt funds decreased $859.6 million, to $82.62 billion.


Sysco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Sounds Around Town
Home Again, Onstage
Jackie Cain and Roy Kral, Tavern on the Green, Central Park West at 67th Street, (212) 873-3200.
After working as a duo for more than 45 years, the singer Jackie Cain and the singer and pianist Roy Kral took the last year off to live a very different kind of life.
The husband-and-wife team drove around the country without having to be on a schedule, and for the first time they could fully enjoy the house in Montclair, N.J., that they have owned for many years.
But now they are back following their old way of life.
Tonight through Sunday, they are winding up a week at Tavern on the Green with a show that includes some of their favorite songs by composers like Stephen Sondheim and Alec Wilder, and some new additions to their repertory by Dave Brubeck ("In Your Own Sweet Way" and "The Duke").
They are also dipping into Duke Ellington for the first time as they begin to explore his work in depth.
They perform tonight and tomorrow night at 8:30, 10:30 and 12:30 and on Sunday night at 8:30 and 10:30.
No minimum; $15 music charge tonight and tomorrow, $10 on Sunday.
Heavenly Dixieland
Kenny Davern Quartet, Church of the Heavenly Rest, Fifth Avenue at 90th Street, (212) 752-1428 or 556-3865.
From the often-stereotyped world of Dixieland jazz, the clarinetist Kenny Davern has shaped a style filled with unexpected twists and turns that keep alive the dry and wry manner of Pee Wee Russell and provide a setting for his own refreshing explorations.
His quartet, with Howard Alden on guitar, Frank Tate on bass and Tony De Nicola on drums, returns to the Heavenly Jazz series on Sunday afternoon, exactly one year after its last appearance there.
Tickets for the concert, which starts at 5 P.M., will be on sale at the door for $10 ($7 for students and the elderly).
Guitar With Polish
Frank Vignola Trio, J's, 2581 Broadway, between 97th and 98th Streets, Manhattan, (212) 666-3600.
Frank Vignola, a guitarist who initially traded on the fame of Django Reinhardt's precise and swinging single-string solos, is now working in a much broader area that encompasses material from swing to bop to Latin jazz.
But the polish that brought distinctive charm to his Reinhardt period is still a feature of his playing, with John Goldsby on bass and Joe Ascione on drums.
The trio plays on Sunday night from 8:30 to 12:30.
No cover charge; minimum: $12 at tables, $7 at the bar.


American Brands reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reconsider Aliens Law in Light of Baird Case; Child-Care Shortage
To the Editor:
Zoe Baird's illegal nanny has helped focus attention on the child-care shortage in this country.
However, I wonder how many Americans realize just how dire the shortage is.


Storms Cause Floods in California and Louisiana and Ice in Midwest


Today's TV Listings
Television news, listings and advertising appear today on pages B14-15.


Ethyl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Time's Up for William Sessions
J.
Edgar Hoover must be spinning in his grave.
Imagine the former F.B.I.
Director taking the lashing that Attorney General William Barr administered, hours before resigning, to the incumbent Director, William Sessions.
"You engaged in a sham arrangement. . . .  [ Your explanation ]  does not even pass the 'red face test.' . . . There is no excuse for your conduct." The penalty: Pay more taxes and reimburse the Government for personal expenses disguised as business necessities.


Sports of The Times; What Parcells Didn't Say
IN his best blue suit, Bill Parcells, the best coach in Giants history and until yesterday the best pro football coach available, was answering questions about the New England Patriots while the Giants were trying to complete their deal with Dan Reeves.
But when Parcells was asked about the Giants, what he didn't say was as important as what he did say.


Japanese Stocks Fall
Stocks traded lower here today.
The Nikkei average of 225 issues lost 201.87 points, or nearly 1.22 percent, to 16,336.81.
On Thursday, the Nikkei gained 28.50 points.


Comdisco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hillary Clinton Gets Policy Job And New Office
Breaking decades of tradition, Hillary Rodham Clinton will set up shop in the West Wing of the White House, alongside the President's senior staff members, where she will help formulate policy on health care and other domestic issues, White House officials said today.
First Ladies have customarily operated from the East Wing of the White House, with their official contributions limited to social duties or charitable causes.


Hudson Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Jordan Sends Taunts And Teases Nets' Way
He is Michael Jordan, basketball superman, and last night he prepared himself to do battle against mere mortals from New Jersey by imagining them to be a serious threat to his no fly zone.
"They are a contender," he called the Nets in the Chicago Bulls' lockerroom before the game.
"They're only one game behind the Knicks, one game out of first place in the Atlantic Division. If you don't come in here with your eyes open, you'll go out with your eyes closed."


Review/Film; Friendly Aliens And Other Creatures
Dan Curtis's "In Advance of the Landing," opening today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, is a feature-length documentary about people in the United States and Canada who have taken rides in unidentified flying objects, have talked to space aliens, are preparing to welcome such aliens to earth or simply daydream about them.
Mr.
Curtis, the film's producer and director, takes a very benign view of his subjects.
Though if he doesn't send them up, it's probably because he knows he doesn't have to.
Among the people he interviews, some are more plausible than others.
There's the bearded young man in northern Michigan who lives in the woods and broadcasts messages to outer space from what appears to be a quite elaborate transmitting station.
He admits that he leads a solitary life.
"You don't date someone for very long," he says, "without their finding out you're a little different."


Large Group of Monitors Is Planned for Haiti, a U.N. Official Says
The special envoy to Haiti from the United Nations and the Organization of American States said today that the two organizations will dispatch a large contingent of human-rights monitors to the country in about 10 days, even though questions persist about whether the military-backed Government will allow them in.
The envoy, Dante Caputo, said Haiti's civilian and military leaders had agreed to the deployment of the monitors, but said the size and composition of the delgation, as well as its working conditions, are to be decided by the United Nations and the organization, and not the Haitian Government.


Who Owns The Rights To 'Rite'?
In the Walt Disney film "Fantasia," music from Igor Stravinsky's "Rite of Spring" accompanies scenes of the creation of the earth, the demise of the dinosaurs and the birth of civilization.
Now comes the one thing that seems to have been left out: a lawsuit.


But Does Punishment Fit the Budget?
With spending on corrections quadrupling in the 1980's and continuing to rise sharply, the North Carolina Legislature this week began considering a plan that would reduce the average criminal sentence in the state by 80 percent and send nonviolent criminals to community programs for supervision, treatment and work.
The Arkansas Legislature began considering a similar proposal this week, and Kansas has just started remodeling its sentencing policies and punishment programs.
Criminal justice experts say other states, including Pennsylvania, Delaware, Florida, Tennessee, Louisiana, Texas and Ohio, are also slowly moving in a similar direction.


Imperial Oil Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Acting Chiefs Named At 2 U.S. Endowments
The heads of the National Endowment for the Arts and of the National Endowment for the Humanities have stepped down and named their acting successors.
Ana M. Steele, an executive of the National Endowment for the Arts who has worked for the Federal agency since its creation in 1965, has been named its acting chairwoman.
Jerry Martin, an executive of the National Endowment for the Humanities who joined the agency in 1987, has been named its acting chairman.


Bill T. Jones Premiere In Dance Center Benefit
Performances by the Bill T. Jones/ Arnie Zane Dance Company and the Stephen Petronio Company and the premiere of a work by Mr.
Jones will be part of a gala benefit for Movement Research tonight at 8 at the Pace Downtown Theater, 3 Spruce Street, south of City Hall.
Mr.
Jones has created a new, untitled solo for the program, which also includes his "Love Defined," Mr.
Petronio's "Middlesex Gorge" and Mike Taylor's video "Dancenoise: The Phenomenon." Movement Research, celebrating its 15th anniversary, is a center for new dance and workshops on experimental dance and theater.


Morceli in Wanamaker Mile
Algeria's NOUREDDINE MORCELI, the world indoor and outdoor record-holder at 1,500 meters, and Spain's FERMIN CACHO, the 1992 Olympic 1,500-meter champion, have entered the Wanamaker Mile at the Millrose Games Feb. 5 at Madison Square Garden.
Also in the field will be the five-time Wanamaker Mile winner, MARCUS O'SULLIVAN of Ireland, Olympian STEVE HOLMAN, the 1992 National Collegiate Athletic Association champion, and Kenya's WILLIAM KEMEI, the fastest outdoor miler of the 1990's. (AP)


Seton Hall Team Puts Words Through Hoops
HERE'S startling news: Not every student at Seton Hall University plays basketball.
Here's a second stunner: There's another Seton Hall team that's ranked higher nationally than the basketball squad.


Supercomputer Maker May Lose I.B.M. Aid
The bold crusade of Steve S. Chen to build the world's fastest supercomputer may be nearing an end because his major partner, I.B.M., is backing out, several people familiar with the project say.
Mr.
Chen, who is one of the world's foremost supercomputer designers, may be the most visible casualty of the financial woes of the world's largest computer maker, the International Business Machines Corporation.


Jordan Says No Thanks To the Dream Team II
If he had to do it over again, Michael Jordan would have passed on the Olympics last summer.
Once the business of the National Basketball Association championship had been taken care of, he would have headed straight to the golf course in Hilton Head, S.C., instead of carrying his clubs from San Diego to Portland to Monte Carlo to Barcelona.
Playing for pay from October until deep into June and then, in no particular order, for his country and basketball shoe company was simply too much, Jordan has decided.
"I'd done it before," he said tonight before the Bulls played the Nets, referring to his gold medal with the 1984 Olympic team.
"I didn't have anything to prove."


A Shakeout Is Under Way For Japanese Chip Makers
Japanese companies took over the computer memory chip market in the 1980's by withstanding heavy losses that drove most American companies out of the business.
Now the losses are becoming too heavy even for some Japanese companies, and a shakeout is beginning here.
The strongest sign of the trend came today when the Minebea Company, primarily a manufacturer of ball bearings, said it planned to leave the chip business and was negotiating to sell its subsidiary NMB Semiconductor to the Nippon Steel Corporation.


Art in Review
Elliot Schwartz
Jayne H. Baum Gallery  588 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 13
Ominous machines and people in uniforms abound in Elliot Schwartz's new show.
Mr.
Schwartz pins his dark, solarized black-and-white photographs directly to the wall and arranges them in clusters that at first seem more or less random.
Several prints feature scenes from bullfights: a matador resplendent in his costume, a fat picador, a dead bull being dragged from the ring.
These pictures are grouped with other photographs in an apparently intuitive way, taking on a Surrealist air.
A firefighter appears next to the matador; nearby are several police officers, a street drummer and a couple kissing on a couch.


Dow Up 11.07 and Nasdaq Reaches a High
Like Candide, the stock market faced the best of all possible worlds yesterday, reacting to a rally in bonds and evidence from the Federal Reserve of a moderate economic recovery.
The Nasdaq Composite average continued its hot streak, rising 3.33, to 700.77, closing above 700 for the first time.
Cyclical stocks, especially the steels, continued to feed on the upbeat economic news, leading the Dow Jones industrial average 11.07 points higher, to 3,253.02.


Pfizer Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rodney King Testifies About Night of Beating
Rodney G. King told Federal grand jurors that he did not attack police officers on the night he was beaten and complied with their orders after he stopped his car to end a high-speed pursuit, according to a transcript of the testimony.
Mr.
King's testimony on July 23 is the first time he has spoken under oath about the beating on March 3, 1991.
Mr.
King did not testify in the state trial for the four officers charged in his beating, and there were no convictions.
Lawyers in the case expect him to testify in the Federal trial, which is set to begin in two weeks.


Outside of Alternative Radio, Who's Heard of Mojo Nixon?; Three-Fifths British
To the Editor:
While I have no quarrel with the sentiment behind your reminder that "Fleetwood Mac epitomized the least vibrant period of American rock" (editorial, Jan. 11), the group that recorded "Don't Stop (Thinking About Tomorrow)" was three-fifths British.
Neil Young would probably put on a good show at the inauguration, but as a Canadian who endorsed Ronald Reagan, he might not fit in.


Wang Turnaround Artist Quits Work in Progress
Richard W. Miller, who has waged an unsuccessful three-year effort to resuscitate Wang Laboratories Inc., surprised the computer industry today by stepping down as chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Miller, a turnaround specialist who joined Wang in August 1989, said he decided to leave now because Wang was preparing to emerge from Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection as a much smaller company and needed a less costly management structure.


Daly to Come Back to Tour
JOHN DALY, who has undergone alcohol rehabilitation treatment since late last month, will return to action on the pro golf tour next week in Phoenix.
Daly's agent committed the former P.G.A. champion to compete in the Phoenix Open, tournament officials said yesterday.
Daly has received treatment for alcohol-related problems at an undisclosed location.


Under Standing Orders, U.S. Jets Hit Iraqi Radar Seen as a Threat
Two American warplanes, acting under standing orders from the Bush Administration, attacked a radar for an Iraqi surface-to-air missile battery today, after concluding that the radar was directed at allied planes patrolling the northern no-flight zone.
Baghdad denied that its forces had caused the encounter.


Group Makes Ultra-Thin Chip in the U.S.
After five years and $500 million of public and private money, Sematech, the consortium of United States computer chip companies, said yesterday that it had accomplished the first of its goals: using American-made equipment to produce a chip with ultra-thin circuitry.
The group said it had made chips with individual transistors 0.35 micron in width.
On such a chip, transistors are so small that 72,500 of them side by side would measure just one inch.


Centex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A brief report in the Events column in The Home Section yesterday about a talk by Philip Zimmerman, on the New-York Historical Society's furniture collection, misstated the location.
The talk, on Tuesday at 6 P.M., will be at Christie's, 502 Park Avenue (59th Street).


ANN TAYLOR SETTLES A LAWSUIT FILED BY SHAREHOLDERS
The Ann Taylor Stores Corporation, the specialty chain that caters to career women, said yesterday that it had agreed to pay $2.8 million and some legal fees to settle a lawsuit filed against it, its major investor and two former senior executives.
In October 1991, shareholders filed a suit naming Ann Taylor, Merrill Lynch and Joseph Brooks and Thomas Brooks, respectively the former chief executive and president of Ann Taylor.
The lawsuit contended that the defendants had misrepresented and omitted pertinent facts about Ann Taylor in its prospectus, in news releases and in statements to the investment community about its business and prospects.


SETTLING IN: Presidential Appointees; 14 Major Clinton Nominees Are Confirmed by Senate
The Senate today approved 14 major appointments by President Clinton, including Ronald H. Brown as Commerce Secretary after he agreed to sever all ties to his former law firm and to remove himself from all decisions that might give the appearance of a conflict of interest.
Among the others confirmed today were Donna E. Shalala as Secretary of Health and Human Services, Robert B. Reich as Labor Secretary, Federico F. Pena as Transportation Secretary and Leon E. Panetta as director of the Office of Management and Budget.


Talk of a Smaller Issue Lifts Bonds
Treasury prices inched higher yesterday as traders and investors continued to wait to see what the new Clinton Administration would do to stimulate the economy and cut the record Federal budget deficit.
More speculation about a Treasury move to reduce the issuance of 30-year bonds helped lift their price by 12/32 and lower the yield to 7.30 percent, from 7.33 percent Wednesday.


TransCanada PipeLines reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the performance of the West inghouse Electric Corporation misstated its financial results for the fourth quarter of 1992.
In the quarter, the company posted a net loss of $1.18 billion, compared with net income of $171 million, or 51 cents a share, in the 1991 quarter.
Its earnings from continuing operations dropped 33.6 percent, to $91 million, or 22 cents a share.


LSI Logic reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chicago &amp; North Western Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Union Camp Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Some Small Steps by Byrd Turning Into Giant Leaps
Less than two months after suffering a broken neck during a football game, which resulted in his partial paralysis, Jets defensive end Dennis Byrd took his first real steps during a therapy session yesterday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
Byrd stood between two parallel bars and with some help from a therapist took a few steps for the first time since his injury, according to Dr.
Kristjan Ragnarsson, the chairman of the Department of Rehabilitation Medicine at Mount Sinai.
Ragnarsson has been supervising Byrd's therapy.


Katie Beers's Mother Asks to Cede Financial Control
The Suffolk County Attorney should take charge of Katie Beers's financial affairs, including any money she may receive from movie deals, Katie's mother, Marilyn Beers, said today.
Katie is the 10-year-old who was kidnapped and held captive in an underground bunker for 16 days.
Miss Beers is seeking to regain custody of Katie, who is living with a foster family under the county's supervision, pending a custody hearing in three weeks.


SETTLING IN: The Judiciary Committee; Baird Endures Difficult Day Adrift at the Senate Hearing
The process that led to the decision to withdraw Zoe Baird's nomination as Attorney General began quietly Thursday morning, then snowballing late in the day.
When the Senate Judiciary Committee reconvened Thursday morning to continue Ms.
Baird's confirmation hearing, the sentiment was barely audible.
But by the time the committee concluded its work for the night about 9:30, after a day of tepid testimony, the atmosphere outside the hearing room had changed drastically.
Under the weight of hundreds of angry phone calls from constituents, 11 Senators had called for Ms.
Baird's withdrawal or said they would oppose her nomination.


At the Bar; HBO's trial of James Earl Ray may stir sensation, but will it produce revelation?
Next week in Memphis, the ever-fuzzier line between fact and fiction, justice and show biz, history and entertainment, courtroom and television studio, will be blurred still further.
That's when Home Box Office puts James Earl Ray on trial for the 1968 killing of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Everything about the ersatz trial, which will last for 10 days, is scrupulously genuine.
It will take place in a genuine courtroom, feature a genuine prosecutor and defense lawyer appearing before a genuine (former) judge, be decided by a genuine jury.
And, unlike Showtime's 1986 trial of Lee Harvey Oswald or Geraldo Rivera's trial of Joey Buttafuoco next Monday, there will be a genuine defendant: Mr.
Ray will be questioned via satellite from his very genuine prison cell in Nashville.


W. Griswold Smith; Developer, 71
W.
Griswold Smith, a prominent North Carolina business executive, died Tuesday at his home here.
He was 71.
Mr.
Smith, a native of Durham, was chairman and president of the Key Company, one of Greensboro's largest housing development companies before it was liquidated under Federal bankruptcy laws in 1991.


Restaurants
Visiting Barbetta, the longest-running production in the theater district -- since 1925, although founded in the garment district in 1906 -- is sort of like attending a summer repertory theater.
In some efforts, the company succeeds surprisingly well, while in others it lays a substantial egg.
The best strategy is to go with realistic expectations and a sense of humor.
Piedmont cuisine is the theme of this stately town house restaurant owned by Laura Maioglio, the daughter of its founder, Sebastiano.
Past a long bar near the entrance, you enter the grand main dining room, which is dominated by an 18th-century Piedmontese crystal chandelier.
Silk drapes, brocade-upholstered chairs, tuxedoed waiters: all suggest the most regal experience.


Projecting a Rosy Future for Schools
Network news departments have a way of alternating between laments over the present condition of America's schools and celebrations of what Peter Jennings tomorrow calls their "glorious future." The latest exercise in optimism, "Common Miracles: The New American Revolution in Learning," is pieced together from "World News Tonight" reports by the ABC News education correspondent, Bill Blakemore.
The hourlong program begins with the comforting proposition that every child is intelligent in some way and has the ability to learn.
Some researchers now say that if Sally is not all that good at reading or adding, she may still be a whiz at "bodily intelligence" or "interpersonal intelligence" or "introspective intelligence."


Drivers Stage Protest Against Insurance Rise





Books of The Times; A Couple's Story, During Marriage and Beyond
Mystery Ride
By Robert Boswell
334 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
The title of Robert Boswell's new novel, "Mystery Ride," comes from a Bruce Springsteen song:
Would they ever look so happy again
The handsome groom and his bride
As they stepped into that long black limousine
For their mystery ride.


Three Days of Artillery Duels Leave 300 Wounded in Kabul
Government forces and rebels fought artillery duels in Kabul again today, wounding about 100 people and forcing hundreds to flee their homes, doctors and witnesses said.
At least 300 people have been wounded in three days of fighting, which erupted after the Government opened an offensive against a Hezb-i-Islami faction led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, doctors said.


Boxing; Among the Leisure Class, Bowe Is Hard at Work
In the land of heart-shaped bathtubs and starry-eyed newlyweds, Riddick Bowe is an anomaly in winter: a fighter among lovers, a laborer among the leisurely.
He doesn't seem to belong.
There are snow-covered slopes and scenic trails, frozen lakes and full moons, skiers and sightseers and honeymooners.
And there is Bowe, the new heavyweight champion, encamped in the Poconos with his sparring partners and trainer and a boxing ring.


Taxis to Put Telephones In Back Seat
The Taxi and Limousine Commission decided yesterday to let yellow cabs in New York City begin installing back-seat cellular pay phones, a move that will add convenience for many passengers and safety for cabdrivers.
For passengers, the new phones will mean they will able to call ahead, or, more luxuriously, fill their travel time.
For drivers, perhaps more significantly, the phones will have a safety feature that dials 911 by simply pressing a button in the front seat.


A Debate Unstilled
In moving to identify and hospitalize violent mentally ill residents of New York City shelters, state officials are taking a small step to improve coordination in a fragmented, overwhelmed mental health system.
The new policy is not a return to institutionalizing the mentally ill on a large scale.
Instead, it is a limited initiative to deal with the fears aroused by the latest horror story out of the mental health system: the fatal beating Sunday of an 80-year-old woman by a mentally ill man from a Bronx shelter.


INSIDE
Hailing a Cab, and a Phone
Yellow cabs in New York City will be allowed to install backseat cellular pay phones, a move that will add convenience for passengers and safety for drivers.
Page B1.
Patriots Hand Off to Parcells
Football's New England Patriots hired Bill Parcells as coach while his old team, the Giants, tried to wrap up a deal with Dan Reeves.
Page B7.
New British Deal for USAir
British Airways is still trying to link up with USAir, investing $300 million for 20 percent in the airline.
Page D1.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
British Airways invested $300 million for a 20 percent stake in USAir.
The deal came a month after the two companies had withdrawn a plan for combined operations amid objections from U.S. carriers and the Transportation Department.  [ Page D1. ]
A high-profile and flourishing Florida brokerage firm appears to be having a problem with information on its stock picks' being leaked to select investors in advance of wide release.  [ D1. ]
I.B.M. is said to be withdrawing support of a renown computer designer who hopes to build the world's fastest supercomputer.
The move would be more evidence of financial woes.  [ D1. ]
Wang's chairman stepped down after an unsuccessful three-year effort to resuscitate the computer company.
He said Wang needed to emerge from bankruptcy with less costly management.  [ D1. ]
Nynex, Bell Atlantic and U S West reported higher fourth-quarter earnings.
But charges for work-force reductions and accounting changes made year-to-year comparisons difficult.  [ D2. ]
McDonnell Douglas earnings fell 61.9 percent in 1992 because of losses from its C-17 cargo plane and continued commercial aircraft declines.
Fourth-quarter earnings declined 59.2 percent.  [ D4. ]
Pfizer reported strong profit and sales gains, staking a claim as the world's fastest growing large drug company.  [ D4. ]
Dell will sell low-priced computers directly to Japanese customers, heating up a personal-computer price war.  [ D4. ]
May Department Stores will move its New York merchandising office to its headquarters in St.
Louis.  [ D4. ] The Economy
The Sematech chip-making consortium accomplished its goal of using American-made equipment to produce a chip with ultra-thin circuitry.
It met the goal on time and on budget.  [ D4. ]
Zoe Baird withdrew her name as President Clinton's nominee to be Attorney General.  [ A1. ]  The Senate confirmed Ronald H. Brown as Commerce Secretary, Robert B. Reich as Labor Secretary and Leon E. Panetta as director of the Office of Management and Budget.  [ A13. ]
The economy except in California continues to improve, with gains in retailing, construction and factories, the Federal Reserve said.
But job growth continues to lag.  [ A16. ] International
Japanese companies are losing their grip on the computer memory chip market.
High costs and sharp competition have caused many to curb production of widely used D-RAM's, their mainstay product since the 1980's.  [ D1. ]
Germany will cut benefits for the poor, lower tax breaks for the rich and put a surcharge on corporate and income taxes to finance rebuilding of the formerly communist east.  [ A3. ] Markets
Stocks rose as bonds rallied.
The Dow gained 11.07, to 3,253.02, and Nasdaq stocks continued their hot streak.  [ D6. ]
Shares sold short and not yet covered on the New York Stock Exchange fell almost 8 percent, reversing a 10-month trend.  [ D16. ]
Treasury prices inched higher, with the 30-year bond gaining back what it lost Wednesday.
Its yield fell to 7.30 percent.  [ D14. ]
Livestock prices fell sharply on forecasts for good weather and oil prices rebounded in New York.  [ D13. ]  The dollar settled higher.
Gold prices fell in the U.S. but advanced overseas.  [ D13. ] Today's Columns
Pepsi's new ads scheduled for the Super Bowl return to themes emphasizing youth, moving away from an appeal to older consumers begun only a year ago.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D2. ]
Education Alternatives has attracted attention on Wall Street with its soaring revenues and stock price.
But the school management company insists that its business is improving education, not enriching investors.
Kurt Eichenwald: Market Place.  [ D6. ]


First Data Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


When MICA's Commit Murder
The public's concern last summer focused on Larry Hogue, whose drug-related mental illness led to menace and violence on Manhattan's West Side.
Mr.
Hogue became notorious for aggressive panhandling, setting fires and other antisocial acts, yet authorities seemed powerless to restrain him.
Now concern and outrage are focused on Christopher Battiste, a homeless New York man tormented by similar demons that provoked even worse menace.
Police allege that last Sunday he bludgeoned an 80-year-old woman to death.


Reconsider Aliens Law in Light of Baird Case; Let Her Measure Up
To the Editor:
In regard to the nomination of Zoe Baird for Attorney General of the United States:


Killing Shown on TV Prompts Debate
Two women are walking side by side.
A man walks up and shoves one of them out of the way.
Then he pulls a gun and shoots the other.
As she falls, he shoots her again, 12 times in all.
On Monday, by happenstance, this scene at a cemetery in North Lauderdale, Fla., was recorded on videotape by Telemundo, the Spanish-language network.
A Telemundo crew from Miami was interviewing the man, Emilio Nunez, about his daughter's recent suicide when his former wife showed up and he shot her.
He had earlier told television crew members that he blamed his former wife for the suicide.


Joseph Anthony, 80, a Director And Stage and Film Actor, Dies
Joseph Anthony, an actor and director who at his peak staged four hit productions on Broadway simultaneously, died on Wednesday at a nursing home in Hyannis, Mass.
He was 80 and lived in Truro, Mass.
In 1960 to 1961, Mr.
Anthony opened four successful shows in 11 months.
They were Gore Vidal's "Best Man," "Under the Yum-Yum Tree," with Gig Young, Eugene Ionesco's "Rhinoceros" and Jean Kerr's "Mary, Mary."


When Helping Hands Have to Pay Taxes
To the Editor:
Prof.
Edgar S. Cahn's bright picture of the Time Dollar for the exchange of services in "When Money is Time" (Op-Ed, Jan. 9) may be dimmed somewhat by something he misrepresents: their susceptibility to Federal income taxes.


May Stores Moving Mechandise Staff to St. Louis
Pfizer Inc. staked a strong claim yesterday to the title of world's fastest-growing large drug company.
At a time when most drug makers are wrestling with slipping growth rates, the New York-based company announced that pharmaceutical sales had leaped 32 percent in the final quarter of 1992.
Earnings from continuing operations climbed sharply, compared with the last three months of 1991.


Matching Up Better Against Knicks
Watching the New Jersey Nets on television used to be painful.
My remote control in Queens somehow tensed up when I pushed Channel 30 for SportsChannel; at Channel 28, for the Knicks on the MSG Network, it was relaxed.
The last time I endured a complete Nets game on TV, Steve Albert was the play-by-play man, Julius Erving was a young physician and Nixon was in exile in San Clemente.
Now, the Nets are more exciting on offense than the Knicks, trail the Knicks in the National Basketball Association's Eastern Division by only two games and have a coach in Chuck Daly who dresses as well as Knicks model Pat Riley.
"Chuck hasn't two-peated a suit all season," said Spencer Ross, the Nets' play-by-play announcer.


Sonoco Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Outside of Alternative Radio, Who's Heard of Mojo Nixon?; Not Rolling Stone
To the Editor:
"Might As Well Book Mojo Nixon" (editorial, Jan. 11) cruelly lambastes the not inconsiderable talents of Fleetwood Mac.
True, the band did not have the biting edge of Neil Young (referred to by you as geriatric, a characterization that anyone who witnessed his riveting performance of "All Along the Watchtower" at the recent Bob Dylan tribute would find ridiculous).


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"SPIC-O-RAMA," Westside Theater, 407 West 43d Street, Manhattan.
A one-man show with John Leguizamo; directed by Peter Askin.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets, $30.
Information: (212) 307-4100; 315-2244.


MONSANTO CO. (N)
A one-time gain enabled the Monsanto Company to post fourth-quarter net income of $141 million, or $1.14 a share.
The gain came on the sale of Monsanto's Fisher Controls International, a manufacturer of automated valves, for $554 million, or $4.49 a share.
Offsetting that gain was a $413 million loss from continuing operations during the last three months of 1992.


Georgia Gulf Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TV Weekend; Wendy Hiller as Countess With Past
Acting can sometimes be a miraculous profession.
Wendy Hiller, who was 80 in August, has in the last year or so been doing some of the best work of her distinguished career.
And "Masterpiece Theater" on public television has been a chief beneficiary.
Earlier this season, there was "The Best of Friends," with John Gielgud and Patrick McGoohan.
This Sunday at 9 P.M. on Channel 13 there is "The Countess Alice," co-starring Zoe Wanamaker.
Miss Hiller has always been a gifted actress.
That much was spotted early on by none other than George Bernard Shaw, who handpicked her for two major film performances: Eliza Doolittle in "Pygmalion" and the title role in "Major Barbara." Among other career landmarks, she won an Oscar as best supporting actress in the 1958 film version of Terence Rattigan's "Separate Tables." Miss Hiller has rarely failed to impress, but her recent performances have assumed an even higher level of authority.
The voice is more commanding, the bearing more regal.
The effect can be quite astonishing.


On Stage, and Off
Whither Hwang?
It had been an unspoken question for a while: With "Face Value," David Henry Hwang's new play, which is scheduled to open in April, apparently headed for the Eugene O'Neill Theater, and with "Five Guys Named Moe" ensconced there, what would Rocco Landesman do?


British Air Buys 20% Of USAir
British Airways has invested $300 million to buy a 20 percent stake in USAir, the companies said yesterday.
The announcement came just a month after the companies had withdrawn a plan for combined operations in the face of objections from United States carriers and the Transportation Department.
While the two airlines said they thought the new plan addressed the concerns that caused the Transportation Department to object to the old deal, the announcement of the new one brought immediate criticism from USAir's competitors.


U.N. Inspectors Fly to Iraq To Destroy Chemical Arms
After a standoff with Baghdad and a week of United States attacks on Iraq, a team of United Nations weapons inspectors arrived in the Iraqi capital today.
Iraq's treatment of the inspectors is being watched as an important test of whether the Government of President Saddam Hussein was sincere about changing its attitude toward the United Nations and the West.


Abroad at Home; The Clinton Doctrine?
The classic reason for the use of American military force has been to protect our vital interests.
In one pregnant sentence of his Inaugural Address, President Clinton added another.
"When our vital interests are challenged," he said,
"or the will and conscience of the international community is defied,
we will act, with peaceful diplomacy whenever possible, with force when necessary." (Emphasis added.)


Eric R. Sumner, 68, An Engineer, Is Dead
Eric R. Sumner, a former vice president of A.T.&amp; T Bell Laboratories, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 68.
He died of heart failure, said Robert Ford, a spokesman for A.T.&amp; T.


Science Gets Its Chance to Dazzle
WITH the hoopla of a circus or a new amusement park, New Jersey is opening its first major science museum on Sunday, an extravaganza that provides a great deal of family fun, and even a bit of science.
The museum, called Liberty Science Center, rises like a version of Tomorrowland out of the marshes of Liberty State Park, just across the harbor from lower Manhattan.
It features the world's largest Omnimax theater, with a domed screen eight stories high.
It has a continuous laser show.
It has a mirror maze and a touch tunnel, a black maze you crawl through using only your sense of touch to guide you.
It has an insect museum with live insects like carpenter ants, honeybees, tarantulas and giant cockroaches, some of which you can hold and pet.
It has science demonstrations on stages set up on each floor.
It has an auditorium where science shows will be performed each hour.
And it has discovery rooms, where serious science students can explore subjects in depth and, the museum directors hope, in a peaceful environment.


Diner's Journal
Lafayette Tries Again
Lafayette, the French restaurant in the Drake Hotel, at 65 East 56th Street in Manhattan, has experienced unsettling times recently, going through three chefs with different cooking styles in three years, then closing for four months before reopening in November.
Understandably, customers have been confused.
The latest attempt to resuscitate the former four-star establishment is in the hands of John DeLeo, who helped open the successful American grill called Zoe in SoHo.
Based on a recent sampling of his ambitious menu, he is off to a spirited start.


DPL Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-8  PESSIMISM ABOUT BOSNIA TALKS
The Secretary of State said he doubted that the international mediation effort to end the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina would succeed.
His spokesman pointed to two obstacles: the parties engaged in the Geneva-based talks have broken their agreements in the past, and the fighting and atrocities have been "so horrible" that it is very difficult to bring the parties together.
A1  Croats in a Bosnian town are using 240 Serbs as bargaining chips.
A7


Editorial Notebook; Old News from Albany
Here's an educated guess from a former Albany resident: Many people who work in New York's state capital
still
don't understand why two legislators apologized to an Assemblywoman who complained of sexual harassment.
I can hear them now, the Albany regulars, asking each other: Apologize?
What for?
Those two guys were just kidding around, flirting.
Where's the harm?
Sometimes there's no harm in a little badinage among colleagues.
But more often there's real damage -- enough so that women emboldened by cases like Anita Hill's are finally stepping forward.
Assemblywoman Earlene Hill of Hempstead so shamed her male colleagues that they identified themselves -- even though she hadn't named them -- and confessed to their behavior.


Inland Steel Industries reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Review/Theater; Revised 'Last Yankee,' With Focus on Wives
In "The Last Yankee" a major playwright, Arthur Miller, is writing in a minor key.
More anecdotal than dramatic, the play, at the Manhattan Theater Club, is enhanced by the contribution of the cast, under the direction of John Tillinger.
Basically the work is an overlapping slice of life about two disparate wives in contrasting but equally disastrous marriages.
They are driven to the same end: a severe state of depression.
Each case is in the nature of a case history, with the playwright diagnosing the illness and offering a litany of causes without fully investigating the roots of the shared problem or the marriages themselves.
In each story, the husband would seem to bear much of the responsibility for his wife's depression.
In an earlier, 20-minute version of the play at the Ensemble Studio Theater, the emphasis was on the husbands, a prosperous local businessman and a carpenter living below his social class.
They met in the waiting room of a state mental hospital and gradually revealed their differences (and the similarity of their wives' ailments).
The expanded version, which opened last night and will be presented in a different production in London next week, runs barely more than one hour.
It abbreviates the waiting room scene and reduces the dramatic buildup of the male conflict.
Then it shifts to the women, who are nervously postponing the moment they will face their husbands.


Cray Research reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Killing's Wake, Bronx Residents Debate Men's Shelter
Hours before mourners filed past the coffin of Doll Johnson, the 80-year-old Bronx woman who was bludgeoned to death on Sunday, her community demanded that the city close the overcrowded shelter where the suspect in her killing lived.
Meeting yesterday at the offices of Community Board 3 in Morrisania, more than 50 residents, elected officials and representatives of community organizations called for the city to balance concern for the neighborhood's welfare with its obligation to help the homeless men who sleep on the crowded drill floor at night and loiter on nearby streets by day.
Neighborhood residents said that while they feel compassion for the less fortunate, the city has betrayed them and taken advantage of their initial wary acceptance of the shelter.


Anti-Abortion Movement Prepares to Battle Clinton
These are grim days for the anti-abortion movement.
For the first time in 12 years, opponents of legalized abortion do not have a sympathetic President in the White House.
Many feel badly let down by a conservative Supreme Court.
Perhaps most of all, they are fighting the idea that the courts and the political system reached a lasting consensus on abortion with the court cases and election of 1992, and that their side lost.
Presidential Action
There is no surer sign of the altered political climate than President Clinton's resolve to use executive orders to reverse some important victories the anti-abortion forces won under Republican rule.
This turnaround will come only days after George Bush issued a proclamation declaring last Sunday National Sanctity of Human Life Day to "call attention to the tragedy of abortion."


Art in Review
Andy Warhol
Gagosian Gallery  136 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through Jan. 30
Western culture tends to give special attention to an artist's last works, as if they couldn't help but yield crucial secrets or crown a career.
Yet the paintings and silk screens done by Andy Warhol in the three years before his death in 1987 at the age of 57 provide no real sense of valedictory closure, nor do they refine in any important way our view of the artist's previous work.


From Children's Savings, Neediest Are Enriched
The words may be clumsily scrawled, waving and wiggling their way across the thickly lined paper.
But the sentiments expressed in these letters to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund are often well formed.
The authors are children who are taking their first steps toward assuming responsibility for the less fortunate in their society.
"I'm Alessandro Presti," read one letter to the fund.
"I'm 7 years old and I live in Brooklyn. For Christmas my grandmother gave me $100, and I would like to share it with a child who needs it."


Art in Review
Paul McMahon
Muranushi-Lederman Productions  426 Broome Street  SoHo  Through tomorrow  Zand Projects  38 King Street  SoHo  Through Feb. 13
Paul McMahon's irreverent, polymorphous art has been a largely invisible fixture on the art scene for more than a decade.
Known primarily to his fellow artists, and now being rediscovered by a younger generation of art dealers, Mr.
McMahon has exhibited infrequently and produced objects intermittently, taking time off to work as a performance artist and a punk-rock musician and songwriter.
Along the way, he has written a book of potato jokes and invented a small cat toy called the mock mouse.


Amdahl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


The Mets in 1993? Get a Second Opinion
There is at once blind denial and blunt honesty about the 1992 season.
Forget it, the Mets tell themselves one moment.
Never forget it, they say to themselves in the next breath.
It is one very confused self-help clinic out at Shea Stadium these days.
"I just won't dwell on it anymore, and I have suggested to our players and manager that they do likewise," Al Harazin, the general manager of the Mets, said yesterday of 1992's 72-90 epic in underachievement.
"It happened. It's done. I see no point in beating ourselves up about it anymore."


It Hurts When You Say 1992
Six Mets who underwent surgery during or after last season:
BOBBY BONILLA Sept. 17: Torn bicep tendon in right shoulder reattached; labral tear repaired.


BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB CO. (N)
The General Electric Company's earnings of $1.34 billion for the fourth quarter of 1992, up 6 percent from a year earlier, were within the range of analysts' predictions, althought toward the lower end of the range.
John F. Welch Jr, the company's chairman, said G.E.'s level of profitability "is particularly rewarding in light of slow growth in the United States and around the world." Mr.
Welch said the profits were produced by "strong, double-digit earnings increases" at its financial services, power generation and medical instruments operations.


9 Orchestras Face a Strike By Musicians
The freelance musicians who make up nine of New York City's orchestras might strike at midnight if an agreement is not reached in contract negotiations that begin today at 2 P.M., a spokeswoman for Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians said yesterday.
The musicians' contract expired on Sept. 8, and they have been performing on an extension that expires tomorrow.
The nine orchestras, which are negotiating as a consortium, are the American Composers Orchestra, the American Symphony Orchestra, the Brooklyn Philharmonic, the Little Orchestra Society, the Opera Orchestra of New York, the Riverside Symphony, the New York Chamber Symphony of the 92d Street Y, the New York Pops and the New York City Symphony.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
3.565
4.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.97
2.99
3.78
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.09
3.11
3.88
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.20
6.25
6.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.30
7.33
7.71
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.33
8.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.34
6.33
6.65
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


SETTLING IN: The Pentagon; Aspin Moves In With Much Unsettled
The mundane collided with the sublime at the Pentagon today as Defense Secretary Les Aspin and his staff began moving into their new quarters and immediately faced issues ranging from combat in Iraq to jockeying over Pentagon parking spaces.
Unlike most of President Clinton's incoming Cabinet secretaries, Mr.
Aspin, a former Pentagon analyst and chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, is no stranger to the department he now heads.
Senior aides said that Mr.
Aspin would soon give Mr.
Clinton a reorganization plan for the civilian side of the agency.


Pet Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Film; Bucharest Mavericks In Love
"The Oak" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 1, 1992.
The film (in Romanian with English subtitles) opens today at Lincoln Plaza Cinemas, Broadway and 63d Street.
"The Oak" evokes a world that is completely alien to contemporary American experience.
Though sometimes baffling, the film is never boring.
To feel your way through it is like the exploration of a house of horrors in an amusement park in space.
You can't be sure which way is up.


Athens Journal; Coping With a Rumor That Could Be Ruinous
The streets are clean, the fences mended and the leaves raked on the lawns of the Greek Revival homes that line the historic district here.
Not surprisingly, residents of Athens, a city of 17,000 people in north-central Alabama, take the notion of civic responsibility seriously.
Even Athenians have their faults, though.
"This town's famous for rumors," said Sonny Turner, editor of The News Courier, the local paper.


Garbage Trucks Reported Stolen
A dozen New York City garbage trucks have been stolen in the last five months, the Sanitation Department said yesterday.
Anne Canty, the department's director of public affairs, said yesterday that 11 of the Sanitation Department's fleet of 2,000 trucks, costing $110,000 apiece, were still missing.
But the 12th stolen truck was recovered when sanitation workers stopped a theft in Brooklyn last month, she said, adding that a suspect was arrested in that case.


TEXACO INC. (N)
Texaco Inc. said its operating results in the fourth quarter were 41 percent better than last year's, though after special items its performance was worse.
For the year, operating results were down slightly, because recession softened demand for refined products and the price of oil was substantially lower than the year earlier, when the Perisan Gulf war pushed up prices.
After special charges, net income dropped nearly 45 percent for the year.
James W. Kinnear, Texaco's president and chief executive, said that "in light of this difficult business environment, we are continuing to place special emphasis on improving productivity, maintaining operational competitiveness and strengthening our financial position. In 1992, as compared to our plan, we realized cash savings of approximately $500 million from reductions in oeprating and overhead expenses."


Review/Dance; Flamenco 'Dona Flor And Her 2 Husbands'
"Flor" is probably one of the most imaginatively staged dance events ever presented at the Joyce Theater.
The performers are likable and the energy level high.
But the full-evening work, presented by the Zorongo Flamenco Dance Theater on Tuesday night, is essentially dance for those who think of "Tony 'n' Tina's Wedding" as fulfilling theater.
Choreographed and directed by Susana di Palma, the founder of Zorongo, "Flor" retells Jorge Amado's "Dona Flor and Her Two Husbands." The evening opens with the 13-member company dancing, singing and laughing in a small space near the audience that is usually used for music ensembles.
When the irresistible Vadinho, Flor's first husband, drops dead, the action moves to the stage and into a set that serves as Flor's bedroom, her cooking school and a cafe.


SETTLING IN: The Democratic Party; Democrats Get a New Chairman, and a Warning
Still reveling in self-congratulation, Democrats elected a new party chairman, David C. Wilhelm, today, but they also received a stern warning that the November election results should not be taken as a mandate for governing.
"You all know that Bill Clinton is enormously popular," said Stan Greenberg, the party's poll taker.
"Just remember, George Bush was enormously popular."


Rose Says He Still Gambles
PETE ROSE, banned for life from baseball in 1989 because he was gambling on the game, said he was gambling again, The Cincinnati Post reported yesterday.
"I don't do illegal gambling anymore," Rose was quoted as saying.
"But I'm not going to sit here and tell you I don't gamble anymore, because I'd be lying. I went to the Kentucky Derby last year, and if people think I'm going to the Kentucky Derby to watch the horses, I can go to the farm to watch the horses.


Croats Holding 240 Serbs in a Bosnia Village
Disregarding calls by Red Cross and United Nations officials for their release, the Croats who control this remote village are holding about 240 Serbian women, children and elderly people hostage.
The detainees are among 840 or so Serbian civilians whom the Croats refuse to free from this area despite a blanket prisoner-release deal signed Oct. 1 by leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina's Serbs, Croats and Muslims.


The Art Market; New Mood at Antiques Show
COMPETITION is healthy.
At least it seems to have made a difference at this year's Winter Antiques Show, which opens to the public tomorrow at the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan and runs through Jan. 31.
For most of its 39 years, the event has been something of an institution on the antiques circuit, but in recent seasons this decidedly American show had become overridden with boring brown furniture, banal objects and works of dubious provenance.
Then the arrival of the fall International Antiques Show at the armory four years ago changed things.
And for the better.
For starters, the quality controls at the Winter Antiques Show became stricter.
They had to.
Since the International Show is vetted, a practice common in Europe but still relatively new in the United States, the Winter Show felt it had to follow.
Dealers at the Winter Show have always been required to offer customers a certificate of authenticity for every purchase, but this year, in addition to the guarantees, a committee made up of more than 70 dealers, scholars and art experts toured the armory, reviewing the objects in every booth.
Anything they found questionable was removed.


Bear Stearns Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mayor's Film Office Should Go After Productions for New York
To the Editor:
The appointment of Richard Brick as director of Mayor David N. Dinkins's Office of Film, Theater and Broadcasting is welcome, with the city in need of every possible source of revenue.
Mr.
Brick needs support from everyone connected with the New York film industry.
With that support there are many ways this city can regain its pre-eminent position in film and television production.


LIONEL CLOSES A MANHATTAN STORE AS IT STREAMLINES
The Lionel Corporation closed its Kiddie City toy store on Broadway at 79th Street in Manhattan this week under its plan to close 40 stores and two regional distribution centers by the end of February.
Lionel, which has operated under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection since June 1991, declined to discuss its plans beyond stating that after it closes the stores and centers, it will operate 29 stores in markets that include Philadelphia and central New Jersey.
The list omitted New York, where two other Kiddie City stores remain open in Manhattan, suggesting that those stores will close as well.
Last year, the company, based in Edison, N.J., tried unsuccessfully to merge with another troubled toy retailer, Child World Inc.


Paris Journal; It's a Little Late, but Still, Bouquets for Louis XVI
With the French tricolor flying at full-staff as if to signal the Republic's official indifference to the occasion, about 5,000 true-blue royalists gathered in the Place de la Concorde this morning to commemorate the exact moment 200 years ago when King Louis XVI was beheaded.
In reality, though, the Government was far from indifferent.
Having organized sumptuous celebrations on July 14, 1989, to mark the bicentenary of the storming of the Bastille, it at first tried to ban a meeting that could only remind people of the Reign of Terror, which followed the Revolution.


Robert W. Larkin, 61, A Dance Press Agent
Robert W. Larkin, a dance and theatrical press agent, died on Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 61 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of respiratory complications from AIDS, said his brother, John, of Summit, N.J.


McCann Healthcare Is Reorganizing
Keeping up with a trend, McCann Healthcare Advertising in Chicago said yesterday that it would reorganize into two specialized divisions, to focus on consumer health-care communications and global medical advertising.
Arthur R. Tauder, senior vice president of planning and business development at McCann-Erickson Worldwide, said, "Since health-care and pharmaceutical advertising is expanding rapidly, we've done what is needed to better concentrate on those opportunities."


Bowater Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Tijuana Flood Victims In a Political Bog, Too
The pounding rains have ended and the floodwaters have begun to recede, and after two weeks of storms that left at least 28 people dead and more than 5,000 homeless, the sun has begun slowly to dry this border city.
But as Tijuana digs out from the mud and debris, the slow pace of official relief efforts has focused attention on a continuing political squall between President Carlos Salinas de Gortari and the country's most independent state governor.


A Bit of Dissonance Over Pavarotti's Copycat Art
It's not even about music.
Luciano Pavarotti's latest troubles are about painting.
Just a week after he canceled performances with the Metropolitan Opera and other companies, saying his doctor had ordered him to begin a two-month weight-loss program, the 57-year-old tenor is being accused of profiting from three pictures copied from "My Adventures in Europe," a how-to-draw book written in 1972 by Mary E. Hicks, an artist who is now 87 and living on Social Security in La Veta, a small town near Pueblo, Colo.
Mr.
Pavarotti, who has said he always dreamed of being a professional artist, has painted as a hobby since 1978.
Twenty-two of his works have been reproduced and sold as "original" silk-screen prints at $2,200 to $2,500 per print, or $25,000 per set, and his art has been exhibited in New York, Tokyo, Washington and Cologne, Germany.
The paintings in his Washington exhibition were praised by The Washington Post, which called them "as exuberant and unstudied as his performances."


Nynex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Colleges; Its Good Deeds Aside, N.C.A.A. Is a Culprit
Bonnie Frankel has a cold, an "emotional cold," she thinks, from watching herself become a heroic symbol, so she probably won't jump into the swimming pool until tomorrow at the earliest.
Joan of Arc was burned for following her inner voice, so Frankel, who is not put off by the comparison, is willing to wait a few more days to get wet.
Bonnie Frankel is a 48-year-old senior at Loyola Marymount in Los Angeles.
She was unable to compete on the varsity track team because she had originally enrolled in college in 1962.
Under National Collegiate Athletic Association rules, the five-year period of eligibility at Division I schools begins the first day of enrollment.
Bonnie had dropped out of school in 1963, but by 1967 she was out of luck anyway.


Results Plus
COLLEGE BASKETBALL Duke Beats N.C.
State Sixth-ranked Duke defused North Carolina State's slowdown offense, and Grant Hill had 20 points as the Blue Devils whipped the Wolfpack (4-8 over all, 0-4 in the Atlantic Coast Conference), 92-56, last night in Durham, N.C.
Thomas Hill and Bobby Hurley each added 17 points for Duke (13-2, 3-2). (AP) Wake Forest 81, Georgia Tech 58: In Atlanta, Rodney Rogers and Randolph Childress sparked runs of 11-0 and 16-0 as Wake Forest built a commanding first-half lead and handed 16th-ranked Georgia Tech its third loss in a row.
Rogers scored 29 points and Childress 18 for the Demon Deacons (10-3, 2-2).
Tech fell to 9-4, 2-2. (AP) Utah 82, Hawaii 67: In Salt Lake City, Byron Wilson scored 24 points and led a surge that broke the game open as No. 22 Utah (12-2, 6-0) remained unbeaten in the Western Athletic Conference. (AP) N.B.A.
Bucks Edge Pacers Blue Edwards scored 27 points and Todd Day 24 as the Milwaukee Bucks ended their losing streak at seven games with a 110-108 victory over Indiana at Indianapolis last night.
The Bucks didn't allow the Pacers a field goal after Sam Mitchell's jumper with 4 minutes 6 seconds left tied the game at 103-103. (AP) Rockets 126, Pistons 120: Hakeem Olajuwon celebrated his 30th birthday with 38 points and helped host Houston win its seventh consecutive game.
Joe Dumars scored 32 points for the Pistons. (AP) Nuggets 110, Mavericks 94: Host Dallas, with its best chance of the season to win consecutive games, couldn't pull it off as Denver snapped a 13-game road losing streak.
Chris Jackson scored 24 points, helping to send the Mavericks to their 31st loss in 34 games.
The Nuggets got 19 points from Reggie Williams and 16 rebounds from LaPhonso Ellis. (AP) N.H.L.
Red Wings Rally Again  Jimmy Carson and Paul Ysebaert scored back-to-back goals late in the second period to lead the Red Wings to a 5-3 comeback victory over the St.
Louis Blues last night in Detroit.
The Wings are unbeaten in their last five games (4-0-1). (AP) Whalers 4, Sharks 2: Expansion is all that is keeping the Hartford Whalers from hitting incredible depths.
The San Jose Sharks have nothing to keep them afloat.
Terry Yake had a goal and an assist as the Whalers won the home game, ending a five-game losing streak and raising their record to 7-0-0 against expansion teams this season.
Dean Evason scored both goals for the Sharks. (AP) North Stars 7, Senators 2: Russ Courtnall scored his third career hat trick, giving him nine goals in his last nine games as Minnesota beat Ottawa in Bloomington, Minn. (AP) Blackhawks 6, Capitals 2: Stephane Matteau had two goals for the first time in two years as host Chicago shut down Washington's power-play game and beat the Capitals.
With the victory, the Blackhawks remained 4 points ahead of second-place Detroit in the N.H.L.'s Norris Division. (AP) Bruins 5, Flyers 4: Dave Reid's second goal of the game, with 8 minutes 43 seconds remaining, lifted Boston over host Philadelphia.
Boston won for just the second time in its last 10 road games (2-7-1) and is 4-1-1 in its last six games overall.
Philadelphia dropped its second staight game. (AP)


Martin Marietta reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about fashions at the inaugural events referred incorrectly to a designer whose clothes were taken to Washington by Paige Powell.
He is Shawn Ray Fons.


Figure Skating; Reunited U.S. Pair Captures Crown
Calla Urbanski didn't mean to call him a toad.
Rocky Marval was sorry he didn't practice his triples.


Harry L. Smith; Civic Leader, 84
Harry L. Smith, a longtime Brooklyn civic leader, died on Tuesday at his home in Coney Island.
He was 84.
Mr.
Smith died of complications from diabetes, said a son, Arnold J. Smith, of Brooklyn.


CHRONICLE
There's the Rhodes scholar connection, the Yale connection, the Little Rock connection.
And now, it seems, there's also a Carnegie foundation connection that leads right to the top of the Clinton Administration.
The foundation, known formally as the Carnegie Corporation of New York, is losing 3 of its 17 trustees to President Clinton's Cabinet or other high posts.
WARREN M. CHRISTOPHER, until now chairman of the foundation, is now Secretary of State; ROBERT E. RUBIN, chairman of the its finance committee, was chosen to be chairman of the National Economic Council, and DONNA E. SHALALA is Secretary of Health and Human Services.


CLINTON CANCELS BAIRD NOMINATION FOR JUSTICE DEPT.
President Clinton said early this morning that he was withdrawing the nomination of Zoe Baird as Attorney General.
The announcement came after a day of steadily mounting public and political opposition had turned the nomination into Mr.
Clinton's first political test on his first day in office.
A growing number of influential Senators began voicing opposition to her appointment on Thursday and urged Mr.
Clinton to withdraw it.
Surprised by Reaction
It was not clear whether the new President had made any attempt to save the nomination.
But the White House made the unusual move of issuing a statement at about 1:30 this morning that her name was being withdrawn.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League


Sara Lee Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Arco Chemical Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Critic's Notebook; Can Showy Gestures Fill In the Blanks?
WHEN Demi Moore paces furiously while talking into a cordless telephone during "A Few Good Men," she takes a big step forward in the name of busy behavior.
Aficionados of showy, meaningless gestures have long appreciated both the purposeful walk and the commanding phone call, even before technological progress made it possible for these two maneuvers to be combined into such mega-bluster.
Now the free-range phone caller is sure to become a visual commonplace, just like the important executive who marches down the hall barking instructions to his briefcase-toting secretary.
Conventional film-making wisdom insists that a mobile executive or a stalking courtroom lawyer has much more impact than one who is sitting still.


Raytheon Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reconsider Aliens Law in Light of Baird Case
To the Editor:
The problem faced by Zoe Baird, Bill Clinton's nominee for Attorney General, illustrates a fundamental defect in our immigration laws.
Ms.
Baird and her husband are distinguished lawyers who have a 3-year-old child.
It was necessary for them to employ household workers to care for him while the parents pursued their careers.
They employed undocumented foreign workers, whom they assisted in the first steps of their application for permanent residence, a process that takes years.


Popeye's Is Moved To Fitzgerald
America's Favorite Chicken yesterday named Fitzgerald &amp; Company in Atlanta to handle the national advertising account for its Popeye's Famous Fried Chicken and Biscuits chain.
The account, with billings estimated to exceed $5 million, was previously handled by Garfield, Linn &amp; Company in Chicago.
Frank Belatti, chairman and chief executive of America's Favorite Chicken, said that Fitzgerald had been awarded the account after an informal review of Atlanta-based shops, though he declined to identify the other contenders.
He added that the principal media-buying agencies for Popeye's -- Garfield, Linn; Berry-Brown Advertising in Dallas; Hambright Calcagno &amp; Downing in Alexandria, Va., and Kupper Parker Communications in St.
Louis -- would continue handling those duties.


Sounds Around Town
Go-Go Is Back
Trouble Funk, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
One of the best dance bands in America comes to town with a great price, $5.
The band, easily the most accomplished in Washington's go-go sound, was poised to make it big in the mid-1980's.
The record company push died out, but that doesn't mean the music or the band did.
Sets tonight are 8:30 and 11:30 P.M. ; cover charge: $5.
New Haiti Sounds
Zin, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, South Village, (212) 243-5062.
Haitian music has a whole flock of new bands, and Zin is one of the best.
It's a new sound, with synthesized gloss; the driving rhythms make it some of the best Caribbean music to come out of New York.
Show times tonight are at 11 P.M. and 1 A.M.; cover charge: $16; two-drink minimum at tables.
Southwestern Sax
Bobby Watson, Bradley's, 70 University Place, at 10th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
Bobby Watson improvises on alto saxophone with a dry Southwestern sound; conversant with be-bop, he's also interested in more modern harmonies.
He's one of the best composers around.
He will be joined by James Williams on piano and David Williams on bass, his equals on their instruments.
Shows through Sunday at 10 P.M., midnight and 2 A.M.; cover charge: $15; minimum, $8.


Art in Review
David Hockney
Andre Emmerich Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Feb. 13
David Hockney's current show is coyly titled "Some Very Recent Paintings." But "A Lot of . . ." would be more like it.
The 26 canvases, bubbling with bright, overlighted shapes that billow and snap back and forth in space, teeming with sprightly textures and patterns, seem to have been made in a single, extended work session.
Their assembly-line similarity increases the sense of numbers.


Beirut Chief Says Hostage-Taking And Civil War Are Over for Good
Signaling what he termed the emergence of "a Lebanon of peace and reconstruction," Prime Minister Rafik al-Hariri said today that he wanted to assure the world that 15 years of civil war in his country "are over for good, and that the kidnapping of foreign nationals and hijacking of aircraft are something of the past."
In an interview, Mr.
Hariri expressed the hope that the Clinton Administration would lift a seven-year-old ban on the travel of American citizens to Lebanon and on flights to New York by Lebanon's national airline.
"These American measures are hurting Lebanon as our country embarks on an era of peace and reconstruction," he said.


Computer Associates International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW POLICY FOR NEW YORK CITY SHELTERS
The Cuomo administration said that it would begin sending state mental health workers into New York City homeless shelters to evaluate mentally ill residents and commit those deemed dangerous to state mental hospitals, possibly against their will.
The policy was ordered after a mentally ill homeless man was charged in the bludgeoning death of an 80-year-old woman in the Bronx.
A1.
SMALL STEP TO AID OVERWHELMED SYSTEM
In moving to identify and hospitalize violent mentally ill residents of New York City shelters, state officials are taking a small step to improve coordination in a fragmented, overwhelmed mental health system.
News analysis, B2.
Community of slain Bronx woman calls for closing of shelter where accused murderer lived.
B2.
NEW YORK CITY  STUDY FAULTS 3 AGENCIES
The Citizens Budget Commission, a nonprofit organization financed by businesses, released a study that criticized several New York City agencies.
The study contends that New York City's firefighters spend too much time in firehouses, called for the elimination of city-provided garbage pickup and said the city had been slow to hire civilians to replace police officers now doing some desk jobs.
B3.
PROSECUTOR'S OFFICE CHASTISED
A judge, citing a "pattern of inaction, ineptitude and indolence, has thrown out drug-dealing charges against a man after Brooklyn prosecutors failed to produce him for trial for nearly three years because they did not know he was imprisoned in another drug case handled by their colleagues. B3.  DISPUTE OVER RIGHTS TO 'RITE OF SPRING'
In the Walt Disney film "Fantasia," music from Igor Stravinsky's "Rite of Spring" is played during the creation of the universe, the demise of the dinosaurs and the birth of the modern world.
Now comes the one thing that seems to have been left out: a lawsuit.
B3.
Sanitation Department reports theft of a dozen trucks over five months.
B4.
REGION
FISCAL GUARDIAN FOR KATIE BEERS?
The Suffolk County Attorney should take charge of Katie Beers's financial affairs, including any money she may receive from movie deals, Katie's mother, Marilyn, said.
Miss Beers is seeking to regain custody of Katie, who was held captive for 16 days.
B5.
CHANGES FOR SOUTH NORWALK STATION
For years, commuters have said the Metro-North station in Norwalk, Conn., was unsafe.
Now the city says it is about to embark on an $8.6 million plan to transform a commuter's nightmare with a 600-car parking garage and an elaborate electronic security system.
B5.
RELEASED RAPIST ORDERED INTO HOSPITAL
A New Jersey judge ordered the temporary commitment of a released rapist to a hospital.
Psychiatric reports said that the man was likely to strike again within a month of his release and would probably kill his victim.
B5.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B5  Neediest Cases B3  Chronicle B4


Danger of Mentally Ill Homeless To Be Re-evaluated in New York
The Cuomo administration said yesterday that it would begin sending state mental health workers into New York City's homeless shelters in an effort to identify residents who are dangerously mentally ill and place them in state mental hospitals, in some cases against their will.
The policy, which was ordered by the State Mental Health Commissioner, Dr.
Richard C. Surles, came in response to the case of a mentally ill homeless man who drifted in and out of homeless shelters and was charged with bludgeoning an 80-year-old Bronx woman to death on Sunday near the shelter where he sometimes lived.


SETTLING IN: The Fashion Scene; A Blue Hat Has Critics Wondering
Pity Hillary Clinton.
A woman who never put fashion high on her list of priorities is being criticized left and right for what she has been wearing for the inaugural festivities this week.
The main target: the hat.
A blue velour number with a turned-back brim that some say made her look like a chipmunk.
People kept wondering why she didn't at least take it off when she removed her matching coat.
Maybe there was no time to get her hair into shape since it seemed to be just pulled back into a tail under the hat.
Or maybe she liked it.
The designer did.


No Headline
"Mr. President, I wanted to tell you I was so excited when I received my call. And I wanted to call my parents. But they aren't talking to me for the last 11 years because I'm a lesbian. I hope your Administration will change that. " -- CHRIS HENRY, one of 3,000 visitors at President Clinton's open house.  [ A1:4. ]


CHRONICLE
President FRANCOIS MITTERRAND has made JEAN-CLAUDE KILLY, the former Olympic ski champion, a commander of the Legion of Honor, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
"We don't have in each generation many champions of your caliber," Mr.
Mitterrand said as he hung the sash and medallion around the skier's neck at ceremonies in Paris on Wednesday.


Jenny Craig reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


8 Broadway Theaters Join Alliance to Cut Ticket Costs
A major expansion of the Broadway Alliance, the two-year-old plan to produce plays at low cost to bring reduced ticket prices to Broadway's darkened theaters, was announced yesterday by Broadway's theater owners and the major theatrical unions.
The plan, which has so far yielded three plays, none of which has been successful, has been restricted to three of Broadway's often unoccupied theaters, the Belasco, the Nederlander and the Walter Kerr.
Yesterday the number of theaters participating in the plan was expanded to 11 with the addition of the Ambassador, the Brooks Atkinson, the Cort, the John Golden, the Longacre, the Lyceum, the Eugene O'Neill and the Neil Simon.


SETTLING IN: Presidential Appointees; 14 Major Clinton Nominees Are Confirmed by Senate
The Senate today approved 14 major appointments by President Clinton, including Ronald H. Brown as Commerce Secretary after he agreed to sever all ties to his former law firm and to remove himself from all decisions that might give the appearance of a conflict of interest.
Among the others confirmed today were Donna E. Shalala as Secretary of Health and Human Services, Robert B. Reich as Labor Secretary, Federico F. Pena as Transportation Secretary and Leon E. Panetta as director of the Office of Management and Budget.


Joseph A. Albertson, 86, Creator Of 651-Store Supermarket Chain
Joseph A. Albertson, who took a chance on an Idaho grocery store more than half a century ago and parlayed it into one of the nation's largest supermarket chains, died Wednesday night at his home in Boise.
He was 86.
The company he created, Albertson's Inc., based in Boise, said only that he had died after a long illness.


The Spoken Word
ARCHITECTURAL TALK, Transit Museum, Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights.
An illustrated talk about Squire Vickers, the chief architect of the New York City subways from 1906 to 1942, given by Elisabeth Kashey, a co-director of the Shepherd Gallery in Manhattan.
Sunday at 1 P.M.
Admission: $6; $3 for members.
Information: (718) 330-5839.
FOOD LECTURE, Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street.
"Food for the Belly and the Spirit: Spring Rolls and Other New Year's Foods," a lecture by Barbara Tropp, author of "China Moon Cookbook." Today at 6:30 P.M.
Admission: $10; $7 for members.
Information: (212) 517-6397 or (212) 517-2742.


Good, Yes, but Against the Bulls, Not Ready for Prime Time
The night began with eight-time Olympic gold medalist Carl Lewis delivering the national anthem off key.
If that wasn't ugly enough, the Nets, big-time complainers about how they don't get enough respect, blew a big-time opportunity to get some by losing to the Chicago Bulls in front of a packed house.
A five-game winning streak.
A sell-out crowd of 20,049 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
A great Chicago team.
A perfect time to convince the fans that maybe the Nets are for real.
A 107-94 loss.
The Nets are still a good team.
But the Bulls tonight showed just how far the Nets have to go to become a very good team.


McDonnell's Earnings Off 61.9% in '92
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said today that its earnings fell 61.9 percent in 1992, as a result of heavy losses from its C-17 cargo plane and continued declines in its commercial aircraft division.
These results excluded the effects of a one-time accounting change that gave the company a net loss for the year.
Moreover, the company's fourth-quarter earnings, also excluding the one-time accounting change, declined 59.2 percent.


Review/Photography; Making Industrial Buildings Look Like Butterflies
With their deadpan photographs of such industrial structures as cooling towers, natural-gas storage tanks and factory facades, Bernd and Hilla Becher have for more than 30 years exercised a great influence on contemporary photography.
Three years ago, an extensive retrospective of work by the German couple was held at the Dia Center for the Arts in Chelsea; now a show at the Sonnabend Gallery in SoHo offers updated versions of some of their familiar grid works, as well as a selection of recent single-frame pictures.
In carrying out their distinctive brand of industrial archeology, the Bechers rely on a clearly defined method.
They photograph their subjects in as neutral a way as possible, usually recording them head on with a large-format camera.
The pictures are often taken on overcast days, reducing the possibility of expressive variations in lighting; the resulting images are presented in grids that in some cases include 20 or more black-and-white prints.


Valero Natural Gas Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Stock Picks Plagued by Leaks
Brokerage firms try hard to guard against the leaking of information about coming stock picks.
But trading on such leaks, known as "front running" in the securities business, appears to be a recurring problem at Raymond James &amp; Associates, a high-profile and flourishing regional brokerage firm, according to internal company memorandums.
Front running is harmful to investors because it allows a select group of traders to exploit news that could lift or depress the price of a stock.
It would violate Securities and Exchange Commission disclosure rules if the trading took place in accounts of Raymond James's customers or employees, and it would violate Federal insider-trading laws if the leaks made their way to stock investors who trade outside the firm.


British Air Buys 20% Of USAir
British Airways has invested $300 million to buy a 20 percent stake in USAir, the companies said yesterday.
The announcement came just a month after the companies had withdrawn a plan for combined operations in the face of objections from United States carriers and the Transportation Department.
While the two airlines said they thought the new plan addressed the concerns that caused the Transportation Department to object to the old deal, the announcement of the new one brought immediate criticism from USAir's competitors.


On My Mind; What's in It for Us?
The ruler of a great power had shown kindness and friendship to a new nation.
So its leader wrote a letter of appreciation, and of his country's realities.
"Within our territories there are no mines either of gold or silver, and this young nation, just recovering from the waste and desolation of a long war, have not, as yet, had time to acquire riches by agriculture and commerce.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the inauguration of President Clinton referred incorrectly to the church where Mr.
Clinton attended a morning prayer service.
It is African Methodist Episcopal.


Total Petroleum (North America) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Costs of a Savings; Retirement Incentives Ease Strain on School Budgets at Expense of Continuity in Class
Eugene Frank's class was just wading into a discussion of Holden Caulfield and his relevance for modern teen-agers when the bell rang and Mr.
Frank had to say goodbye to his students -- forever.
After 35 years of teaching, Mr.
Frank abruptly retired last month along with 2,100 other seasoned teachers and principals throughout New York State who accepted a sweetened pension offer devised by the Legislature.


Parallel Course
These seemingly redundant fever lines illustrate a point: the run-up in the Nasdaq average to its first close above 700 yesterday is due not just to the well-publicized gains in a handful of stocks like Intel.
The Russell 2,000 index of smaller stocks, which excludes all the giants, has come in less than 3 percent behind the Nasdaq average since Oct. 1.


British Air Buys 20% Of USAir
British Airways has invested $300 million to buy a 20 percent stake in USAir, the companies said yesterday.
The announcement came just a month after the companies had withdrawn a plan for combined operations in the face of objections from United States carriers and the Transportation Department.
While the two airlines said they thought the new plan addressed the concerns that caused the Transportation Department to object to the old deal, the announcement of the new one brought immediate criticism from USAir's competitors.


Corrections
A news analysis article yesterday about the transfer of power in Washington described one of President Clinton's campaign pledges incorrectly in some editions.
He promised to cut the budget deficit in four years by half, not by one-quarter.


Robert W. Larkin, 61, A Dance Press Agent
Robert W. Larkin, a dance and theatrical press agent, died on Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 61 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of respiratory complications from AIDS, said his brother, John, of Summit, N.J.


Train Station Arouses Fears and a Plan to Allay Them
Lisa Zarkower has used the dilapidated railroad station in South Norwalk for more than two years, but she has never felt comfortable there.
"I carry Mace and park as close as I can to the train, and I still don't feel safe until I drive out of here," said Ms.
Zarkower, a video production manager from Norwalk who commutes to Manhattan.
"Fairfield is such a beautiful county, but this station is an absolute disgrace. It's the only bad one on the whole line."


COMPANY BRIEFS
GENERAL MOTORS CORP., Detroit, said its Oldsmobile division had cut prices on its compact Achieva by $1,300 and its Eighty-Eight Royale sedan by almost $3,000 to spur sales of its two newest models.
AMSOUTH BANCORP., Birmingham, Ala., definitively agreed to pay $93 million of stock for First National Bank of Clearwater, Fla., a unit of closely held Mickler Corp.


Three 'Baby Bells' Report Better 4th-Quarter Results
Three regional Bell telephone companies reported yesterday that their fourth-quarter results improved.
But year-to-year comparisons are difficult to make because of one-time charges for work-force reductions and large noncash charges to cover accounting changes involving retirement benefits.


Dismissing a Drug Charge, Judge Criticizes Brooklyn Prosecutors
A judge has thrown out drug-dealing charges against a man after Brooklyn prosecutors failed to produce him for trial for nearly three years because they did not know he was imprisoned in other drug cases handled by their colleagues.
The judge, Justice Lorraine Miller of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, called the case "an illustration of the distressingly frequent failure" of the Brooklyn District Attorney's office "to diligently prepare and prosecute cases, which has become a matter of great concern to members of the judiciary." She accused the office of a "persistent pattern of inaction, ineptitude and indolence."


U S West Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Service for Reginald Lewis
A memorial service for Reginald F. Lewis, the chairman and chief executive of TLC Beatrice International Holdings Inc., will be held on Monday at 11 A.M. at the Riverside Church, Riverside Drive and West 120th Street in Manhattan.
Mr.
Lewis died on Tuesday at age 50.


Bell Atlantic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


American Express Job
Directors of the American Express Company charged with finding a successor to James D. Robinson 3d as chief executive continued their mission yesterday, discussing options in secrecy.
It remained unclear whether the search committee had moved any closer to recommending that the board select an outsider, as some members favor, or backing Mr.
Robinson's apparent choice, Harvey Golub, the company's 53-year-old president.
Mr.
Golub is believed to have the support of at least 10 board members, a majority, and by company bylaws, all the votes he needs.


Market Place; Education Alternatives looks great, but read the fine print.
FEW things attract as much attention on Wall Street as soaring revenues.
So, when Education Alternatives, a school management and consulting company, reported that its third-quarter earnings jumped by some 900 percent, to more than $5 million, investors took notice.
Since early October, shares in Education Alternatives have more than doubled, closing yesterday at $23.75, up $2.50 in over-the-counter trading.


Kohl Seeks to Cut Benefits to Finance Aid to East
To find the $62.5 billion a year needed to rebuild the formerly Communist eastern part of Germany over the next 10 years, Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Government announced today that it plans to reduce unemployment and welfare benefits for the poor, cut tax breaks for the rich and put a new "solidarity surcharge" on corporate and income taxes in 1995.
The plan was immediately rejected by the opposition, labor unions and spokesmen for the poor, who all said it would deepen resentments between east and west.


Coaches Who Bred Success in 80's Need New Blueprint for 90's
The regular season ended less than a month ago and new coaches have emerged for Chicago, New England and probably New York.
Dave Wannstedt, Bill Parcells and maybe Dan Reeves will mean that the National Football League would have 11 new coaches in merely one year.
For Parcells with the Patriots and possibly Reeves with the Giants, the new, when scrubbed to the surface, is old and familiar.
Both were bold figures in the 1980's and both coached in a total of five Super Bowls.
Parcells won twice and Reeves lost three times.


Robert W. Larkin, 61, A Dance Press Agent
Robert W. Larkin, a dance and theatrical press agent, died on Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 61 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of respiratory complications from AIDS, said his brother, John, of Summit, N.J.


Two-Wheel Terrorists
To the Editor:
When are the New York City police going to enforce traffic rules against bicyclists?
Every day we see bicyclists disregard the most basic rules, going through red lights, traveling the wrong way on one-way streets or against traffic, riding on sidewalks.
They go at great speed through pedestrians, ignoring the pedestrian's right of way, causing many accidents and near-accidents.


Allegheny Power System reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mismanagement Cited In New York Agencies
The managements of the New York City Fire and Sanitation Departments have not kept up with the changing reality of their missions and are wasting tens of millions of dollars a year, a private group that monitors the city's budget contended yesterday.
In a study of four city agencies, which was met with skepticism by city officials yesterday, the group, the Citizens Budget Commission, said that firefighters spend too much time in firehouses, waiting to put out building fires that occur ever less frequently over time.
The commission also said it is wasteful to assign firefighters at equal staffing levels around the clock, even though fires occur primarily in the afternoons and early evenings.


Jackson Makes Some Strides In a 'One-Shot' Comeback Bid
BO JACKSON is preparing for one final comeback attempt with the White Sox.
He looked impressive in a workout yesterday in Chicago, fielding grounders, taking swings in a batting cage and running four 120-yard sprints in the carefully monitored time of 20 seconds a sprint.
"There's no limp, no pain, and the difference from last year is night and day," said Jackson, who did not play an inning last season after being fitted with an artificial left hip in April.


If Some Ignore Parcells, The Patriots Surely Don't
Twenty months after he suddenly quit the Super Bowl champion Giants, Bill Parcells returned to coaching today to take over the moribund New England Patriots.
The news conference to announce his return to football was more like a coronation, with Gov.
William Weld of Massachusetts on hand and batteries of cameras clicking and whirring in a hotel ballroom scene that would be the envy of any New York news media crowd.


In Russia, the Cult of Lenin Is Not Quite Dead


Pacific Telesis Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Critic's Notebook; A Matisse Encore With Picasso for Just a Week
The great Matisse retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art closed on Tuesday, and the city already seems a dimmer place.
But the museum has managed an encore.
It has put together, for just a week, a 20th-century-art version of the Dream Team.
John Elderfield, the curator who organized the retrospective, has arranged for a handful of important loans to stay through the end of the month so they can be exhibited with several of the museum's paintings by Picasso.
The result will go on view to the public in two galleries tomorrow: Matisse's "Blue Nude" (1907), "Le Luxe (I)" (1907), "Bathers With a Turtle"(1908), "Bathers by a River" (1909-16) and the first three of his "Back" sculptures, along with Picasso's "Two Nudes" (1906), "Les Demoiselles d'Avignon" (1907) and a watercolor, "Bathers in a Forest" (1908).
Almost every work is a landmark, and to have all of them together is to realize the extent to which these two artists, during a pivotal and intense period early in their careers, seemed to respond to each other and vie for pre-eminence.


CHRISTOPHER LEERY OF BOSNIA ACCORD
Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher said today that he doubted that the international mediation effort to end the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina would succeed, his spokesman said.
Mr.
Christopher's spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, said at the State Department briefing this morning that although the Clinton Administration generally supports the negotiations, Mr.
Christopher "expressed doubts about whether it can realistically be achieved, whether they can, in fact, find an agreement, find a solution that's peaceful that the parties would, in fact, agree to."


Words Will Have Their Own Sweet Way
To the Editor:
"Quixotic Grammarian" (letter, Jan. 1) by Louis Jay Herman states that Paul Roche, poet in residence at Centenary College in New Jersey, is "fighting a battle lost centuries ago" to insist on "I shall," rather than "I will," to express future action.


Rival Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Observer; The Generation Excess
The papers say a new generation has come to power.
It is tempting to smile at a pomposity.
Nowadays new generations come along more often than the Ninth Avenue bus.
It's inevitable that a few will wind up in power.
When it happens there is good talk about the regenerative effect of youth on a nation with tired blood.
Yet when these new generations come to power -- Kennedy in 1961, now Clinton -- power passes not to the young, but to the middle-aged.


Delay in Martin Marietta's Purchase of G.E. Unit
The Martin Marietta Corporation said yesterday that completion of its pending acquisition of the General Electric Company's Aerospace division had been delayed a month, partly because of Government antitrust concerns.
But the company said it was planning to complete the transaction by April 1.
Company officials said the Justice Department, which must evaluate the transaction on antitrust grounds, had made a second request for information.
They also said the $3.05 billion cost of the acquisition had forced a halt to the company's share buyback program and that it was uncertain when it would be resumed.


Chester Valley Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tax Breaks for Companies in Puerto Rico Don't Help Islanders; Repeal Is Dangerous
To the Editor:
"Trade Pact Threatens Puerto Rico's Economic Rise" (front page, Jan. 3) states that the North American Free Trade Agreement, if approved by Congress, will encourage United States companies in Puerto Rico to take advantage of even lower wages in Mexico.


Still Reeling From Hurricane, Louisiana Is Hit With Floods
Still recovering from the effects of Hurricane Andrew's destructive winds, low-lying areas of South Louisiana have been swamped by widespread flooding after heavy rains this week.
As a spokesman for the National Weather Service said today, "It's just simply rain, lots of rain, and it's building up in the tributaries."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.75
3.05
3.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.97
3.80
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.09
3.91
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.16
6.20
6.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.29
7.30
7.70
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.36
8.35
8.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.33
6.34
6.68
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CHRONICLE
In the White House not even a week, and already HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON will take a trip out of Washington.
On Tuesday, she will come to New York to pick up the Lewis Hine Award for Distinguished Service to Children and Youth, given by the National Child Labor Committee.
It will be presented to her by PAUL ALLAIRE, chairman and chief executive of the Xerox Corporation, at a reception in the Chemical Bank corporate headquarters on Park Avenue.
Then she is to attend a dinner the organization will give at the University Club.
Unless Mrs.
Clinton's schedule changes, the event will mark her first public appearance since a reception for 3,000 visitors in the White House on Thursday morning, said Lisa Caputo, her press secretary,


Beliefs
Once the phrase was uttered, it ran like a mantra around the table of guests on the "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour" on Wednesday.
The inaugural festivities, they repeated, were the nation's great "secular holiday."
It was a curious way to describe an event that has, at its core, the solemn administration of an oath on the Bible, preceded and followed by prayers and accompanied by hymns as well as patriotic music.


UST Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Too Many Specialists
To the Editor:
Only 12 percent or so of American physicians are generalists, the rest specialists.
In part this explains the high cost of medicine in America.


MOBIL CORP. (N)
Higher prices for natural gas and a successful cost-cutting program gave the Mobil Corporation an increase in earnings of more than 28 percent last quarter.
The bottom line also benefited from less spending on oil exploration, "reflecting a slower-paced and more selective program," the company said.
The company had earlier said that by the end of 1992 it would cut the salaried payroll in this country by 2,000, or 10 percent, but the actual cut was 2,300, or about 11 percent, compared with a year earlier.
Mobil also sold $900 million in assets.


Heller Financial reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Sixers Can't Handle Knicks' One-Two Punch
There are many nights when John Starks provides a spark for the Knicks.
Tonight, it was more like a bolt of lightning.
During the final 3 minutes 33 seconds of the third quarter, Starks scored 12 of his 32 points, keying a 14-4 run that stunned the Philadelphia 76ers and eventually sank them.
As a result, New York won its third consecutive game, an impressive 109-91 verdict at the Spectrum.


Sherwin-Williams reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TEXAS INSTRUMENTS INC. (N)
With strong sales in its semiconductor unit, Texas Instruments Inc.  reported a sharp swing in its fourth-quarter results yesterday.
Net income was $78 million, compared with a loss of $85 million a year earlier.
Revenues over all rose nearly 14 percent, with a gain of 20 percent in the semiconductor unit.
Income from operations was $113 million in the quarter, compared with a loss of $43 million in the period a year ago.
Jerry R. Junkins, chairman and chief executive, said Texas Instruments expected a double-digit increase in sales for the global chip market this year, with demand strongest in the United States and the Asia-Pacific region.


Croatia's Army Launches Attacks on Serb-Held Lands
Croatia's army launched attacks on territory held by breakaway Serbs near the port city of Zadar today in an action that threatens to destroy a year-old United Nations cease-fire for Croatia and sour peace talks on Bosnia and Herzegovina set to resume in Geneva on Saturday.
Today's attack is the most serious breach of the cease-fire in Croatia since 14,000 United Nations peacekeeping troops took up positions in the country last spring.


Fans and Devils Take Hats Off to Holik
As long as Bobby Holik kept his arms and his stick raised in celebration, the hats kept coming on all parts of the ice tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
It was only the second time such a scene occurred here this season and Holik was at center stage both times.
The celebration this time occurred with 2 minutes 39 seconds left in the first period, when 22-year-old Holik, a native of the Czech Republic, completed his second hat trick of the season to lead the Devils to a 6-2 triumph over the Montreal Canadiens.


Sealed Air Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


As Redgrave Teaches, The Audience Is a Jury
The body in question was Edward Plantagenet, Prince of Wales, slain in battle by Richard III.
Rebekah Slotnick, a senior in the drama department of Adelphi University on Long Island, was having trouble, as Edward's widow, dealing with the corpse.
Wouldn't the natural reaction be one of revulsion at the cold flesh?
Vanessa Redgrave had a couple of suggestions.
The British actress, who was at Adelphi on Wednesday to read from the works of Russian and Soviet writers, had agreed to conduct a master class for the drama department in the school's Olmsted Theater.
After canvassing the students to see what pieces they had prepared, she settled on a shortened version of Act I, Scene 2 from "Richard III," in which Richard overcomes the loathing of Lady Anne and persuades her to accept his ring.
For the next two hours, she pushed, pulled and picked at the scene, challenging her two actors to justify every intonation, every change of mood, every physical movement, with one goal in mind, to convince the audience beyond a reasonable doubt that Richard wins over Lady Anne.


SETTLING IN: Picking Up the Pieces; Baird's Consolation Prize: Her Old $507,000 Job
Hours after Zoe Baird withdrew her nomination for Attorney General, her employer, Aetna Life and Casualty, issued a statement of warm reaffirmation, saying it would gladly welcome her back as the company's top lawyer.
Ms.
Baird had been on leave from her $507,000-a-year job as a senior vice president at Aetna's Hartford headquarters pending her confirmation.


Review/Film; A Grandmaster Who Plays Cat and Mouse. Your Move.
Carl Schenkel's thriller, "Knight Moves," which opened yesterday, is a film that should do nothing but enhance the image of professional chess as a sport for lunatics.
Or as Peter Sanderson (Christopher Lambert), the main character, puts itdarkly in one of the film's many howlers, "Chess is a reflection of the world, and the world is violent."
Peter, who knits his eyebrows in a continual scowl and speaks in a tense, slightly raised voice, is an international grandmaster who may or may not be a serial killer.
In a confusing flashback, the film implies that he became unhinged as a boy after witnessing the gory suicide of his alcoholic mother.
The bulk of the story is a cat-and-mouse game that Peter (and perhaps an accomplice) may or may not be playing with the police, who are investigating the murders.
The mayhem coincides with an international tournament that takes place during an endless fake thunderstorm.
The killings are accompanied by furious explosions of lightning and thunder.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
ROOMS FOR HOMELESS AVAILABLE AND EMPTY
Despite an overflow of New York City's shelter system that has caused up to 175 families to sleep in city welfare offices on recent nights, hundreds of apartments that have been set aside as permanent housing for the homeless have been standing empty, often for months at a time.
According to the city's Housing Authority, there are currently 401 available apartments scattered across the five boroughs.
Page 1.  3 TAKEN FROM SHELTERS FOR MENTAL CARE
State officials said that they had inspected two New York City shelters for the homeless in an effort to identify residents who are dangerously mentally ill, and so far three residents of the Franklin Avenue shelter in the Bronx have been voluntarily taken to psychiatric emergency rooms.
The results of a visit to the Borden Avenue Shelter in Long Island City, Queens, are expected to be available on Monday.
The inspections are part of a new effort by state officials after a mentally ill man was charged with bludgeoning an 80-year-old woman to death near the Franklin Avenue shelter where he sometimes lived.
Page 25.


It Isn't Head Coach Reeves Just Yet
Dan Reeves remained on a golfing vacation in California yesterday, but he still seemed on course to become the next coach of the Giants.
The question was when, and there were mixed signals.
Apparently he will not be named today or tomorrow, because there are still details to clear up.
And apparently it will not be Monday, because Wellington Mara, the Giants' president and co-owner, and George Young, the vice president and general manager, must attend a National Football League owners' seminar in Atlanta on the new collective-bargaining agreement.


The Red Light Goes On, But It's Over the Exit
After undergoing surgery seven times on his left shoulder and twice each on his right shoulder and right knee, TIM KERR has finally surrendered.
Kerr, 33, retired Thursday night after failing to score a goal in 22 games with Hartford this season and being scratched in six of the Whalers' last eight games.
He will become an assistant coach of the Whalers' American Hockey League team in Springfield, Mass.


Lifetime's Work, Tested and True
IN the late afternoon of last Aug. 30, Eileen Egan, who has spent most of her almost 80 years in the advocacy and practice of nonviolence, was attacked in Manhattan.
Miss Egan, an editor of The Catholic Worker and a friend and biographer of Mother Teresa, was knocked down by a man she did not see.
Her hip and seven ribs were broken.
Her head was gashed.
She stayed at Lenox Hill Hospital for two weeks.
Even now, four months later, she has some trouble walking.


Gibson Stays With Mets
Left-handed relief pitcher PAUL GIBSON has signed a minor league contract with the Mets and will report to spring training with the team's other pitchers and catchers on Feb. 18.


Racial Pranks at Fraternity Bring Rebuke From College
The president of Rider College moved today to suspend some privileges of an all-white fraternity for a work night in which potential pledges were ordered to emulate a black stereotype and clean the fraternity house.
The move was intended to defuse growing anger and disbelief at the school, which prides itself on its minority recruitment and its Holocaust-Genocide Resource Center.


Golden Poultry Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING  Desormeaux Returns With Two Victories  Six weeks after being carried from the track bleeding and with multiple skull fractures, Kent Desormeaux, the nation's top-winning jockey with more than $14 million in 1992, returned yesterday in Arcadia, Calif., with winners in his first two races.
In typical, aggressive Desormeaux style, the 22-year-old Louisiana native rode the mare Shrewd Vixen to victory in the fifth race at Santa Anita.
Then in the $61,500 Ack Ack Handicap at a mile, he found a hole between two horses and directed the favorite, Slerp, to a $5.20 win payoff by a half length. (AP) GOLF  Mickelson and Hart in a Tie for Lead


Chief of F.B.I. Says He Will Not Resign
A day after the White House sent him an unmistakable signal of its disfavor, William S. Sessions said in an interview that he would not step down as Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


Integra Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Unifi Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Apartments for the Homeless Are Left Vacant in New York
While scores of homeless families spend night after night on chairs and tables in the offices of the city's welfare agency, hundreds of apartments that have been set aside as permanent housing for the homeless have been standing empty, often for months at a time.
According to the city's Housing Authority, there are currently 401 available apartments scattered across the five boroughs.
They are part of a city program that provides financial incentives to private landlords willing to offer apartments to the homeless.


Magna Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rider College Disciplines Fraternity for Racist Pledge Incident


Queens Man Kills Wife And 2 Girls, Police Say
An unemployed garment worker from Queens fatally stabbed and bludgeoned his wife and two young daughters on Thursday, telling the police that voices had warned him they would be tortured if he did not kill them before the Chinese New Year, the authorities said yesterday.
The man, Da Pei Wu, then tried to electrocute himself with exposed wires from a radio, but succeeded only in blowing a fuse in the apartment on 56th Avenue in Elmhurst, the police said.


J &amp; J Snack Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Munis: Popular, Tax Free and Tricky
With as much as $15 billion worth of municipal bonds being redeemed this month by the states, cities and public authorities that sold them, and almost $7 billion worth of new municipal bond issues coming to market, many investors are focusing their attention on these tax-exempt securities.
It is their freedom from Federal income taxation, and in some cases their exemption from state and local taxes as well, that accounts for the popularity of these investments.
Millions of Americans, and particularly people who invest for income rather than growth, include municipals in their portfolios.


SETTLING IN: The Overview; Clinton Concedes He Erred on Baird Nomination
President Clinton acknowledged today that he had made a mistake in rushing through Zoe Baird's selection as Attorney General.
He conceded that he had not fully reviewed her hiring of illegal aliens, even though his aides informed him in general of the legal violation before he announced his choice.
Responding to mounting public opposition to Ms.
Baird and rapidly eroding support for her nomination in the Senate, Mr.
Clinton early this morning withdrew her name from consideration for the highest Cabinet post he gave to a woman.
Mr.
Clinton immediately began to search for a new nominee.
Aides said he would prefer another woman.


Tarkanian to Rest
The former Nevada-Las Vegas basketball coach JERRY TARKANIAN says he may have suffered a slight heart attack recently and won't be taking any kind of a job this year.
"I want to take it easy," Tarkanian said Thursday.
"The doctor thinks I might have had a slight attack."


Air Products &amp; Chemicals reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SETTLING IN: An Angry Public; Fueled by Radio and TV, Outcry Became Uproar
By Sunday, most of official Washington and the news media had already dismissed the problems with Zoe Baird's nomination as Attorney General.
But anyone listening that morning to Susan Estrich's talk show here on KABC radio knew the nomination was in deep trouble over Ms.
Baird's hiring of illegal aliens as household help.
"The phones went crazy," said Ms.
Estrich, who was the Presidential campaign manager for Michael S. Dukakis in 1988 and now teaches law at the University of Southern California.
"That's the only thing people wanted to talk about. I found a fire already raging, just looking for a house to burn down."


9 Orchestras Go on Strike
The freelance musicians who make up nine of New York City's smaller orchestras went on strike just before midnight last night, when the orchestras and Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians were unable to reach an agreement on a new contract, said Leonard Leibowitz, the lawyer for the musicians.
The players had voted last week to authorize their negotiating committee to strike.
Three of the orchestras had concerts scheduled for this weekend.
They are the New York Chamber Symphony of the 92d Street Y, which was to perform tonight at 8; the American Composers Orchestra, which was to play at Carnegie Hall tomorrow at 3 P.M., and the Little Orchestra Society, which was to give children's concerts at Florence Gould Hall tomorrow at 12:30 and 1:45 P.M.


CSX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Oriole Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Sylvan Winds Weill Recital Hall


First Eastern Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


UST Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
COMPANY REPORTS ** UST Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1992
1991
Sales
272,740,000
235,510,000
Net inc
79,879,000
66,288,000
Share earns
.36
.30
Shares outst
220,474,000
224,037,000
Yr sales
1,044,416,000
907,328,000
Net inc
312,558,000
265,905,000
Share earns
1.41
1.18
Shares outst
222,033,000
225,130,000


Paying for Health, The German Way -- A special report.; Medical Care in Germany: With Choices, and for All
If the most critical problem in providing national health care is getting control over rapidly rising costs, as President Clinton has often said, he may find some intriguing ideas in the German health care system, which offers coverage to all at a much lower price than Americans pay.
Germany's much-admired system of health care, provided through nonprofit but private "sickness funds" that are legally mandatory for nearly 90 percent of the population, leaves patients with freedom to choose their own doctors and their own hospitals, and freedom from almost all medical bills.


G.O.P. Candidates Say They Hired Illegal Aliens
Two candidates for the Republican nomination for Governor of New Jersey said today that they had employed undocumented aliens.
Christine Todd Whitman said that she and her husband, John, employed two undocumented Portuguese citizens to care for their two children for three and a half years.


The Lesson of Zoe Baird
They didn't understand, the powerful who lead the country.
Bill Clinton and his advisers, who promised a departure from the old ways of go-along Washington, didn't get it.
Neither did Joseph Biden Jr., chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
Separated by some invisible shield from the feelings of everyday Americans, they were unprepared for the angry public reaction to Zoe Baird's revelation that she knowingly violated the law by hiring illegal immigrants.
Astonishingly, neither Mr.
Clinton nor his talent scouts understood just how seriously Americans took his promise to hold his appointees to the highest standards.
If they had anticipated the country's outrage, they might have prevented the public humiliation of a talented lawyer who, her grave errors notwithstanding, surely did not deserve the painful ordeal of the last week.
And the country would have been spared the spectacle of its leaders tripping once again on their own insensitivity.


Review/Film; The Difficulties of Life On Aspen's Ski Slopes
"Aspen Extreme," which opened at theaters here yesterday, is a cautionary tale with scenery about two young automotive workers from Detroit who become ski instructors in Aspen, Colo., but pay a terrible price for the glamorous lives they achieve.
T.
J.
Burke (Paul Gross), described as "gorgeous" by women who meet him, slips into the role of gigolo.
He's beguiled, at least in part, by his benefactor's offer to advise him on which authors he should read to gain success as a writer.
She apparently considers but discards the idea of starting him out on Proust.
After one season on the slopes T. J.'s pal, Dexter Rutecki (Peter Berg), who smokes cigarettes anyway, is drinking hard liquor and sniffing cocaine.


A Cry for Help in Bridgeport as Tide of Killings Rises


Sealright Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


PNC Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


International Shipholding reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SOUTHWESTERN BELL CORP. (N)
The Southwestern Bell Corporation, the regional Bell company for Texas, Arkansas and some Midwestern states, attributed its fourth-quarter earnings growth of nearly 11 percent to the "outstanding" performance of its local-phone business, which provides the majority of its revenue.
It posted a record increase in the number of telephone lines, adding 405,000 lines in 1992, compared with 293,000 in recession-weakened 1991.
The total is 12.8 million lines.


IBM Canada Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Fourth Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Winn-Dixie Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 6


InaCom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


GFC Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Big Pension Fund Prodding 12 Companies
Flexing its $71 billion muscles, the California Public Employees Retirement System released the names of 12 companies today in which it holds large blocks of stock and whose management it wants to see improved in 1993.
Saying that many of the companies were poor long-term performers, the pension fund, known informally as Calpers, said it would meet first with management if the company chairmen preferred but considered such a meeting only a precursor to talks with the boards.


World Bank Keeps Improving Its Approach; How I.M.F. Helps
To the Editor:
In "Failed I.M.F. Policy" (letter, Jan. 6), Timothy A. Canova says political developments in Egypt and Venezuela in the last decade are "the legacy of prolonged economic austerity imposed from without by the International Monetary Fund, acting on behalf of foreign creditors." He does not portray the I.M.F.'s role in either country accurately.


KnowledgeWare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New-Home Starts Rose Last Month
Builders broke ground for new homes in December at a pace 5.5 percent faster than in November, the Government said today, ending a year in which housing starts posted their first advance since 1986.
The 1992 total of 1.2 million represented an 18.5 percent increase from 1991 that helped lift the economy out of recession.


Breast Implant Report Was Premature
To the Editor:
"F.D.A. Questions Safety of Saline Breast Implants" (news article, Jan. 7) is based on a Congressional staff report released by the House Government Operations Committee on Jan. 6.
The report reflects the views of one nonelected Congressional staff member, not the official views of the Government Operations Committee and its members.
The staff member failed to consult members of the committee or the F.D.A. before releasing the report.


World Bank Keeps Improving Its Approach
To the Editor:
In "Before We Let World Bank Squander More" (letter, Jan. 6), Deborah Moore, Bruce Rich and Lori Udall of the Environmental Defense Fund are misguided in their argument that the United States should not support the World Bank's International Development Association's $18 billion replenishment.


London Journal; Labor's Problem: Must Beliefs Be Whitewashed?
Among the thousands who gathered on Wednesday under red, white and blue flags in the Dorchester Hotel ballroom to raise a long-distance toast to Bill Clinton's inauguration were more than a smattering of Labor Party leaders, members and sympathizers.
They could be forgiven for what they were thinking: we could have been winners, too.
Nowhere are the changeover to a new Administration in Washington and the lessons of the Democratic victory in November being studied more closely than in Britain, where Labor has been wandering in the desert during 13 years of Conservative rule.


BancTexas Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Anthem Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


This Family's Tuition Bills Come in Triplicate
When thier children were younger, the Rev.
David Tontonoz, rector of St.
Peter's Episcopal Church in Salisbury, Md., and his wife, Susan, didn't have spare cash to start a college fund.
Despite limited savings, they have managed to find the funds for their sons' school expenses.
The couple's combined gross income, including $9,000 from Mrs.
Tontonoz's part-time job at Salisbury State University, is $56,100 a year.
School costs will be $69,000 next year, when all three sons will be enrolled.
Here is how their bills add up, and how the family plans to pay them.


Bell Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bearings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bolar Co-Founder Receives A 5-Year Sentence for Fraud
A co-founder of the Bolar Pharmaceutical Company, a multimillion-dollar generic drug maker and a stock market favorite in the mid-1980's, was sentenced yesterday in Federal District Court in Baltimore to five years in prison for defrauding the Food and Drug Administration.
Robert Shulman was also fined $1.25 million.
Mr.
Shulman, 59, of Centerport, L.I., had pleaded guilty in November 1991 to charges of directing Bolar employees to submit fraudulent records to Federal regulators to obtain approval for low-priced generic versions of popular drugs, including Dyazide, a blood-pressure treatment made by SmithKline Beecham.


Paying for Health, The German Way -- A special report.; Medical Care in Germany: With Choices, and for All
If the most critical problem in providing national health care is getting control over rapidly rising costs, as President Clinton has often said, he may find some intriguing ideas in the German health care system, which offers coverage to all at a much lower price than Americans pay.
Germany's much-admired system of health care, provided through nonprofit but private "sickness funds" that are legally mandatory for nearly 90 percent of the population, leaves patients with freedom to choose their own doctors and their own hospitals, and freedom from almost all medical bills.


National Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Abortion Tide Turns
With a few strokes of a pen yesterday, President Clinton discarded five Federal policies that both traduced tolerance and infringed freedom.
By doing so, he gave his new Administration a wise and humane start.
On the 20th anniversary of Roe v.
Wade, Mr.
Clinton suspended the "gag rule," a relic of the Bush Administration that forbade anyone but a physician to give abortion counseling and referrals at federally funded family planning clinics, supposedly pending new regulations.
From now on, poor, pregnant women who must rely on clinics for their medical care are assured of a privilege taken for granted by the more affluent.


SETTLING IN: Rewriting the Rules; Last-Minute Bush Proposals Rescinded
More than a hundred actions taken by the Bush Administration in its final days were rescinded today in a sweeping move by Leon E. Panetta, hours after he was sworn in as Director of the Office of Management and Budget, Administration officials said.
In a separate decision today, Vice President Al Gore announced the abolition of the Council on Competitiveness, established by President George Bush to review the cost to business of regulations, especially those concerning the environment.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall


Jones a Victor on Court, Not in Eyes of the Fans
When the American qualifier Kelly Jones surprised David Wheaton, 0-6, 6-3, 6-4, 6-2, in the third round on Friday, he pulled off the most significant victory of his career.
Jones, 28, played only three singles matches in 1992, losing two, as his ranking fell from 230 to 447.
But with the added confidence of a successful year in doubles behind him, he has decided to play more singles in 1993.
And He has returned and volleyed brilliantly in all three of his main-draw matches.
Unfortunately for Jones, the match may be remembered not for his fine play, but for his lack of self-control.


UST Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31
COMPANY REPORTS ** UST Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Dec 31
1992
1991
Sales
272,740,000
235,510,000
Net inc
79,879,000
66,288,000
Share earns
.36
.30
Shares outst
220,474,000
224,037,000
Yr sales
1,044,416,000
907,328,000
Net inc
312,558,000
265,905,000
Share earns
1.41
1.18
Shares outst
222,033,000
225,130,000


Nominee for Pentagon Aided Buildup of Iraq
The likely nomination to a senior Pentagon post of an official who helped shape the Bush Administration's policy of aiding Iraq before the Persian Gulf war is causing deep concern among Senate Democrats, staff aides said today.
President Clinton is considering appointing the official, James Covey, to a new position of Assistant Secretary of Defense for Regional Conflicts, Administration officials said.
Mr.
Covey, who until recently was the second-ranking official in the State Department's Middle East bureau, was involved in pressing agencies to provide aid to Iraq as part of President Bush's failed effort to bring President Saddam Hussein into what he called the family of nations.


Garner Hitches Ride Out of Anonymity
The identity of the first American man to reach the round of 16 at Flinders Park came as no surprise on Friday.
Jim Courier, with his baseball cap pulled low and power game pulled together, is no stranger to Grand Slam glory.
The top-seeded player easily defeated Guillaume Raoux, a burly Frenchman, 6-4, 6-3, 6-4.


Consolidated Papers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SETTLING IN: Anatomy of a Doomed Nomination; The Baird Appointment: In Trouble From the Start, Then a Firestorm
Thursday evening, on the second day of Zoe Baird's confirmation hearings to be the nation's first woman to hold the post of Attorney General, the Senate majority leader and the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee interrupted the proceedings to place an urgent call to the White House.
They could not get through to the Oval Office because the switchboard was jammed by well-wishers and because of the first-day confusion there.
Finally, Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., the Delaware Democrat who is the Judiciary Committee chairman, told a Presidential aide that he would instantly come out against the nomination if the President did not call back within three minutes.


Putting Homes in Trust To Avoid the Estate Tax
FOR many Americans, a house is more than a home; it is also their most valuable asset.
And when the home's value is added to investments and other assets, it can easily push the worth of an estate above the $600,000 threshold for Federal estate tax.
This is why getting the family house or apartment out of a parent's estate is an increasingly popular way of avoiding the tax, which can run as high as 55 percent.
The means is a qualified personal residence trust, a specialized form of grantor retained income trust, or GRIT, that is sanctioned by the Internal Revenue Service.


Strength of Big Issues Lifts Dow 3.79, to 3,256.81
Invigorating economic news lifted the industrial heavyweights high enough yesterday for the stock market to finish with narrow gains.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 3.79 points to close at 3,256.81, while Big Board gainers outnumbered losers about 5 to 4.


Tarkanian to Rest
The former Nevada-Las Vegas basketball coach JERRY TARKANIAN says he may have suffered a slight heart attack recently and won't be taking any kind of a job this year.
"I want to take it easy," Tarkanian said Thursday.
"The doctor thinks I might have had a slight attack."


Andrew Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SETTLING IN: The Armed Services; Joint Chiefs Fighting Clinton Plan To Allow Homosexuals in Military
In an angry challenge to the Administration's promise to lift the ban on homosexuals in the armed forces, the Joint Chiefs of Staff are fighting to persuade President Clinton to reverse his campaign pledge, senior military officials said today.
Defense Secretary Les Aspin's first meeting on Thursday with the Joint Chiefs was dominated by an emotional, two-hour discussion of their concerns that repealing the ban would wreck morale, undermine recruiting, force devoutly religious service members to resign and increase the risk of AIDS for heterosexual troops, senior officers said.


No Room for King On the Knicks
The Knicks are not expected to pursue Bernard King, a former All-Star forward for the Knicks who was released by the Washington Bullets on Thursday.
King, 36, is a close friend of Ernie Grunfeld, the Knicks' vice president of player personnel.
That friendship dates to when they were teammates at the University of Tennessee.


Union Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sunrise Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 GERMANY'S LOW-COST CARE
A special report: Germans spend only about half has much a person on health as Americans do, but they still have the freedom to choose their own doctors and hospitals.
The system presents intriguing ideas, but American experts find few that could simply be copied.  1


Irwin Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Celebrating the 150th Year of the New York Philharmonic


Howell Joins Braves
Free-agent relief pitcher JAY HOWELL signed a minor league contract with the Atlanta Braves yesterday and was invited to spring training.
Contract terms were not disclosed.


Testimony Changed in Sex Assault Case
A former defendant, now testifying for the defense in the Glen Ridge sex assault case, today disavowed a major element in the sworn statement he made to a judge last year in pleading guilty.
He then proceeded to add details to his earlier account of one phase of the incident.
The witness, Paul Archer, appearing to contradict previous testimony, said today that one of the defendants, Kevin Scherzer, pushed a broom after the mildly retarded young woman at the center of the case inserted the broomstick into her vagina.
On Wednesday, he said only that Mr.
Scherzer held the broom.


Haggar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An Image That Launches Sponsorships
Nancy Kerrigan is very publicly adorned with a Seiko watch.
She is nurtured by Campbell's and clothed in black Lycra by the designer Vera Wang.
Kerrigan is the center of all commercial commerce, and attention, at the United States figure skating championships.
She is the sure thing in the ladies' singles competition here, unless she tumbles through an expansion crack on Saturday during her long program and Tonya Harding Gillooly skips her appointment with another spill.


Washington Mutual Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A music review on Wednesday about "The Boys Choir of Harlem and Friends" at the Richard Rodgers Theater misidentified the reader of a poem after an unannounced program change.
Maya Angelou's poem "Still I Rise" was read at a preview on Saturday night by Robert Jason Jackson, not Richard Lawson.


Jury Panelists Asked Views on Abortion
In an unusual prelude to an unusual trial, lawyers asked prospective jurors this week about their attitudes toward abortion, in the case of a Lower East Side doctor accused of attempting an illegal third-trimester abortion that severed the arm of a fetus who was born the next day.
Several potential jurors who evinced anti-abortion views or discomfort with the subject in the questioning, conducted Thursday and yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, were dismissed.


Yves Saint Laurent's Buyer Scurries to Calm Investors
Executives of Elf Sanofi, the French pharmaceuticals group, are scurrying to calm the furor here over the company's acquisition of the Yves Saint Laurent fashion house this week.
Investors have expressed their anxiety over whether the company paid too much to enter an industry that will distract it from its pharmaceuticals business.
Elf Sanofi's stock has plunged more than 10 percent since the announcement, closing today at 973 francs, or about $177.


Fleecing the Public, Faster
Count two more states as culprits in the rush to expand state-sponsored gambling.
New York and New Jersey are both on the verge of launching new electronic games to fatten the take from their lotteries.
That's how politicians avoid unpopular tax hikes and spending cuts, no matter that it casts the government in the role of pickpocket.
In Albany, Gov.
Mario Cuomo's budget proposals include $25 million from Keno, a new electronic numbers game that increases betting by multiplying the number of payoffs.
In Trenton, the state lottery commission intends to install Keno in more than 200 bars as an "experiment," unless Gov.
Jim Florio has the spine to veto the plan.


C.H.S.A.A. Wants Everyone to Ride the Local
When Rice and St.
Raymond play each other tonight at Iona College, one question should be settled: which of New York's two top-ranked high school basketball teams is the best.
Rice (14-2), of Harlem, is ranked No. 1 by the New York State High School Athletic Association and is 14th in USA Today's national poll.
St.
Raymond (11-3), of the Bronx, is No. 2 in the state ranking and No. 23 nationally.


Chicago Plans Barriers To Hinder Street Crime
Confronting a murder wave that made 1992 the second deadliest year in Chicago history, and criticism that he has not done enough about it, Mayor Richard M. Daley says he wants to block off streets in every ward as a way of discouraging criminals by limiting their movements.
The plan, which city officials hope to begin by the summer, will probably mean building concrete barriers at strategic points of entry to neighborhoods.
Some opposition to the idea has emerged, with people saying they would be more afraid of being blocked in than relieved that criminals were blocked out.
But a spokeswoman for the Mayor said today that the plan would not be imposed on any neighborhoods that strongly objected.


SETTLING IN: News Analysis; Early Damage Control
It was a most inauspicious beginning, but President Clinton had no choice.
Withdrawing the nomination of Zoe Baird to be Attorney General, only 36 hours into a new Presidency, was a nightmare born of a flawed transition.
But pressing on, in the view of both the White House and the circle around Ms.
Baird, would have ended either in defeat or in a narrow, Pyrrhic victory, which would have turned political embarrassment into political disaster.


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
NBA -- Fined Pervis Ellison, Washington Bullets center, $3,500, and Rik Smits, Indiana Pacers center, $1,000, for fighting in a game on Jan. 19.
Fined Harvey Grant, Washington guard, and Charles Jones, Washington forward, and Greg Dreiling, Indiana center; Vern Fleming, Sean Green and Reggie Miller, Indiana guards, and George McCloud, Malik Sealy, and Kenny Williams, Indiana forwards, $500 each for leaving the bench during the incident.
DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Named Brad Davis assistant coach.
Re-assigned Bob Zuffelato, assistant coach, to scout.


Two Shelters Inspected in Effort To Find Mentally Ill Residents
State officials said yesterday that they had inspected two New York City shelters for the homeless in an effort to identify residents who are dangerously mentally ill, and so far three residents of the Franklin Avenue Armory in the Bronx have been voluntarily taken to psychiatric emergency rooms.
The inspections are part of an expanded effort by state officials to evaluate the city's shelters in response to the case of a mentally ill man who has been charged with bludgeoning an 80-year-old Bronx woman to death last Sunday near the Franklin Avenue shelter where he sometimes lived.


Audrey Hepburn's Perfection
Audrey Hepburn, who died this week, was a charming actress.
She was also an impassioned ambassador for the United Nations Children's Fund.
But a lot of women, and more than a few men, remember her best for the way she looked.
It's not that she was a clotheshorse, though she was, or a great beauty, because she wasn't.
It's that she came along in the age of the sex bomb -- the Monroes, the Mansfields -- and blew most of them away.
She was skinny.
Her nose was long, her mouth big, her teeth a little bit crooked.
She chose not to inflate her modest bosom, and her feet were on the large side.
The sum of these irregularities, however, was perfection.


Citizens Banking reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kimball International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SETTLING IN: Easing Abortion Policy; CLINTON ORDERS REVERSAL OF ABORTION RESTRICTIONS LEFT BY REAGAN AND BUSH
Signaling a sea change in domestic policy, President Clinton moved today to reverse a decade of Republican edicts on abortion and other issues, including a repeal of the ban on abortion counseling at federally financed clinics.
Mr.
Clinton signed five abortion-related memorandums on the 20th anniversary of Roe v.
Wade, the Supreme Court decision that established a constitutional right to abortion.


New Appeals to Pocketbook Patriots
By the standards of respectable economic thinking, people like William Lynott are dismissed as well-meaning but misguided eccentrics whose ideas come from the Rush Limbaugh-Patrick Buchanan school of economics.
Mr.
Lynott is the president of the year-old Buy America Foundation here, one of a handful of organizations that have sprung up in recent years to urge consumers to wield their wallets like patriots and buy American-made goods.


Ice Dance Title to Roca-Sur
Renee Roca and Gorsha Sur, symbols of the open era in figure skating, completed their sweep at the United States Figure Skating championships tonight by winning the free dance program and the over all national ice dancing title.
Dancing brilliantly to a combination of romantic Duke Ellington tunes, Roca and Sur scored higher than the second-place couple, Susan Wynne and Russ Witherby, and the third-place finishers, Elizabeth Punsalan and Jerod Swallow.
The top two teams qualified for the world championships at Prague in March.


New Iraqi Site Raided as White House Vows Firmness
For the second time in its two days in office, the Clinton Administration used military force against Iraq today, attacking an antiaircraft missile site in the north.
It also vowed to continue a tough policy against President Saddam Hussein.
President Clinton "is prepared to hold firm with Iraq," the White House spokesman, George Stephanopoulos, said, adding that the Iraqis "must comply with all the U.N. resolutions."


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERICA WEST AIRLINES INC., Phoenix, is planning to pool its resources with Aeromexico on two routes linking Phoenix and Mexico.
INGALLS SHIPBUILDING, Pascagoula, Miss., a unit of Litton Industries, received a $340 million Navy contract to build an Aegis guided-missile destroyer.


ADVO Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Review/Dance; Martha Graham Dancers as Choreographers
Eight members of the Martha Graham Dance Company presented their own choreography on Thursday night, and three aspects of the evening stood out sharply.
The first was that none of the pieces, surprisingly, resembled Miss Graham's own works; the second was that all eight were very different; last, all were sensationally performed by dancers from the Graham troupe, the Graham school and two guest artists.
Overall, there was more ingenuity than genius on display, but the novice choreographer was often more interesting than the relatively experienced one.
Craft, however, was never in short supply.


Dominion Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Thiokol Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; It's Time To Turn The Page
WHEN Sports Illustrated publishes its swimsuit issue next month, the University of North Carolina men's basketball players probably won't bring their copies to practice.
It's not that the coaches disapprove.
The players will leave their magazines at home in deference to Dr.
Linnea Smith.


Rare Tap-Dancing Films
Lincoln Center is to present "Movement as Metaphor: Jazz Dance on Film," a screening of rare films of tap dancing over six decades, on Wednesday at 8 P.M. at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center.
Jimmy Slyde, the tap dancer, will serve as host of the show, which includes films of Tip, Tap and Toe, Bill (Bojangles) Robinson, the Nicholas Brothers and Bunny Briggs.
Information: (212) 875-5600.


Paying for Health, The German Way -- A special report.; Medical Care in Germany: With Choices, and for All
If the most critical problem in providing national health care is getting control over rapidly rising costs, as President Clinton has often said, he may find some intriguing ideas in the German health care system, which offers coverage to all at a much lower price than Americans pay.
Germany's much-admired system of health care, provided through nonprofit but private "sickness funds" that are legally mandatory for nearly 90 percent of the population, leaves patients with freedom to choose their own doctors and their own hospitals, and freedom from almost all medical bills.


U.S. Surgical reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Music; When All Is Synthesis, There Are No Categories
The composer Alfred Schnittke commented not long ago: "Contemporary reality will make it necessary to experience all the music one has heard since childhood, including rock and jazz and classical and all other forms, as a synthesis." That reality is taking hold.
In the last decade, a fair number of composers have found a language that entirely defeats categorization by genre.
The music heard at the Kitchen on Saturday night, closing a series devoted to "Gruppen: Chamber Music for the 21st Century," displayed persuasive evidence of the continuing synthesis.
Most impressive were the performances by the Michael Gordon Philharmonic, a group that includes two composers, Michael Gordon on keyboards and Evan Ziporyn on winds, as well as Mark Stewart on guitar, Todd Reynolds on violin and John Lad on viola.
The set, coinciding with the release of an equally impressive CD on the CRI label, began with Mr.
Gordon's "Low Quartet," a dark-hued work unrelated to the David Bowie album and propelled mainly by Mr.
Ziporyn's bass clarinet.


Valassis Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Thursday about the National Arts Club's awarding a medal of honor to Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn misstated the author's policy on accepting honors in person.
Mr.
Solzhenitsyn accepted honorary degrees from Harvard University in 1978, when he also gave a commencement address, from the College of the Holy Cross in 1984 and from Dartmouth College in 1991.
He also accepted the Templeton Prize for Progress in Religion in London in 1983.


Sharpton Aides Say He Will Not Enter City Council Race
The Rev.
Al Sharpton, who has said often in recent weeks that he was considering running for New York City Council President this year, has apparently decided against the race.
Mr.
Sharpton's office circulated a news release late yesterday, saying that he would hold a news conference this morning to announce that he would not seek the post.
Instead, the release said, he plans to explore whether to challenge Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the Democrat from New York, next year.


Tarkanian to Rest
The former Nevada-Las Vegas basketball coach JERRY TARKANIAN says he may have suffered a slight heart attack recently and won't be taking any kind of a job this year.
"I want to take it easy," Tarkanian said Thursday.
"The doctor thinks I might have had a slight attack."


Island of Lost Souls? No, but the Talk of the Mall.; Spate of Highly Publicized Crimes Leaves Many Asking What's Got Into Long Island
On Long Island, in the same suburbs that for decades have been considered prototypes of security, wealth and tranquillity, now comes the macabre.
"I suppose the question for a lot of people is how this all could have happened on our quiet, tree-lined streets," said Louis Simpson, the poet and a Long Island resident for more than 20 years.


Leetch Trying to Reach Out But It's Still Just Too Painful
Brian Leetch woke this morning in his Santa Monica hotel room and stretched his left arm out from under the sheets.
He flexed, he wiggled, he tried to lift a few things off the night stand nearby.
He was disappointed again.


No Credit Left, Post Demands 20% Pay Cuts
The New York Post, which has operated for years on the brink of extinction, plunged into a new survival crisis yesterday.
Short of cash, its bank credit cut off, the newspaper said it would suspend publication as early as Monday unless its 720 employees took a temporary 20 percent pay cut.
The pay cut, which would be imposed for four weeks, would come atop salary reductions for Post employees just over two years ago.
Coupled with a 10-cent increase in the newsstand price to 50 cents effective Monday, the move would give The Post a month of grace to seek salvation in a new owner or an investor to share ownership with Peter S. Kalikow, the real-estate developer who bought the newspaper in 1988 but has since sought personal bankruptcy protection.


Corrections
A brief front-page report on Tuesday, summarizing an article about a New York Times/CBS News Poll, referred incorrectly in some copies to the last time a majority of Americans said they approved of the way President Bush was handling his job.
It was November 1991.


Review/Film; Behind a Hotel Desk, Dreaming of Adventure
For anyone who has ever dreamed of being a hotel desk clerk, "Hexed" describes the comic adventures of Matthew Welsh (Arye Gross), clerk extraordinaire.
Matthew's Mittyesque life is filled with far-fetched escapades, since he enjoys borrowing clothes and cars from other parts of the hotel and masquerading as a man about town.
This fantasy life becomes dangerous when Matthew finagles a date with Hexina (Claudia Christian), a homicidal, world-famous model.
Hexina, who appears in and out of a variety of skintight, zipper-laden outfits, is in town to murder a blackmailer.
He has been threatening her with photos from the days when she was fat.


One Valley Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


How Stockbrokers Use The Tricks of the Trade
ALONG with other troubles coming to light about operations at the Raymond James &amp; Associates brokerage firm are some of the company's questionable sales practices.
They should give investors helpful lessons in how securities are sold at Raymond James and many other brokerage houses.
Raymond James acknowledged that it had been having trouble keeping its stock picks confidential in advance of release dates.
After several discussions about possible "front running" -- buying stock on improper tips of coming recommendations -- Thomas A. James, the company chairman, said the firm had asked the New York Stock Exchange in November to look into the problem.


Harris Bankcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ServiceMaster L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Donations to the Neediest Carry an Extra Meaning
They appear to be ordinary checks, seemingly no different than the billions of others that flow through the nation's financial system each year.
But these are endowed with something extra, for they are filled out for sums that are multiples of 18, the numerical value of the Hebrew word for life, chai.
Each year, dozens of people send donations to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund that reflect the Jewish tradition of giving in the spirit of chai.


Jordan. Wilkins. The Nets See Double.
Facing two superstars in two consecutive nights was the less than enviable position the Nets found themselves in.
On Thursday, it was Michael Jordan.
Tonight, it was Dominique Wilkins.
That's like facing Clint Eastwood and Charles Bronson in back-to-back shootouts.
Not only that, but the Nets were without Chris Morris, their third leading scorer, and in the stretch tonight they couldn't contain Wilkins, who had his guns blazing in the fourth period.
Wilkins finished with 38 points, 7 rebounds and a gash on his head resulting from an elbow by Rafael Addison.
All the Nets got was their second straight loss, 102-91, in front of 9,419 at the Omni.


Review/Music; Penderecki Returns to a Style He Overthrew
Every period in history, no matter how brief, summons an artist or two to explain its feelings.
Krzystof Penderecki's "Threnody for the Victims of Hiroshima" and "Polymorphia" ushered in the 1960's as if the product of some unspoken commission.
They and other pieces by the Polish composer became instantly famous.
Where many composers had sought to reduce the uncertainties of a nuclear age to stringent counterpoint and rigorous organization, Mr.
Penderecki embraced cold-war anxiety with a metaphor of his own.
The element of the mob was introduced, purposeful but not quite under control.
Individual musicians and singers were pointed in a direction and then invited to play or sing what they wanted.
Textures seethed with organic life.
Color replaced harmonic change as a means of movement.
Mr.
Penderecki manufactured a reputation and a comfortable living from his early depictions of dread, even though those first pieces have long since lost their fascination for the sophisticated listener and even though he no longer writes music that resembles them.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 6 about Bill and Hillary Clinton's choice of Sidwell Friends School in Washington for Chelsea Clinton referred incorrectly to another Quaker school in some editions.
That school, Germantown Friends School, is in Philadelphia.


Shawmut National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


McDonnell Douglas Plans 4,000 New Layoffs; Stock Jumps
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation announced another 4,000 layoffs today at its commercial aircraft unit, where production has dropped sharply.
But Wall Street apparently believes that the nation's largest military contractor has put the worst of its troubles behind it.
McDonnell Douglas shares jumped $5.50 each today, to $62, after rising $2.50 on Thursday.


First Hawaiian reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Accuses Angolan Rebel of Inciting Civil War
The Clinton Administration today accused Jonas Savimbi, an Angolan rebel leader once closely allied with the United States, of escalating the civil war in Angola and urged him to take part in a new round of United Nations-sponsored peace talks.
In a statement released this evening, Richard A. Boucher, the State Department spokesman, said the Administration was alarmed by attacks this week by Mr.
Savimbi's organization, the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, on the oil-producing town of Soyo.


Japanese Trade Surplus Leaps to a Record
Japan said today that its trade surplus with the United States jumped 14 percent last year, as its surplus with the entire world reached a record high.
It was the second consecutive yearly increase in the surplus with the United States after several years of declines.
That trend may pose a challenge to President Clinton, who is facing calls in Congress for a tougher stance on the Japanese trade issue that could include retaliatory measures.


Tax Breaks for Companies in Puerto Rico Don't Help Islanders
To the Editor:
"Trade Pact Threatens Puerto Rico's Economic Rise" (front page, Jan. 3) implies that Puerto Rico's economy continues to benefit from Section 936 of the Internal Revenue Code, which exempts United States corporations from paying taxes on profits earned in Puerto Rico.


Q &amp; A
Valuing Nonpublic Stock
Q For purposes of an employee stock option plan, how is stock in a corporation valued if it is not publicly traded?
FRED STURUP, WOODSIDE, QUEENS


KLA Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Burlington Northern Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Amcore Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Micropolis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Canbra Foods reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Phar-Mor Fraud Estimate
Phar-Mor Inc., the discount drugstore chain that was pushed into bankruptcy in August, said yesterday that a scheme by former executives to inflate profits was more extensive than previously estimated.
The company said that so far the fraud and embezzlement scheme amounted to $499 million, not the $350 million it estimated when its existence was first disclosed.
It says the scheme was carried out by Michael I. Monus, Phar-Mor's former president and chief operating officer, and other former executives.


Moscow String Quartet
The Moscow String Quartet is to present a concert at 8 tonight at Washington Irving High School, East 16th Street at Irving Place, Gramery Park.
The program includes Mozart's Quartet in D (K. 575); Schnittke's Quartet No. 2, and Tchaikovsky's Quartet No. 2.
Tickets are $3.50.
Information: (212) 586-4680.


Reynolds &amp; Reynolds reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Still a Boys' Club
The new female members of the House, Democratic and Republican, have agreed to work to make Congress abide by the same civil rights laws that most Americans obey -- laws that Senators and Representatives passed for everyone but themselves.
Good for these women.
A few words on the history and some other hints may help them accomplish what they want to do.
First, they probably know about previous efforts to outlaw employment discrimination against minority and female employees of Congress.
Representative Pat Schroeder and others worked on the issue before I entered Congress in 1981.


Steel Prices Rise, and Industry Sees Profitability
Buoyed by the economic recovery and the possibility of new duties to protect them from foreign competition, the nation's large steel companies have announced price increases that could help the industry return to profitability this year.
The USX-U.S.
Steel Group, the nation's largest steel company, said today that it would match increases announced Thursday by the LTV Corporation, the third-largest steel company, of $20 a ton for most sheet steel, a rise of from 4 percent to 5 percent.
The Bethlehem Steel Corporation, the second-largest producer, and several smaller steel companies said that they were studying the increases and would make announcements next week.


Who Is Meal Ticket?
GEORGE FOREMAN is hungry for one more heavyweight title shot, and Lennox Lewis has offered to defend the W.B.C. championship against Big George.
So when will they break bread and make an agreement?
"We have a dinner appointment Feb. 12 in Las Vegas," says the promoter BOB ARUM, who plans to meet with FRANK MALONEY, Lewis's manager, and RON WEATHERS, a Foreman adviser.


Silicon Graphics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


West One Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NBT Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Valero Natural Gas Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Valley Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
The real estate column yesterday about subsidized housing misidentified the architect of an affordable-housing project in Long Beach, L.I.
He is Leslie Feder.


Smith (A.O.) Corp. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Meridian Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


INSIDE
New Crisis at New York Post
The New York Post said it would suspend publication as early as Monday unless its employees took a temporary 20 percent pay cut.
Page 23.
A Pickup in Home Building
Home building expand 5.5 percent last month and posted the first yearly advance since 1986.
Yet housing starts are still low.
Page 37.
Japan's Gains in Trade
Japan's trade surplus with the United States rose 14 percent in 1992 and its global surplus hit a record.
Page 37.
Prospects for Bosnia
Talks in Geneva will resume with some agreement but a cloudy chance for peace.
News analysis, page 5.


Top Futures Regulator Quits; Clinton Can Name 3 to Panel
Wendy Gramm resigned as chairman of the Commodities Futures Trading Commission yesterday, clearing the way for President Clinton to appoint a majority of the five-member body that regulates the nation's futures markets.
William Albrecht, a member of the commission since 1988 and a former economics professor at the University of Iowa, was named acting chairman by the other members of the commission.
He will serve in that post until the President appoints a chairman.
Mrs.
Gramm had headed the commission since 1988.


Classical Music in Review
Juilliard String Quartet Kathyrn Bache Miller Theater


Hibernia Savings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dynatech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Edward J. Ross, 80, a Lawyer Involved in Rothko Estate Case
Edward J. Ross, a lawyer in the case that pitted the estate of Mark Rothko against the Marlborough Gallery in the 1970's, died yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 80 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from lymphoma, said his wife, Felice.


Charlie Gehringer, 89, a Hall of Famer for Detroit
Charlie Gehringer, the unassuming Detroit Tiger whose .320 career batting average was quietly overshadowed by his reputation as one of baseball's most accomplished second basemen, died on Thursday at a nursing home near his home in Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
He was 89, and according to his wife, Josephine, had entered the nursing home after suffering a stroke last month.


Trenton Tries to End $2.2 Billion Budget Gap
Faced with a projected $2.2 billion budget gap in an election year, New Jersey officials have begun negotiations on a range of revenue sources that they hope will allow them to close the gap with "minimal pain" to voters.
But the proposals are based on projections that the economy will grow significantly and that New Jersey residents will have a large appetite for a new lottery game.
And one proposal is largely dependent on the Florio administration's ability to get the Federal Government to reimburse it for Medicaid bills it has refused to pay.


Continental Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Iomega Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cirrus Logic reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kings of the Mountain, at Least for Now
A look at the latest performances of the 18 stock fund categories reveals a good lesson in market cycles -- what was first could very well become last.
The top performer for the 12 months ended Jan. 7 was the financial services funds, which invest in banks, brokerages and the like and are continuing a strong two-year run, though down from 1991's highs.
But when the bank stocks collapsed in 1990, these funds lost 15 percent of their value, on average.


Ruling Aids U.S. in Rodney King Case
Removing a significant obstacle to Government prosecutors, a Federal judge ruled today that they would not have to prove racial bias to win conviction of four white police officers in the beating of a black motorist, Rodney G. King.
The written ruling by Judge John G. Davies of Federal District Court reversed his apparent earlier position and removed a potentially prohibitive hurdle for the prosecutors whose main evidence is an amateur videotape of the beating.


Discount Corp of N.Y.  Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


D. M. Johnson, 78; Led Mead Johnson In Rapid Expansion
D.
Mead Johnson, who turned a medium-sized family business that made infant formula into a worldwide marketer of nutritional products and pharmaceuticals, died Thursday at his home in Palm Beach, Fla., where he had retired.
He was 78.
Mr.
Johnson, who had not been ill, died unexpectedly of natural causes, said Ed Mitchell of Bankers Trust of Florida, who is handling the estate.


QUOTATION OF THE DAY
Someone on my staff had said, 'Oh, this is a parking ticket.' I said: 'It is not.
It's a freeway crash.' -- SENATOR JOSEPH R. BIDEN JR., on Zoe Baird's employment of illegal aliens.  [ 8:2. ]


When Tuition Bills Come in Triplicate
With three sons to educate and limited savings, the Tontonozes of Maryland are living the frugal life while contributing $19,500 toward $69,000 in school bills for Peter, Scott and Matthew.
How They Do It, Page 36.  [ Photo ]


National Convenience Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A New York Premiere
The Cleveland Quartet is to perform the New York premiere of Libby Larsen's "Schoenberg, Schenker and Schillinger" in a concert at 3 P.M. tomorrow in Alice Tully Hall.
Ms.
Larsen's three-part quartet reflects the points of view of the three influential 20th-century music theorists for whom the work was named.
Also on the program are Schubert's Quartet in A minor and Dvorak's Quartet in A flat.
The quartet's members are William Preucil and Peter Salaff, violinists; James Dunham, violist, and Paul Katz, cellist.
Tickets are $22.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Ralston Purina reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Philadelphia Orchestra Carnegie Hall


Schott Has Her Say; Now Awaits Ruling
George Steinbrenner, despite threats to take legal action, never sued Fay Vincent, then the commissioner, over his suspension as the Yankees' managing partner.
But Marge Schott's lawyer has strongly indicated that she would sue if the major leagues' executive council suspends her.
Schott, managing partner of the Cincinnati Reds, appeared before the council for four and a half hours yesterday accompanied by her lawyer, Robert Bennett of Washington.
She was summoned to the session at a Dallas-Fort Worth airport hotel to answer charges by a cross section of people that she has made racist and anti-Semitic remarks.


Laughing at AIDS
A friend was in the hospital, dying of AIDS.
But Eddie was not only dying, he was whining.
He demanded specific diet sodas, candy bars and flowers; he could not abide cheap roses from the deli or milk chocolate as opposed to dark.
He refused to wear his new silk robe, which he deemed "too George Hamilton." He loathed the nurses.
He patrolled the halls, lugging his intravenous hook-up behind him, just to light up an unfiltered Camel in every possible "No Smoking" zone.
Still, many of Eddie's friends visited him.
One afternoon, after leaving his room, we gathered in the hospital lobby and burst into uncontrollable laughter.
Eddie was just not a suitably noble dying person; he was, in fact, a huge pain.
Our laughter was the only possible release, the only way we could return to Eddie's bedside for further abuse.
At that moment, five years ago, I knew that AIDS required a sense of humor.


Rochester Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Insight; A Sign of Zeal
Borrowing to purchase Big Board stocks quietly rose 20 percent last year.
Margin debt stood at $43.99 billion in December, theatening the record of $44.17 billion set in September 1987, the month before the crash.
To Richard Eakle, a money manager, it's a sure sign of speculative zeal, with the popular technology stocks among the most vulnerable.


20-Year Term Asked in Exxon Kidnapping
Federal prosecutors have recommended a 20-year prison sentence for Irene J. Seale, half of the maximum sentence she could have received for participating with her husband, Arthur, in the fatal kidnapping of an Exxon official, Sidney J. Reso.
Mrs.
Seale, 45, will be sentenced Monday by Judge Garrett E. Brown Jr. of Federal District Court in Trenton.
She also faces sentencing on state charges of helping to kidnap Mr.
Reso on April 29, 1992.


Bandag Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
When MIDORI, the 21-year-old violinist who already has 10 years of performing with the New York Philharmonic on her resume, returns to New York on Monday from a tour abroad, she won't be giving blockbuster concerts.
Rather, she is planning to spend most of the week working on the Midori Foundation, the nonprofit effort she started last fall "to bring classical music and its artists closer to the everyday lives of children," she said by telephone from London yesterday.
She has already donated some of her fees to start the foundation but would not say how much.


Heritage Bankcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Judge Blocks New Rules On Emissions
A Federal judge today blocked the adoption of stringent automobile emissions standards that would have required the production of cleaner cars sold in New York State by 1995.
Environmental lobbyists said the ruling was the first of its kind in the country and could affect many other states that have adopted the clean air rules known as the California standards.
New York and New Jersey are part of a compact of 12 Northeastern states and the District of Columbia that have agreed to adopt the standards by the end of the decade.


Review/Ice Skating; Champions in a Display of Patriotism
Some 20 minutes after the announced starting time for the Ice Capades on Thursday night at Madison Square Garden, Christopher Bowman, a star of the show, asked: "How about seeing just a little bit of skating right now? Does that sound good?"
By then, it sure did.
When the Ice Capades skates, it can do more than sound good.
It can look good, convey excitement and display heights of the balletic athleticism that makes ice skating so spectacular and thrilling.
Given the opportunity, stars like Mr.
Bowman, Dorothy Hamill and Rory Flack deliver the goods.
But for a skating show, the Ice Capades packs an awful lot of talk, especially in its first half.


Bruce Kelly, 44, Architect of Strawberry Fields
Bruce Kelly, a landscape architect who created the gently welcoming realm of Strawberry Fields in Central Park, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 44.
He died of AIDS, his family said.


Associated Banc-Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Home building grew 5.5 percent last month and rose in the year for the first time since 1986.
Yet housing starts are still low and have not invigorated the economy.
Indeed, first-time claims for unemployment insurance rose again.  [ Page 37. ]
The huge California Public Employees Retirement System will meet with managements of 12 companies in which it holds stock to discuss improvements for 1993.  [ 36. ]


Russia and Partners Meet, But Unity Still Eludes Them
Leaders of the Commonwealth of Independent States met today in the Belarus capital, Minsk, for a summit meeting that once again failed to give real shape or purpose to the association that emerged 13 months ago as the successor to the Soviet Union.
The meeting, which was delayed three times, ended without resolving a quarrel between the commonwealth's two largest members, Russia and Ukraine, over the control of strategic nuclear weapons.


Willamette Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


First Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Great Southern Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dim Hope For Bosnia
After five months of deadlock and walkouts, the peace talks on Bosnia and Herzegovina will resume on Saturday in Geneva with all three warring parties committed, at least in principle, to the outline of a settlement.
But the Serbian nationalists' decision to endorse the peace plan, at an assembly session at their headquarters in the mountains outside Sarajevo this week, has raised widespread doubts about whether the conflict will come to an end anytime soon.


N. H. Strouse, Chairman, 86, Of Ad Agency
Norman H. Strouse, who started as a secretary in a newspaper advertising office and became the head of the world's largest ad agency, died on Tuesday at a hospital in St.
Helena, Calif.
He was 86 and lived in St.
Helena.
He died of Parkinson's disease, his family said.


Briggs &amp; Stratton reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Police Bullet Hits Sergeant
A police sergeant was injured last night in Queens when another officer fired at a robbery suspect and struck the sergeant instead, the police said.
The sergeant, Gerald Corrigan, 30, was grazed on the back of his head and was not seriously injured, said Sgt.
Ed Burns, a police spokesman.
The injured officer was treated last night at Bellevue Hospital.
The shooting occurred at 8:43 P.M., when the sergeant and two police officers confronted two men who emerged on the fourth-floor landing of 43-28 39th Place, in Sunnyside, where a robbery had been reported, Sgt.
Burns said.
One suspect was taken into custody, and the other escaped, he said.
Two handguns were recovered.


SCEcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bridge
Many tournament players conduct a post-mortem after the play is complete, comparing the scores with their estimates and trying to discover whether they could have done better.
For winners there is a slight risk in this, as an episode at the Tri-State Regional Championships in Port Chester, N.Y., a week ago demonstrates.
The day ended with Aaron Silverstein of Manhattan and Charles Whitney of Newark victorious by a margin of two match points.
The following morning Silverstein studied his scores, and promptly reported an error to the officials: He had been credited with a high score on a board on which he had in fact done badly.


Kobo Abe, 68, the Skeptical Poet Of an Uprooted Society, Is Dead
Kobo Abe, a literary master whose haunting visions of people senselessly trapped by modern urban life made him one of Japan's most highly acclaimed postwar authors, died today.
He was 68.
After a brief illness, Mr.
Abe died of heart failure in a hospital in Tokyo, hospital officials said.


F.B.I. Chief Insists He'll Stay Although Support Is Fading
A day after the White House sent him an unmistakable signal of its disfavor, William S. Sessions said today that he would not step down from his job as Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
"I have no intention of resigning," Mr. Sessions said in a telephone interview.


Released From Care, Jean Harris is Freed
Jean S. Harris regained her freedom last night after 12 years in prison for killing her lover, Dr.
Herman Tarnower.
She was released directly from a hospital in Westchester County where she was recovering from heart surgery.
"She was released early this evening," said David Ernst, a spokesman for the State Division of Parole.
"She went to the home of friends in Westchester County."


Corrections
A picture caption in some editions on Thursday about President Clinton's saxophone-playing at an inaugural ball misidentifed the musician clapping to the left of Mr.
Clinton.
He was Everette Harp, not Joe Henderson.


PPG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Williams's World Is Nastier
To the Editor:
David Richards argues valiantly that David Mamet's female characters are starting to come alive dramatically, but no cigar.
The ones cited are either apprentice con men or dupes.


'Passion Fish' Nourishes the Grown-Ups
John Sayles is one of those unfortunate film makers who is often damned with great praise.
"Matewan," the tale of a 1920 West Virginia miners' strike, and "City of Hope," the story of racial tension and urban blight in a New Jersey town, were acclaimed for being rigorous, uncompromising social visions.
That kind of praise can kill a picture, and pretty much did.
Audiences saw code words for dreary, depressing, stay away.
In fact, both films are exhilarating in a gritty, hard-to-sell way.
They carry viewers to unglamorous places where people are as worried and messed up as your next-door neighbors, though a lot more interesting about it.
But try explaining that to a moviegoer who fears that seeing a Sayles film will be like going to school.


Tech Notes; A Closer Look at Inner Organs
IN an elegant variation on coal miners' headgear, the Battelle Company of Columbus, Ohio, has developed a lightweight, helmet-mounted video display monitor designed to illumine the dark recesses of the human body.
The monitor provides surgeons and other operating-room personnel with close-up views of internal procedures.
Instead of watching a television monitor several feet away, surgeons can focus on a personal monitor just inches away.


A RIVER OF ONE'S OWN
Sport fishing is not necessarily a man's game, but it does have a tradition and history that have purpose, even if that tradition and history were created by men.
Sandor overlooks the beauty of a ritual of which I am a 50-year acolyte.


Topics of The Times; Operation Racket
When President Clinton manages to assemble a Justice Department, his new Solicitor General faces an intriguing question posed by the Supreme Court: Is Operation Rescue, which terrorizes women who try to use abortion clinics, a criminal enterprise?
If so, the Court could find the organization subject to lawsuits for mobster tactics that deny women their rights and the public its peace -- strongarm tactics like property destruction, harassment and assault.
A lower court found Operation Rescue's methods "reprehensible" but held, "reluctantly," that RICO, the Racketeer Influenced Corrupt Organizations Act, applied only when the gang's motive was economic.
The high court justices, trying to decide whether to review that decision, called for the Justice Department's advice.


A Summer School Program for Teachers
IT may be some students' idea of the ultimate revenge: summer school for teachers.
But Westchester students will be the final beneficiaries of a new program planned by the State University of New York here to establish an intensive teacher-training program on its campus this July.
The goal of the program, called Purchase Teachers' Academy, is to inform teachers about developments in the subjects they teach and give them the skills necessary to implement their new knowledge.
The result should be better-quality teaching in local schools.


Italian Family Style Marches Eastward
PASSING heaping platters of food around a table is, of course, not new.
But harnessing that homey serving style to restaurants is one of the Island's most successful trends.
Italian family dining has long been a favorite in Nassau County restaurants.
A few years ago it spread West and took sophisticated Manhattan by storm.
It has also been marching eastward, although with much less fanfare.
La Pentola in St.
James, which opened last month, is on the eastern fringe of the expansion.


The Sky's the Limit, But Don't Bank on Elvis
FRESH from Elvis ecstasy, the United States Postal Service this week moves on to another hot topic for stamp designs, space exploration.
Several surveys by the Linn's Stamp Weekly and American Topical Association, a national group of people who collect stamps by subject, have shown that space travel is the most popular topic among collectors.
Tomorrow, in Huntsville, Ala., the Postal Service is to issue a booklet of five 29-cent stamps that depict fantasy voyages in space.
Of course, the post office cannot please all collectors all the time, and some space-stamp collectors are complaining about this issue.
They say that only real events belong on topical stamps.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Mike Kingery, outfielder, on a minor-league contract.
Basketball National Basketball Association  INDIANA PACERS -- Placed Kenny Williams, forward, on the injured list.
Activated LaSalle Thompson, forward, from the injured list.
Hockey National Hockey League  DEVILS -- Recalled Claude Vilgrain, left wing, from Cincinnati of the Internatioanl Hockey League under emergency conditions.
Recalled Jason Miller, center, from Utica of the American Hockey League under emergency conditions.
WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Recalled Steve Konowalchuk, center, from the Baltimore Skipjacks of the American Hockey League.
Soccer National Professional Soccer League  CLEVELAND CRUNCH -- Signed Tony Csisar, midfielder, to a developmental contract.
College  COLORADO -- Named E.J.
Kreis strength and conditioning coordinator.
YESHIVA -- Announced Leba Spieglman, center, has left the women's basketball team and Deedee Mcklin, guard, has rejoined the team.


Kimberly Mango, M. P. Thompson
Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth W. Mango of Branford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kimberly A. Mango, to Michael P. Thompson, a son of John R. Thompson and Nancy K. Thompson, both of West Hartford, Conn.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Mango, 26, is an associate at Shipman &amp; Goodwin, a law firm in Hartford.
She and her fiance both graduated from Dartmouth College and received law degrees from the University of Connecticut.


Croat-Serb Clash in Croatia
Croatian forces and breakaway Serbs were trading fierce artillery and small-arms fire near the Adriatic port of Zadar.
Page 12.


More Ideas but Few Solutions to Deer Herds
THE battles go on between gardeners and deer.
Each season brings more solutions, more repellent sprays and more ideas to protect plants from the animals.
Two points remain, however.
The deer herds continually increase and it is more convenient for them to devour "fast foods" in the garden than to hunt for their dinner.
Serious gardeners usually learn that the only sure solution is a fence, a high one of at least eight feet, and if electrified, all the better.


The Reformation of a Street Preacher
Al Sharpton was up on the stage, that familiar voice booming and his words streaming in a hot cascade over an audience of teen-agers, most of them black, who strained forward in their chairs.
The Democratic senatorial primary was long since over.
But Sharpton looked as though none of that had really registered.
Two months after his defeat, he was still running.
His speaking, handshaking, protest marching, celebrity bow-taking, back-room strategizing schedule was so busy that his youngest daughter, Ashley, who is just 5 and perhaps does not yet understand what makes her father run, had to ask, finally, "Does Daddy know yet that he didn't win?"
Nothing that small could ever stop Al Sharpton.


Prosecutors Shift Attack Against Mafia
With their main Mafia targets convicted or awaiting trial, Federal and state authorities in the metropolitan region are preparing a new campaign against the second tier of organized-crime leaders in New York and New Jersey.
In the last five years, most of the Mafia's bosses, underbosses, and acting bosses -- John Gotti, Salvatore Gravano, Carmine Persico, Victor Orena, Alphonse D'Arco and Vittorio Amuso -- have been imprisoned or have defected to become Government witnesses.
On Tuesday, after 32 months as a fugitive sought on racketeering and murder charges, Anthony Salvatore Casso, the acting boss of the Lucchese family, was arrested in New Jersey.


U.S. Court Orders Gas-Vapor Traps for New Autos
A Federal appellate court on Friday directed the Environmental Protection Agency to require auto makers to equip new cars and light trucks with small canisters to trap gasoline vapors that escape into the air when gasoline is pumped.
The vapors are an important source of chemicals that form urban smog.
The ruling by a three-member panel of judges reverses a decision President George Bush made last March four days before the Michigan Republican primary.
At the time, Mr.
Bush hoped to attract support from auto workers and executives by stopping the Environmental Protection Agency from writing regulations requiring the canisters.
Mr.
Bush based his decision on auto industry estimates that the canisters would add $20 to $30 to the cost of a new car and on an opinion by the Transportation Department that they were a safety hazard.


The Executive Computer; In the Home Office, Equipment May Still Be Deductible
Personal computers and other tools of the information age have allowed millions of workers to do some or all of their jobs from home, whether it is running a small business, "telecommuting" or simply catching up on paperwork after a day at the office.
A recent study by Link Resources Inc., a research company in New York, found that 25 million Americans generate their households' main income from a business at home or maintain an office space at home to do work directly related to their primary jobs.
The tax consequences of such offices are on a lot of people's minds, especially after the Supreme Court upheld on Jan. 12 the Internal Revenue Service's rather narrow view of the deductibility of home offices.


A Face Lift for Colosseum
Rome's Colosseum is getting a long-deserved face lift, but the work should not interfere with sightseeing; in the initial phases, through October, there will be no scaffolding on the exterior.
So far the project has not required the closing of any areas that were not already off-limits to visitors.
Hence, parts of the second and third levels of the auditorium remain closed, as do sections of the ground level.
In the final phases of the project, set for 1997, the substructure and underground corridors will be covered so that these may be restored.
After the work has been completed, this area, which includes the halls and corridors where gladiators and beasts were prepared for combat, will be opened to the public.
Currently the substructure is closed.


Contracts to Provide Ombudsmen's Services
We appreciate "Short-Staffed Ombudsmen's Offices Face Onslaught of Complaints"  [ Dec. 20 ]  on the growing importance of Ombudspersons in nursing and adult homes in Suffolk and Nassau Counties.
It would be very useful if the public understood that the Suffolk County Department for the Aging and the Nassau County Department of Senior Citizens have contracts with the state for the Ombudservice programs.
They are administered by two highly respected nonprofit voluntary agencies, the Family Service League of Suffolk County and the Family Service Association of Nassau County.
People who have used the services of our weekly volunteer Ombudspeople have expressed gratitude for the help they have received.
RUTH BERGER Director, Ombudservice Program Suffolk County EVELYN WEINSTEIN Director, Ombudservice Program Nassau County


Corrections
An article last Sunday about a new process for converting natural gas to methanol misidentified a chemical.
From 1992 to 1994 the United States is expected to triple its capacity to make methyl tertiary butyl ether, which is derived from methanol, not to triple the capacity to make methanol itself.


Perspectives: The Assessment Roll; Falling Values an Omen for Tax Collector
GENIALITY prevailed amid the dishevelment of newly renovated offices at 50 Broadway last week as the GFC Capital Resources Group moved in.
It may have been attributable to the satisfaction that Allen I. Gross, the 41-year-old president, was feeling.
"This is a dream come true," said Mr.
Gross, beaming.
He finds himself moving to the nerve center of world finance from the Borough Park section of Brooklyn, where he started the business 10 years as the Gelt Financial Corporation, getting construction loans for home builders and mortgage loans for their buyers.


'Acting Should Be A Joy'
To the Editor:
Stella Adler, who died late last month at the age of 91, broke the mold around the teaching of the Stanislavski system of acting.
The myth of the Method in many areas had become rigid, encased in sacred do's and don'ts.
She challenged them all, to make it a living, ever-changing approach to acting, rid of cliches and dogma.


2 Candidates Begin Trying To Defuse Aliens Issue
Strategists for New Jersey's Republican gubernatorial candidates, Christine Todd Whitman and W. Cary Edwards, huddled today to assess and control the damage from their admissions yesterday that they had employed illegal aliens and failed to pay taxes on their wages.
The candidates and their aides, as well as outside observers, concluded that unlike Zoe Baird, whose confirmation as President Clinton's Attorney General was derailed by a similar revelation, Mrs.
Whitman and Mr.
Edwards would survive to run in the Republican primary, but not without a struggle.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
125.04
126.10
124.45
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5900
1.6475
1.5925
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2809
1.2813
1.1505
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5305
1.5315
1.7960
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Neediest Cases Fund Offers Hope to the Homeless With H.I.V.
On a block in Harlem where drugs have scarred countless lives, a man and a building have found redemption.
The man had spent large chunks of his life abusing heroin and wandering the streets of New York City before he contracted the virus that causes AIDS.
The building, a sturdy 19th-century brownstone, had fallen into disrepair and was often used by squatters as a crack house.


For the Crime-Weary, Security Through the Mist
Unnerved by a spate of violent carjackings two months ago, Sandra Martinez bought some protection: a can of Mace on a key ring.
A week later, she picked up another can to keep in her glove compartment.
And another, to clip on her waist when she jogs.
On Thursday, she returned here to the Rowe-Manse Emporium, a department store that displays Mace at every counter, and bought a fourth can of the "pepper-fortified" tear gas spray -- to tape on the back of her front door.


Plan the Kitchen and Avoid Pitfalls
READY-TO-ASSEMBLE kitchen cabinets make remodeling a kitchen much easier than when cabinets were just available ready-made or built to order by a cabinetmaker.
But planning the sizes, and determining how the cabinets will look when installed, can still be challenging, unless the new cabinets will be exactly the same sizes as the old ones.
Many stores selling cabinets have computerized-design services.
They are often free and can produce views of how the kitchen would look when completed and figure dimensions and prices.
But making scale drawings on graph paper is also a reliable and easy way to plan, one that allows making comparisons between cabinet models carried by different stores and frees you from dealing with salespeople until you have clear ideas of what you want.


Mutual Funds; Sharing the Load, and Other Topics
READERS have written recently asking about sales commissions, fund performance data, tax-exempt funds and more.
Following are some of their questions.
Question: How much of the sales commission do stockbrokers keep when they sell shares in load funds?


Have Snow, Forget the Travel
EVEN though machine-made snow is the staple of their existence, Connecticut ski areas have always been affected by weather factors miles away.
"Unless they see snow, a lot of people, particularly beginners, won't go skiing," said Ed Beckley, general manager at Mount Southington.
"They have to see snow before they think skiing."


A Sports White Paper for Clinton
Having made his initial cabinet and staff appointments and settled into the Oval Office, President Clinton can now get on with the business of governing.
Sort of.
How he organizes his White House and who he puts in certain non-Cabinet posts will add texture to the broad vision of renewal articulated in his inaugural address.
Presidential sports policy involves far more than calling the locker room of the winning team after the championship game.
For example, some of his organizational and hiring decisions can and should reflect commitments to specific policy aims in the area of sports and fitness.


SETTLING IN: The View From Rome; Vatican Attacks Clinton's Moves on Abortion
The Vatican castigated President Clinton today for his new abortion policies, saying his frequent calls for an American renewal have "embarked on the paths of death and violence against innocent beings."
Both the speed of the Vatican's response, which came in an unsigned editorial, and its harsh language suggested that Pope John Paul II was signaling the onset of a public struggle with the Clinton Administration on an issue that divides American Catholics as much as it inspires some of the church's strongest beliefs.


Kerrigan And Davis Win Titles
Nancy Kerrigan persevered during a shaky coronation tonight, while two less heralded figure skaters were knighted more nobly at the United States championships.
Kerrigan skated far less than her best, stumbling on a triple lutz and abandoning two other triple jumps in midflight.
Still, she survived the evening, won the national title and headed for the world championships at Prague in March.
There, among others, she will be joined by the impressive second-place finisher, Lisa Ervin, who is just 15 years old, and by the surprise men's winner, Scott Davis.


A New Gallery, a Display of Prints and a Touch of Manhattan'Vital Trees,'    A Princeton Show    The University League of Princeton University has its own gallery and a full schedule of shows but, a venerable institution of some 75 years, it does not aggressively seek publicity. Previous exhibitors have included artists on the order of Marguerite Doernbach, but the present incumbent, William Knight, is a lesser-known, albeit with many appearances in group shows to his credit.   To the degree that he seizes upon trees as living organisms, Mr. Knight evokes Charles Burchfield -- but fleetingly so, for there is no anthropomorphism here. The dark trunks of junipers rise against a lemon yellow sky. Coniferous growth in colors ranging from dark green to yellow and silver gray seems to shudder as it casts long, dark shadows; not for nothing does the artist call his subjects "Vital Trees."    Although Mr. Knight has yet to achieve consistency of surface and the brushstroke that "speaks," it is plain that there lurks in him an Expressionist awaiting release.   The show closes on Friday; the gallery is on the campus at 171 Broadmead. Hours are 9 A.M. to 3 P.M. Monday through Friday. For information: (609) 258-3650.
WITH a liquor store and an insurance broker for neighbors, along with fancy food for taking out on the other side of the street, a new art gallery would appear to have the basics for survival.
Whether or not this is so, Frankel Nathanson, scarcely two months old, seems already to have put down a root in Maplewood, at 9 Highland Place -- and without recourse to either crafts or frame making.
That the dealer, Marjorie Nathanson, brings with her a whiff of Manhattan may be because she was an assistant curator at the Museum of Modern Art and a consultant at Sotheby Parke Bernet.
Wisely, though, she is still testing the New Jersey waters -- with prints, mostly by well-known contemporaries.
Jim Dine leads the way with a 1976 etching of the Eiffel Tower exploding like an oil well above the words, "Paris Smiles" in sans-serif lettering.
He is accompanied by Frank Stella in his "lyrical" Minimalist mode with a 1973 lithograph of two striped squares, one black and white, the other in color.
With the appearance of William Brice's small etchings, monochrome and colored, emerges a hint of the dealer's preference -- for small shapes drawn in fine lines and suspended against smudgy backgrounds.
Grace Markham, an artist new to this observer, achieves a similar effect in "Foxtrot," a rectangle in which shapes -- a house, vegetation and possibly clouds -- hang like doodles touched here and there with color.
Then come the political comedians, Komar and Melamid.
These Russian-born artists contribute a 1983 silk screen of a red banner reading "Thank You Comrade Stalin for Our Happy Childhood." They are also responsible for a black and white silk screen of a repaired Venus de Milo, armed with a hammer and sickle.
Tom Marioni's color woodblock of the pi symbol, printed in blood red on white silk, looks as Oriental as "Flying Yen" in the same medium.
But neither symbol offers clues to the artist's past as the enfant terrible of Bay Area Conceptualism.
In his book on San Francisco art, Thomas Albright tells how Mr.
Marioni, given $500 to produce an installation for a Jesuit university, spent $350 of it on an old Fiat and the rest on invitations to the show, which he titled "My First Car." Having driven the vehicle up the gallery steps, Mr.
Marioni parked, contending that the church should support artists as it had during the Renaissance.
The show lasted one day.
A British sculptor known for his shapes compiled of plastic junk, Tony Cragg is here represented by "Suburbs I, III and V," all of them pale color etchings of rubber stamps congregating as if they were figures by de Chirico.
The most recent works in the selection are Joel Shapiro's 1992 aquatints of colored slabs that are formally related to his sculptures but do not evoke them.
Yvonne Jacquette's aerial view of Skowhegan in black and white is a bit humdrum, but her "Clouds Obscuring San Diego," which looks like a pastel but is billed as a color etching, is an enticing mass of purplish-brown laced with necklaces of colored dots for lights.
The show runs through Feb. 17.
The gallery is open from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Wednesday through Saturday and until 8 P.M.
Thursday.


Demands Growing for an India That's Truly Hindu
When India gained independence from Britain 46 years ago, it enshrined secularism and tolerance in its Constitution and spurned the idea of identifying itself as a Hindu country, emphasizing economic and social progress.
Now, after a month and a half of sectarian violence that followed the destruction of a 16th-century mosque by Hindu militants, many of India's Hindus are confronting their religious and cultural identity more starkly than they have at any time since independence and have advanced the view that Hindu values need to be defended and propogated, by violence if necessary.


Sarah A. Stackpole, Arnold E. Eggers
Dr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Stackpole of Elizabeth, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Sarah Alice Stackpole to Dr.
Arnold Edwin Eggers, a son of Mrs.
Harry Eggers of New York and the late Dr.
Eggers.
A May wedding is planned.
Dr.
Stackpole is a research fellow in surgery at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
Her mother, Dr.
Henriette Abel, is an assistant professor of medicine there and a dermatologist in Elizabeth.
Her father is a urologist at the Urological Group of Union County in Roselle, N.J.
The prospective bride graduated cum laude from Amherst College and received an M.D. from Cornell University.


Emigres in Suburbs Find Life's Flip Side
For deep-dyed New Yorkers, the dream of a house in the suburbs can be coupled with some rude awakenings.
Roger Sobell, native to Manhattan, was fed up with paying almost as much to park two cars on the Upper West Side as he paid for his rent-controlled apartment.
But six months after moving to Larchmont, he had a more engulfing problem -- three feet of water in the basement, the legacy of the raging rainstorm last Dec. 11.


At Work; It's 1993. Is Your Office Outmoded?
BY commission or omission, how offices look is no coincidence.
Most Fortune 500 companies are organized and furnished by design.
Decisions about who goes where and gets what perk are deliberated.
Smaller businesses have tended to cobble their corporate look as they grow and develop, but how the use of office space evolves still reflects, de facto, relationships between co-workers and their differential access to power.
A nifty new book called "Office Access" is designed to guide businesses through the tricky waters of planning an office, from the sublimina of distributing offices to the nuts and bolts of choosing curtain fabrics or lighting fixtures.


Koch to Skip Deadline For Entering '95 Cup
Still mulling over whether he wants to throw his hat into the America's Cup ring again, the America
financier, Bill Koch, says he plans to ignore the first deadline for entering the 1995 races.
"I do not want the America's Cup to be my life's work," said Koch in a telephone interview last week.
"I truly love it, but I love other things in life, too. I'm still agonizing over it."


Clinton and Yeltsin Aides to Arrange Summit
President Clinton and President Boris N. Yeltsin spoke by telephone today and agreed to arrange a summit.
The White House Press Secretary, Dee Dee Myers, said Mr.
Clinton and Mr.
Yeltsin had agreed that Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher and the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, would meet to work out the details.


Clinton Settles In at the Oval Office


Nana Nicola Olivas, Jamie W. McEwen
Nana Nicola Olivas, the daughter of Maximilian Olivas and Nancy Azara, both of New York, was married yesterday to Jamie Wallace McEwen, a son of Donald and Jean McEwen of Portland, Ore.
The Rev.
Lee Hancock, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Union Theological Seminary in New York.
Ms.
Olivas-McEwen, 25, is a painter in New York.
Her father is a trumpet player.
Her mother is a sculptor in New York.


A SENSE OF PLACE
A new column, "A Sense of Place," begins today in the New Jersey Weekly; it will appear on the fourth Sunday of each month.
The author, Michael Norman, a former New York Times reporter, is an associate professor of journalism at New York University.
In the column, Mr.
Norman says, he will explore "how the dislocations of modern life -- economic, political and psychological -- have shaken our sense of place and order and made us re-examine our notions about the cities, towns and villages we call home."
MONTCLAIR


Presidents Ask a Place in Posterity; Posterity Keeps Rearranging Them
AS Bill Clinton begins to seek a place in history, and George Bush wonders what his will be, they need to remember that those places are fixed not just by their accomplishments and their failings, but also by the values of the time when they are judged.
For most of the 19th century, for example, Andrew Jackson was dismissed as a backwoodsman whose populism wrecked the economy and as the forefather of the spoils system whose excesses civil service was meant to cure.
But in this century, new times called forth different values.
Old Hickory was seen by the first Roosevelt as the exemplar of a strong Presidency, and by the second as a great upper and lower case Democrat, and the histories have reflected those shifts.


Mary Dudine, Ronald Kyle
Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Dudine Jr. of Water Mill, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Mary Margaret Dudine to Ronald William Kyle, a son of Enid Kyle of Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada, and the late Cyril Kyle.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Dudine is a senior corporate legal assistant at the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
Her father is a senior partner at the New York law firm of Darby &amp; Darby.


Business Is Losing Patience With The Cold War's Export Police
IN the twisted skein that is the post-cold-war world, a big tangle is Cocom, the 17-nation Western trade organization that polices high-technology exports to Russia.
Western companies complain that Cocom -- short for the Coordinating Committee on Multilateral Export Controls -- continues to fight the cold war.
It is also being cautious to a fault, they say, in guarding against sensitive technology being resold to unintended recipients like Iran or Syria.


Jessica Crocker, Paul M. Hayes Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Allan C. Crocker of Saratoga Springs, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jessica Ann Crocker, a lawyer with the United States Treasury Department in Boston, to Paul M. Hayes Jr., a lawyer with the Massachusetts State Police Department and a partner in the Boston law firm of Casey, Hayes &amp; Regan.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Crocker graduated from Skidmore College, and she and her fiance received their law degrees from the New England School of Law.
Her father is the assistant director of development at Skidmore, in Saratoga Springs.


Men at Work
FASHION shows, it turns out, are really just business meetings with music.
Most of the 250 people who crowded into Donna Karan's gold-colored showroom on Tuesday morning to preview her fall men's wear collection were conservatively dressed in safe, serious dark suits.
"This is what's wrong with men's wear in this country," said Garth Condit, a fashion stylist, surveying the room filled with the most influential men's wear buyers, editors and retailers in the United States.
"I feel like a freak in my sweater. Everyone here looks like he has to rush back to the bank after the show."


Specimens of British Romance
INVITATION TO THE MARRIED LIFE
By Angela Huth. 290 pp. New York:  Grove Press. $19.95.


A Cocktail Shaker The Thin Man Would Love
Who says you can't find good stuff in thrift shops anymore?
Just sitting there on the shelf at the Astoria Goodwill, this Depression-era cocktail shaker is a bona fide collectible, a memento of the post-Prohibition days when the martini was the cocktail of choice.


Caroline Ewing, Jonathan Crystal
Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander C. Ewing of Winston-Salem, N.C., have announced the engagement of his daughter, Caroline Day Ewing, to Jonathan Michael Crystal, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harvey Crystal of Beverly Hills, Calif.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Ewing, 27, is a lawyer at the Center for Public Representation, a nonprofit public-interest law firm in Newton, Mass.
She graduated from Yale University and received a law degree from Harvard University.


Jesse Jackson's Unfair Plan
To the Sports Editor:
In recent weeks, much attention has been paid to racial tensions and racial relations in professional sports.
One area has been given particular attention, this being the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's allegations that an affirmative action program must be implemented in professional baseball in order for minority groups to gain more key positions in major league baseball.


Lesson for a High-Tech President
IT is no mystery why Silicon Valley became Clinton country in last year's election.
The Clinton Administration's style and policy pronouncements appeal to the people who labor in high-technology industries like software and semiconductors.
The Clintonites talk technospeak, often at length.
They aren't squeamish about declaring that some industries are more equal than others, or that these favored high-tech fields should get government help and taxpayers' money.
President Clinton arrives in Washington with an ambitious technology policy that calls for using government-backed research projects, tax incentives and trade policy to help high-tech industries become engines of economic growth and job creation.


Elizabeth Meuller, David N. Sheehan
Elizabeth Eden Meuller, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dixon M. Meuller Jr. of Mill Neck, L.I., was married yesterday to David Nichols Sheehan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas E. Sheehan of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
Mrs.
Sheehan, 30, is a trust executive for Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is the president and owner of Proto-Color Inc. in New York, a graphic reproduction studio where her mother, Ruth J. Meuller, is the vice president.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE SIGN OF THE SEAHORSE
A Tale of Greed and High Adventure in Two Acts.
Written and illustrated by Graeme Base.
Unpaged.
New York:  Harry N. Abrams. $19.95. (Ages 8 and up)


Front and Center: Bruins Overrun Devils
The Devils allowed the Bruins to parade freely in front of Chris Terreri for a great part of the night at Boston Garden, and they paid the price.
The Bruins had the diminutive Terreri at their mercy numerous times directly in front of the goal, and they capitalized enough for a 7-5 victory that avenged a loss to the Devils here two weeks ago.


We Have Met the Pedophiles and They Are Us
CHILD-LOVING
The Erotic Child and Victorian Culture.
By James R. Kincaid. 413 pp.
New York: Routledge. $35.


World Titles Spread Beyond U.S. and Italy
UNTIL four years ago, world championship play was dominated for 40 years by Americans and Italians.
But that has all changed.
The winners of open events, teams and pairs, from 1989 through 1992 were from Brazil, Germany, Iceland and France.
The only repeat winners in that period were Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco of Brazil, who won the Bermuda Bowl in Perth, Australia, in 1989, and the World Pairs title in Geneva in 1990.
In the last year, they won the Sunday Times event in London, the Reisinger Board-a-Match Teams at the Fall Nationals in Orlando, Fla., and the Cap Gemini World Top tournament in The Hague a week ago.
It is hard to resist the conclusion that they are the world's best pair..


Riding the Crest of an Italian Food Wave
WITHIN the last 16 years, a trim little frame house set back from U.S. 1, where Stamford melts into Old Greenwich, has been host to at least three restaurants.
Now a fourth has taken possession.
Ciaobella! (Hello, Beautiful!) is an elegant looking restaurant riding the crest of the Italian food craze.
To the right of the foyer, down a few steps, is a large nonsmoking dining room with walls of pale and dark green ornamented with sleek art, a formal fireplace at the far end, well-spaced tables with stylish chairs and a ficus tree gracing the room's center.
A smaller room for diners who smoke, to the left off the foyer and also down several steps, is equally inviting, with its own gas-lit fireplace.


A Trove of Greene and Greene Houses
AT the turn of the century, Midwesterners came to Pasadena to winter in a semi-arid landscape offering dependable sun and panoramas of the majestic San Gabriel Mountain range and its expansive valley.
The houses they built in these rolling foothills and along the boulder-strewn, oak-rich ravine that cleaves the city -- the Arroyo Seco -- record the values of what has been called the Arroyo Culture.
These new arrivals were the liberal Democrats who supported national parks, women's suffrage, progressive education, healthful living and a Craftsman ethic and esthetic -- the Americans who were looking to the land itself to forge an American cultural identity independent of Europe's.
Home-grown architecture was very much an instrument of this idealism, and the unpretentious wood-frame villas they built in Pasadena, fused with its noble landscape, embodied the apparently simple life and democratic values they espoused.


William McMeekin, Deidre Callahan
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas L. Callahan Jr. of Westfield, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Deidre Brady Callahan, to William David McMeekin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert T. McMeekin of Redmond, Wash.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Callahan, 27, is a secretary in the marketing department of the I.T.T.
Technical Institute in Seattle, where her fiance is an engineering student.
Her father is an executive vice president of the United States equities department in New York for Yamaichi Securities Company, the Tokyo securities brokerage.


Baseball's Exemption
To the Sports Editor:
Clark Griffith's "Good Reason for Baseball's Antitrust Exemption" (The Times, Jan. 17) completely misses the mark.
The outdated and now illogical 1922 Supreme Court decision held that baseball was not subject to the antitrust laws because the local business of baseball did not involve interstate commerce, a necessary element for the antitrust laws to be applied.


THE WORLD
EVEN before taking the oath of office, President Clinton was bombarded with advice on how to deal with Russia and the other former Soviet republics.
Most of it portrayed Boris N. Yeltsin as a critical and threatened bulwark against the revival of an evil empire.
If the United States fails to shore him up, goes the argument, Russia could fall to Communists, fascists, revanchist generals or worse.
Yes, Russia is in a perilous state, and the risks this carries are indisputable.
But not so long ago, many pundits were similarly arguing that only Mikhail S. Gorbachev's finger in the dike was keeping a new cold war at bay.
In those days, Americans and other Western leaders kept the meddlesome Mr.
Yeltsin at arm's length.
Only a month before the August 1991 putsch, George Bush was still instructing the Ukrainians that their place was in a Soviet Union.


Timman Ties Score In Match With Short
JAN TIMMAN evened his final world championship candidates match with Nigel Short by winning Game 7 on Wednesday in San Lorenzo de El Escorial, Spain.
The 41-year-old Dutch grandmaster and the 28-year-old English grandmaster, having drawn Game 6 on Monday, stand at 3 1/2-3 1/2.
It will take 7 1/2 points to win the 14-game series and claim the $124,000 prize and the right to challenge Gary Kasparov to a title match in August.
The loser's share is $76,000.


Balkan Peace Talks Resume as War Drags On
Overshadowed by a renewed offensive in western Croatia and by battles in Bosnia and Herzegovina, talks on ending the Balkan war resumed here today among top leaders of all hostile factions.
Shortly after noon, the leaders of the Serbs, Croats and the Muslim-led Government of Bosnia renewed pledges to accept the principles of a peace settlement drafted by a special United Nations mediator, Cyrus R. Vance, and the European Community envoy, Lord Owen.
The proposal would create a reconstituted republic with 10 ethnically mixed provinces that would be largely self-governing.


Trying to Get There From Here
To the Editor:
Rick Hill and Vinay Kapoor ("Don't Wax Nostalgic for Airline Regulation," Letters, Dec. 20) have obviously not tried to take a plane to any city not on regular, well-traveled routes.
I have occasion to fly out to Eugene, Ore., from time to time and with the glories of deregulation you almost can't get there from here anymore.
Last August, the choice was between an eight-hour flight that set down in a couple of places or an overnight stay in San Francisco, with a flight the following day.
This is certainly not service as we knew it under regulation.
RUTH C. KAINEN Chevy Chase, Md., Jan. 13


Foreign Affairs; 'Chris' And Aspin And Lake
Almost 30 years ago in the U.S.
Embassy in Saigon, the lives of a young Army lieutenant -- Les Aspin -- and three very junior Foreign Service officers in their mid-20's -- Anthony Lake, Peter Tarnoff and Frank Wisner -- touched one another.
Today, the four sit at the pinnacle of power and, together with Secretary of State Warren Christopher, form two interlocking triangles that will command America's national security machinery.
In the top triangle, two rumply policy intellectuals -- Defense Secretary Aspin and Mr.
Lake, the national security adviser, will vie with each other to shape strategy, while Mr.
Christopher essentially counsels and reacts.


Gunmen, $150 a Day
On a misty July afternoon when I first arrived in the Somali bush town of Baidoa, two young workers of the International Committee of the Red Cross greeted me nervously on the veranda of their compound.
A journalist, accompanied by a photographer with a bulging bag of equipment, was more than they wanted to cope with.
We could stay the night but after that we were on our own.
It had taken them weeks to gain the confidence of the suspicious Somalis who, with guns and no sympathy, lorded over this town they would later call the city of death.
In fact, our overnight hosts provided Fiona McDougall, the photographer, and me with a vehicle, four armed guards and a Somali translator, our essential tools for the next six months.
We didn't have to go far to see what the Red Cross had been telling the world but few had chosen to believe.


Corrections
The Your Own Account column last Sunday included an erroneous location supplied by the Hay Group for the home office of one of its consultants, Martin Leshner.
He is based in Jersey City, not Chicago.


Frames Amid Curves at Choate's Mellon Center
THERE is no missing the contribution of the architect I. M. Pei to the campus of Choate Rosemary Hall in Wallingford.
The way it stands on a grassy slope overlooking Christian Street, this handsome pile of beige concrete and glass could be a monument for a fallen hero but in fact is the arts center named for Andrew Mellon.
The center's gallery, a glassed-in apse that follows the curving wall of the theater within, is the scene of an exhibition by the British-born sculptor Garth Evans.
One might have supposed that this convex surface would pose the same display problems as the concave walls of the Guggenheim Museum.
But the curve turns out to be gentler and well suited to -- almost made for -- Mr.
Evans's wood constructions.
There are 24 of them, hanging in groups of four, and each is a kind of window frame that would be about two feet square were it not warped.


No Delays for Public Trust
"Let us give this capital back to the people to whom it belongs." Five days after President Clinton thundered those words in his Inaugural Address, it is none too soon to say, "Show us what you've got in mind."
Fresh from their inaugural parties, the unrepentant and ever-resourceful hacks who batten at the public trough in times Democratic or Republican are already plotting ways to torpedo real change.
If Mr.
Clinton is serious about reclaiming the nation's politics from the grip of rich special interests, there's no time to lose.


Cauthen: Crossroad or Finish Line?
The Kid came home the other day and admitted that one of racing's renowned careers had reached a crossroads.
Steve Cauthen, the riding prodigy who won the Triple Crown aboard Affirmed at the age of 18 and then became the champion jockey in Britain, came home to Kentucky after a self-exile of 14 years.
He arrived with a soft English accent, with a Kentucky-bred wife who is expecting their first child in May and with world reknown as the only rider in racing history to win the Kentucky, English, French, Irish and Italian Derbies.


A City That Sunshine Built
AFTER the icy monochrome of New York, winter in Pasadena can make the most skeptical Easterner understand why 120,000 people put up with traffic and smog-choked summers to live here.
And those of us who are ex-Westerners may pause to wonder why we ever left.
People say southern California has no seasons, but on a recent December afternoon in Pasadena, I sampled the delights of several: a fragrant orange tree, roses in bloom, a maple dropping one flame-colored leaf at a time -- all against the background of the snow-powdered San Gabriel Mountains.
Occupying 23 square miles in the San Gabriel Valley under Mount Wilson, Pasadena slopes gently south from an elevation of 1,200 feet to 700 feet.
Thousands of trees -- palms, oak, Italian cypress, willow, olive, avocado, walnut, banana and eucalyptus, to name a few -- make the landscape a bewitching blend of the exotic and familiar.
You've seen each of these trees before, just not all in the same place.


Croats Battle Serbs for a Key Bridge Near the Adriatic
Croatian forces and Serbs traded artillery and small-arms fire today near Zadar, a port on the Adriatic, a day after the Croats mounted surprise assaults hoping to wrest a vital bridge and airport from the Serbs.
The fighting continued today despite a statement by Croatian officials asserting that a "limited" offensive had been halted.


'Assisted Living'
To the Editor:
The growth of assisted-living communities for the elderly  [ " 'Assisted-Living' Builders Regroup for 90's," Jan. 3 ]  is welcome and long overdue.
But it is a mistake to view them as an alternative to nursing homes.


Corrections
Because of a musicians' strike, the classical music listings on page 33 of the Arts and Leisure section today include outdated references to performances by the American Composers Orchestra today and by the Brooklyn Philharmonic this Friday and Saturday.
Those orchestras' concerts have been canceled pending resolution of the labor dispute.
A report on the strike appears today in the Metro Report, page 26.


Jean Harris's Plans Include Helping Inmates
Jean S. Harris yesterday spent her first full day of freedom in nearly 12 years recuperating from coronary bypass surgery and preparing to commit herself to helping the children of the imprisoned women she left behind, her lawyer said.
Mrs.
Harris, who was convicted in 1981 of murdering her lover, Dr.
Herman Tarnower, is staying with friends, following her release Friday night from the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla.
Her lawyer, Leon Friedman, declined to disclose the location of her current residence, but state officials said last week that she would remain in Westchester County for a few months.


Frances Orner And Louis Berrick
June wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Orner of Merrick, L.I., for their daughter Frances Rose Orner and Louis E. M. Berrick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Berrick of Monte Carlo, Monaco.
Ms.
Orner, 30, was until recently the advertising director of Vanity Fair magazine in New York.
She graduated from Emerson College.
Her father is the chief financial officer of Gelmart Industries, a lingerie manufacturer in New York.
Her mother, Pearl Orner, is the assistant to the director of the Mental Health Association of Nassau County in Hempstead, L.I.


Pamela Rosenblatt, Lee Samuelson
Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart A. Rosenblatt of North Caldwell, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Pamela Michele Rosenblatt, to Lee Evan Samuelson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliott D. Samuelson of Melville, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Rosenblatt, 26, is an associate in the tax department of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm in New York.
She graduated from Lehigh University and received a law degree from New York Law School.
Her father is the senior tax partner in Weiss &amp; Company, an accounting firm in Livingston, N.J.
Her mother, Audrey Rosenblatt, is a special-education teacher for the Essex County Educational Service Commission, which provides special-education teachers to schools throughout New Jersey.


Colombia Makes a Hero of Drug Cartels' Foe
The pipe-smoking grandfather with the good intentions has yet to prove if he's any match for Colombia's drug barons.
But the Colombian people have found a hero in the soft-spoken man who, as the country's first prosecutor general, has shown he is not afraid to stand up to the likes of Pablo Escobar or Gilberto Rodriguez, the kings of the cocaine trade.


Ruth Horowitz, Steven Kargman
Mr. and Mrs.
Gedale B. Horowitz of Great Neck, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ruth Ellen Horowitz, to Steven Todd Kargman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton A. Kargman of Roslyn Heights, L.I.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Horowitz, 31, is a vice president in the equity capital group at Lehman Brothers, the investment bank in N.Y.
She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her father is an executive vice president of Salomon Inc. and a senior managing director of Salomon Brothers Inc., the company's investment banking subsidiary in New York.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the engagement of Jennifer Teig to Constantine von Hoffman referred incorrectly to the bride's grandmother Martha Werner.
She is not "the late." A retired television scriptwriter who was G.I.
Jill on the Armed Forces Radio Service in World War II, she lives in Makawao, on the island of Maui in Hawaii.


When a Dentist Is Also a Comedian
The article "Dentist's Stand-Up Act Leads to 'Funniest' Title" (some copies, Dec. 6) concerned a dentist who through a contest was designated New Jersey's "funniest dentist." I take umbrage with this because I am the only dentist who is nationally known as a stand-up comic.
During a number of years, I have been interviewed on many television and radio programs across the country.
Recently, I have appeared on the Sally Jessy Raphael show and "Shannon in the Morning," heard locally on WPLJ-FM.
In addition, I have performed in New York's top comedy clubs, including Caroline's and Stand-Up New York.


Rare in Ivy League: Women Who Work As Full Professors
Phoebe S. Leboy did not set out to change the academic world when she joined the faculty of the University of Pennsylvania School of Dental Medicine in 1967.
She was a young scientist eager to become a full professor of biochemistry because it was one measure of achievement in her field, even if it was a position no woman had ever held at the school.
Today, Dr.
Leboy is chairwoman of the dental school's department of biochemistry, a faculty member for a quarter of a century and the only female professor the dental school has ever had.


Rice Is Winner And Still No. 1
In a battle of New York's two top-ranked high school basketball teams, No. 1 Rice needed to fight off a late comeback by No. 2 St.
Raymond to pull out a 74-70 victory in front of a sellout crowd at Iona College.


Knicks Are Striving To Maintain Groove
The Knicks needed the kind of week they just finished.
They won three games.
They restored whatever confidence they had lost during their post-Christmas slump.
And with their next four games at home, the Knicks (24-14) have an opportunity to keep the momentum rolling.


The Dogs of Fashion
Their bark is an accepted part of the backstage pandemonium -- now that models who hop from continent to continent take their dogs along.
Here are three of fashion's new breed, thoroughly enjoying their vagabond life.


Women Who Drink And Drive
A recent article, "In Relentless Pursuit of D.W.I. Drivers," mentioned a police officer who stopped a woman who had been driving erratically.
He felt that she had taken more than one drink but did not arrest her because she hadn't been drinking "enough to be intoxicated."
This reluctance among male police officers to encumber a woman with D.W.I. charges must be regarded in light of the Centers for Disease Control finding that the number of auto fatalities in 1990 was 13 percent higher among females and 3 percent lower among males.


Winifred Barnes, W. W. Linen
Mr. and Mrs.
Warren W. Barnes Jr. of Wilmington, N.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter Winifred Anne Barnes to Worthington Warren Linen, a son of Sara S. Linen of Greenwich, Conn., and the late James A. Linen 3d.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Barnes is a managing partner of Bastoni Barnes, an advertising agency in New York.
Her father is the president of the Barnes Construction Company, a general contractor in Wilmington.
Her mother, Maryanne G. Barnes, is a real estate broker with Coldwell Banker Real Estate there.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE NAKED CONSUMER How Our Privates Lives Become Public Commodities.
By Erik Larson.
Holt, $23.


Increasingly, 2-Career Family Means Illegal Immigrant Help
The hiring of illegal household workers appears to be so commonplace that licensed employment agencies in an immigrant haven like New York routinely violate the law by recommending undocumented immigrants for hire, usually at lower wages than legal workers would be paid.
Even the controversy over Zoe Baird's employment of illegal immigrants, which led to her withdrawal Friday as President Clinton's nominee for Attorney General, did not push employment agents to hide their practices last week.
Thirteen of 18 agents who were called acknowledged without hesitation that they represented both legal and illegal immigrants, with illegal workers earning as little as $175 a week and legal ones as much as $600.


Again -- and at Last -- a New Camaro
"In the 1960's, muscle cars were like the muscle men of the era: formidable, hulking presences dominated by brute strength. But the science of muscle has come a long way since then. Like today's bodybuilders, the 1993 Camaro is lean, finely proportioned and powerful. It's a muscle car for the Nineties."
-- Chevrolet overview of the 1993 Camaro.
I HAVE been prowling through my computer, looking for notes on a conversation that is now more than a decade old.
Electrons are amazing, and I actually found what I was looking for.
It turns out that it has been 11 years since that sunny morning when the late Pete Estes and I stood talking in the outdoor dining area of Tavern on the Green in Central Park.
Estes was then about to retire as president of General Motors, and he had come to New York to show off his final creation, Chevy's 1982 Camaro.
I remember discussing the crucial need for better fuel economy.
The new Camaro was lighter than its predecessor but still heavy enough to have displeased the critics.
Estes agreed, noting that the engineers had only scratched the surface.
"So far, we've done the easy part," he said.
"We got rid of the fat. The rest is going to be tougher."
Aha!
And now there is a new Camaro, the fourth generation, exactly 100 pounds heavier than the '82 model, but of the modern ilk, which is to say that it looks nothing like Camaros of the past.
In the intervening years technology has taken the place of dieting and, heavier or not, the new car does go farther on a gallon of gas.
I remember expressing surprise, too, during that conversation with Estes, that G.M. had managed to get 10 years out of the same basic model.
And his response was this: "It shows what you can do when you do it right in the first place."
In fact, the Camaro and its twin, the Pontiac Firebird, have always been exactly right for their markets, sporty cars that could be dressed inexpensively or in go-fast fashion, appealing both to low-end buyers and to hot-rodders.
And the Camaro is still right, still with an available V8 engine to burble pleasantly and to drive the rear wheels, still fast even in its conservative standard mode.
The new car competes against the Toyota Celica, Nissan 240SX, Ford Mustang, Eagle Talon, Plymouth Laser and the Mitsubishi Eclipse, among others.
According to Chevrolet, 50 percent of the buyers in the sporty-car segment are women, and nearly half of Camaro's principal drivers are female, a figure that drops to 30 percent for the high-end Z28.
Both the Z28 and the standard car are hatchbacks, and the base coupe carries a 160-horsepower V6.
The Z28, with a 5.7-liter V8 under its hood, is as always a flat-out performance car, and it will give a Corvette a run for its money.
That is not surprising, of course, since the 5.7-liter power plant is the same basic engine that lives under the Corvette's hood.
In the Camaro, it produces 275 horsepower, and its bulk fills the engine compartment.
The new 3.4-liter V6 delivers 20 horsepower more than was available in 1992's standard car, and it sends it to the road through a five-speed manual transmission.
The V8 produces 30 more horsepower than last year, and it is coupled to a new six-speed manual.
Four-speed automatics are optional with either engine.
For '93, rack-and-pinion steering has replaced the recirculating-ball system of the past in order to improve responsiveness and an "on-center" feel.
Antilock brakes also are standard.
The fourth generation car was redesigned head to tail, and Chevrolet's literature says that "all classic Camaro design ingredients are evident." That is arguable, however, and the new model looks more like a Mitsubishi Eclipse than like anything else.
Part of that, at least in the case of the Z28, has to do with the paint scheme and the upper body.
All Z28's have black roofs, and the darkly tinted glass makes the entire "greenhouse" look black.
What has been retained from the past is the Camaro's tenacious stance, aggressive front end and brawny tires on 16-inch wheels.
The car is smooth but wedge-shaped.
It rides on the same 101-inch wheelbase as the '92, but the body is longer, wider and taller.
Sideview mirrors are fared into the front fenders, and a spoiler is integrated into the rear hatch.
Trim is of the blackout variety, and the headlights nestle in black pockets.
The new Camaro makes extensive use of dent-resistant, rustproof body panels.
The roof, doors, hatch and spoiler assembly are made of sheet-molded compound, and the front fenders, and nose and tail pieces also are made of composite material.
Rust-resistant two-side galvanized steel is used for the rear quarter panels and hood.
The hatch itself has a very high liftover, leading to a deep well just inside and then to a shallow cargo floor.
Luggage capacity is not this car's long suit.
Space also is at a premium in the rear of the redesigned interior, and even small children are likely to complain.
On the other hand, the cockpit is comodious, and the new front buckets -- available only in cloth -- are both commodious and supportive.
The black and white Z28 test car had a two-tone gray interior, nicely finished although abundantly plastic.
The instrument panel sort of wraps around the driver, and the analog gauges, dominated by a 150-mile per hour speedometer, are easy to read.
A huge door covers a medium-size glove compartment, in which resides the remote button for the rear hatch.
The console contains a small ashtray, a single cupholder and a bin whose cover serves as an armrest.
The shifter, as always, is topped by a large round knob, now covered with leather.
As tested and loaded with options, the car carried a sticker of $19,098, although the base price for a Z28 is a more reasonable $16,779.
The least expensive Camaro goes for $13,399, and the cars will begin arriving in dealerships early in February.
Oddly enough, they are "imports," coming from an assembly plant near Montreal.
And they do now feel less like Detroit iron.
The bone-jarring ride of the past is gone, as are many of the creaks and rattles that resulted from the huge metal doors.
The new Z28 is tighter and a great deal more civilized than its ancestors.
On the road, though, there is still that slingshot acceleration.
There is the taut suspension and good handling.
And, of course, there is that wonderful rumble of a potent V8.
Like the '82 model that lasted almost unchanged for a decade, the newest Z28 has been named to pace the Indianapolis 500.
And with the 77th running of the race on May 30, Chevrolet will set a record.
In all, nine Chevies will have led the pack.
Four of them, including the 1967 original, have been Camaros.


Behind Acquisition Of Community Hospital
As a resident of Smithtown for more than 30 years, I find the attitude of St.
John's Episcopal Hospital-Smithtown; the Episcopal Health Services Inc., and Bishop Orris G. Walker Jr. appalling  [ "The Hospitals' War: Patients or Power," Nov. 29 ] .
To say that North Shore University Hospital's acquisition of Community Hospital of Western Suffolk would be "destructive," and I use Bishop's Walker's term, is incredible.
The scare tactics and threatening verbal discords being expounded by those opposing this acquisition is nothing short of ludicrous.
Just a little history.
In 1966 did Episcopal Health Services consider it "destructive" when they opened the doors of St.
John's, knowing full well that there was a thriving hospital in the area?
Were they concerned with the possible financial effect on Community Hospital, then known as Smithtown General Hospital?
Despite pundits' saying there was no need for another hospital in Smithtown, St.
John's felt it offered the community a choice.
At that time "they" said competition was good.
Competition would make both institutions strive to provide residents with a health care delivery system they expect and deserve.
Back in 1966 "choice" was good.
Back in 1966 "competition" was good.
Now in 1992, "choice" is an ugly word, and competition is "destructive."
Lighten up St. John's.


CHALLENGE TO THE FAITHFUL
In "Challenge to the Faithful" (Dec. 27), Alan Cowell missed an opportunity to draw a remarkable parallel between the state of the contemporary papacy and the beleaguered British monarchy.
Quite simply, in both cases the faithful are tiring in large numbers of ceremonial and
expensive
regimes hopelessly ignorant of the lives of common folk.


Old Poe, New Poe
To the Editor:
While all book lovers have reason to cheer the relaunching of the Modern Library, Gary Giddins's appreciation ("Why I Carry a Torch for the Modern Library," Dec. 6) contains a few passing remarks about the Library of America series that may mislead some readers.
He states, for example, that the Modern Library edition of Edgar Allan Poe includes three poems "inadvertently left out of" the Library of America's "Poe: Poetry and Tales." Actually, the Modern Library has repackaged an old 1938 text of Poe that has since been superseded.
Two of the poems -- "Hymn, in Honor of Harmodius and Aristogiton" and "To Isadore" -- are now known to have been written by others, and the third, "A Paean," is an early draft of "Lenore."


Insurers Second-Guess Doctors, Provoking Debate Over Savings
Dr.
Robert Sawyer, a Denver surgeon, has a full-time office manager to get approval from insurers to perform operations.
He also speaks to the companies every couple of days himself to report on patients' progress, spending about an hour each day on the phone justifying his patients' care.
In the case of a patient whose extensive intestinal bleeding prompted a two-month hospital stay, he fielded daily calls from her insurance company requesting minute details: the volume of urine she had produced and the drip rate of her intravenous lines.


Democrats In Their Glory
Washington's inaugural balls welcomed over 70,000 on Jan. 20.


SURFACING
CONFESSIONS --
"I Will Always Love You":
Otherwise jaded urban types are sharing a guilty secret: love for the sappy middle-of-the-road ballad sung by Whitney Houston.
PASSAGES --
Power surges
: the new euphemism for hot flashes in feminist circles of a certain generation.
FAILING UPWARD --
Sofia Coppola:
Since her acting debut in "The Godfather, Part III," she has garnered a contributing editorship at Details magazine, become involved with a new TV program tentatively titled "High Octane" and received video credits in the Black Crowes' "Sometimes Salvation" and Madonna's "Deeper and Deeper."


Speaking of Deficit Spending
In January, consumers traditionally rue their holiday largess as they study their credit card bills.
Some consumers - those with thinly stretched finances - may find themselves unable to make credit payments.
The National Foundation for Consumer Credit, a non-profit group, can refer people to one of its 835 offices nationwide for counseling.
Calls to their number - 1-800-388-CCCS - increased more than 40 percent in 1992.


Bearing Lieder


Gartner Turns Rout Into Record
The Rangers didn't need the goal from Mike Gartner.
They had the lead, they had the momentum, they had the Kings' goaltender, Robb Stauber, hanging his head in shame long before Gartner took the puck to the net.
But the Rangers were waiting for this moment.
In the afternoon, before heading to the Forum, Mark Hardy bought a rose.
He planned to give it to Gartner after he scored what would be his 30th goal of the season.
He expected it to happen this evening.


Sports of The Times; Time to Get Nostalgic For Commish
AS soon as the Giants hire a coach, perhaps we can all get serious about truly vital affairs.
I have never seen so much energy expended trying to come up with a figure who will materialize only 16 Sundays a year and otherwise spend his time like a surly mole in concrete bunkers underneath a stadium in the swampland.
No, it is time to get back to the more socially redeeming task of helping our laggardly baseball owners find themselves a new commissioner.
We must all take part in the democratic process because the new commissioner will belong to all of us, kind of a national court jester.


Hungarians Think The Darnedest Things
GENIUS IN THE SHADOWS
A Biography of Leo Szilard: The Man Behind the Bomb.
By William Lanouette with Bela Silard.
Illustrated. 587 pp.
New York: A Robert Stewart Book/ Charles Scribner's Sons. $35.


Beckmesser: Two Villains At a Swipe
"Die Meistersinger Von Nurnberg," which is now being presented in a new production by Otto Schenk at the Metropolitan Opera, will make two groups uneasy: music critics and Jews.
This has nothing to do with the new staging, which is part of the Met's attempt to establish a traditional-Wagner in residence.
The Met is setting the work precisely where Wagner wanted it: in 16th-century Nuremberg, where members of the various occupational guilds came together to create an elite organization of singing masters, heirs to a long tradition.
The source of discomfort is the opera itself.
Music critics might justifiably feel disconcerted because of their resemblance to Beckmesser, the pedantic town clerk and master of "Die Meistersinger." Critics (like Beckmesser) judge newcomers (like the opera's young aspirant, Walther), who claim nobility and immense musical gifts and wish to be declared Masters of the Art.
They act as "Markers" -- stern graders slashing chalk across slates -- citing every supposedly broken rule, sometimes attacking fellow Markers with similar narrow-mindedness.
Beckmesser can't actually create beauty himself; all he can do is find flaws, judging the new by the old.
In an early draft of the text, Beckmesser was called Hanslich, after the powerful critic, Eduard Hanslick, who dared to criticize Wagner.
Hanslick was actually at the composer's 1862 reading of the "Meistersinger" text; he stormed out in anger.


Collecting on Insurance in Oakland's Fire
A firestorm in October 1991 swept over the steep hills of this city and destroyed the home of Ron and Bette Bugaj, among 3,300 other houses here and in neighboring Berkeley.
But as far as Mr.
Bugaj is concerned, "the damage we really suffered was in our negotiations with our insurance company."
The Bugajes's home-insurance policy, for which they paid about $750 a year, stipulated that if there was a fire or other catastrophe the couple, both physical therapists, would have their 2,100-square-foot, four-bedroom home fully rebuilt and their belongings replaced.


Intriguing Concepts From Fellowship Winners
ON rare occasions, a small exhibition can evoke a whole flood of ideas, warm memories and even a few nightmares.
While visitors to the New Jersey Designer Craftsmen Gallery could glance from object to object by simply revolving in the center of one room, the effect would be meaningless and the impact lost.
This is not a slick and easy show; careful examination brings rewards.
The work extends beyond function, beyond good craftsmanship and esthetic pleasure to intriguing concepts.


Abigail Koppel, Leslie Wexner
Abigail S. Koppel, a lawyer, was married last evening to Leslie H. Wexner, the founder and chairman of the Limited Inc., the apparel retailer based in Columbus, Ohio.
Rabbi Alan G. Ciner performed the ceremony at the couple's home in New Albany, Ohio.
Mrs.
Wexner, 31, graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College and received a law degree from New York University.
She was until recently an associate at the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Yehuda Koppel of New York.
In the 1950's, her father, who is now retired, opened the first ticket office in New York for El Al Israel Airlines.


Britain Senses a Lapse in That Special Relationship
FOR weeks, editors and politicians here have been waging an unusual trans-Atlantic campaign, nudging the incoming Clinton team to consider preserving at least one holdover from the Bush Administration: Raymond G. H. Seitz, the United States Ambassador to Britain.
"If he is wise," The Times of London advised, "Mr. Clinton will recognize that there are some virtues in continuity."
The new Administration has not yet signaled what it will do with Mr.
Seitz, a Foreign Service officer whose appointment by President Bush in 1991 broke a more-than-200-year tradition of naming well-heeled political appointees to the London post.


For Openers


SETTLING IN: The Media; Outdoing Bush, President Keeps the Press at Bay
On President Clinton's first full day in office, his Administration's communications strategy was already clear: tightly control the information flow to reporters as the President speaks directly to the people.
In a move that even the Reagan Administration never tried for all its sophistication in the ways of the media, Mr.
Clinton wore a wireless microphone when he greeted thousands of citizens who strolled through the White House for an open house.
While television stations could pick up his warm exchanges with the visitors, reporters were kept behind a rope line several feet away, shouting questions about the hostilities in Iraq and other breaking news.
Mr.
Clinton refused to acknowledge them.


Laurie Burstein, L. P. Maxwell Jr.
Dr.
Laurie Joan Burstein, an investment manager, was married yesterday to Leland Powers Maxwell Jr., a controller.
Rabbi Harold White and the Rev.
Peter Wells, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at the Brantwyn of the DuPont Country Club in Wilmington, Del.
Mrs.
Burstein-Maxwell, 41, is employed by Provident Mutual Management Company, an investment management company in Wilmington.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. there, as did her husband.
She also received a Ph.D. in clinical psychology from Temple University.
She is a daughter of Benita M. Burstein of Passaic, N.J., and the late Edward G. Burstein.
Her father was a lawyer in Bridgeport, Conn.
Her mother is a clinical social worker at the Jewish Family Service of Delaware Valley in Trenton and a private clinical social worker in Passaic.


Wall Street; When Inflation Hits the Gallop -- Duck
INVESTING during high-inflation times is apparently fun only for the short sellers.
When the consumer price index soared 1.8 percent in August 1973, tobacco stocks dropped 8 percent, and drug issues lost 8.5 percent in a single month, said Laszlo Birinyi of Birinyi Associates, a research firm in New York.
In August 1974, the price index jumped 1.2 percent and electrical equipment stocks lost 20 percent while retailers dropped 16 percent, he added.
"The upshot of it is that there aren't a whole lot of things you can buy that make sense" when inflation is high, said Mr.
Birinyi.
Investors get more maneuvering room when price increases are minimal -- or when inflation has actually been negative.


The Price Is Ripe
A NEWSPAPER COLLEAGUE, propelled by talent and a touch of luck into the editorship of a major Midwestern daily, said to me:
"We don't run any wine stuff. No one in this town's going to shell out $30 for a bottle of wine." Allowing for the fact that that's the way editors talk, he nevertheless put his finger on one of wine's persistent problems: Most people think it has to be expensive to be good.


Marie W. Blair, Arnold Beermann
Marie W. Blair of Wilson, N.C., and William J. Blair Jr. of Wilmington, N.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter Marie Watson Blair to Arnold Edward Beermann Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Beermann of Douglaston, Queens.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Blair is a customer relations representative at Christie's in New York, the auction house.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Her father is the owner and chief executive of the Nordic Group Inc., a refrigerated warehouse and distribution company in Wilmington.
Her mother is a writer.
The prospective bride is a stepdaughter of Sue Ann Blair of Wilmington.


Focus: Oakland, Calif.; Collecting on Insurance After the '91 Fire
A FIRESTORM in October 1991 swept over the steep hills of this city and destroyed the home of Ron and Bette Bugaj, among 3,300 other houses here and in neighboring Berkeley.
But as far as Mr.
Bugaj is concerned, "the damage we really suffered was in our negotiations with our insurance company."
The Bugajes's home-insurance policy, for which they paid about $750 a year, stipulated that if there was a fire or other catastrophe the couple, both physical therapists, would have their 2,100-square-foot, four-bedroom home fully rebuilt and their belongings replaced.


Taboos of Recycling
To the Editor:
Why does New York City recycle certain items and not others?
Why are newspapers, magazines and corrugated board recycled and gray cardboard, brown paper bags and general paper scrap not recycled?
Why are plastics labeled 1 and 2 recycled, while other plastics, including those clearly labeled with higher numbers, rejected for recycling?


E. J. Borrack, Robert L. Reider
Mr. and Mrs.
Morris Borrack of Woodbridge, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Esther Jo Borrack to Robert Leonard Reider, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Adolph Reider of Oceanside, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Borrack, 28, is known as E. J. She is an associate at Cozen &amp; O'Connor, a Philadelphia law firm.
She and her fiance both graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, from which she also received her law degree and her fiance a master's degree in engineering.


SETTLING IN: Clinton's Departure; The Reagan-Bush Era Is Left Behind In a Flurry of Executive Policy Moves
Although his moves were partly obscured by the uproar over his Attorney General nominee, President Clinton in his first days in office actually did begin to carry out what he had promised: a fundamental shift in the role that the American Government will play at home and abroad and the values it will seek to encourage.
While trying to quell the political damage from the retreat on Zoe Baird's nomination, Mr.
Clinton was also signing a series of executive orders and ordering up a series of foreign policy reviews, which are expected not only to alter 12 years of Republican policies but also to inaugurate a new era of Government action.


Riding the Crest of an Italian Food Wave
WITHIN the last 16 years, a trim little frame house set back from U.S. 1, where Stamford melts into Old Greenwich, has been host to at least three restaurants.
Now a fourth has taken possession.
Ciaobella! (Hello, Beautiful!) is an elegant looking restaurant riding the crest of the Italian food craze.
To the right of the foyer, down a few steps, is a large nonsmoking dining room with walls of pale and dark green ornamented with sleek art, a formal fireplace at the far end, well-spaced tables with stylish chairs and a ficus tree gracing the room's center.
A smaller room for diners who smoke, to the left off the foyer and also down several steps, is equally inviting, with its own gas-lit fireplace.


Mad, Bad, Still Hard to Know
BYRON
By Sigrid Combuchen.
Translated by Joan Tate. 518 pp.
North Pomfret, Vt.: Heinemann/Trafalgar Square. $24.95.


Hold The Champagne
To the Editor:
David Richards claims that the strength of Carol in "Oleanna" is an advancement for David Mamet's women.
She is active, not passive, he points out.
True, she is a villain, but Mr.
Richards feels that "villains' roles are usually choicest."


A FATHER'S RITE
I am assuming that Chester Higgins Jr. is an African-American (About Men: "A Father's Rite," Dec. 27).
If this is so, why is he searching for his roots amid the ruins of Pharaonic Egypt?
Extremely rich cultures, though perhaps less suitable for dramatic ritual, exist in the areas of Africa from which the vast major ity of the ancestors of African-Americans were captured and sent to the New World.
From an anthropological standpoint, it seems comparable to my searching for my Celtic roots among the souks and minarets of Istanbul.
MICHAEL PATRICK MCKINLEY
Austin, Tex.


JAN. 17-23: No Comfort in Sight; Justice Dept. Report Clouds F.B.I. Chief's Past and Future
"Deeply disturbing."
President Clinton's spokesman, George Stephanopolous, all but denounced F.B.I.
Director William S. Sessions after a searing Justice Department report last week accusing Mr.
Sessions of many ethical lapses.


Christina McCoy, Shereef H. Anbar
Christina Gerard McCoy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. McCoy of Stamford, Conn., was married there yesterday to Shereef Hussein Anbar, a son of Fatma Anbar of Pelham, N.Y., and Hussein Anbar of White Pine, Tenn.
The Rev.
Fergal MacDonagh and Msgr.
Edward Surwilo performed the ceremony at Our Lady Star of the Sea Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Anbar is an account executive at Medicus Public Relations in New York, a public relations firm for the pharmaceutical industry.
She and her husband graduated from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of Peak International, a radiological and surgical equipment marketing company in Stamford.
Her mother, Arlene McCoy, is a psychotherapist there.


Emporia Journal; Perot Calls, But Bastion Of '92 Race Holds Back
Betrayed and forgotten by the nation's power brokers, struggling Americans in distant little towns are growing "ornerier and meaner than a spavined, distempered mule," William Allen White, the famed editor of The Emporia Gazette, wrote in 1895.
Nearly a century later, an enduring streak of populism here helped Ross Perot win one-third of the vote in Lyon County, one of his strongest showings anywhere.
This windswept county near the Flint Hills of eastern Kansas would seem fertile territory for Mr.
Perot's latest venture, an organization that he says will monitor government and influence legislation.
Mr.
Perot has said that 400,000 people have joined the group; membership dues are $15.


Plan the Kitchen and Avoid Pitfalls
READY-TO-ASSEMBLE kitchen cabinets make remodeling a kitchen much easier than when cabinets were just available ready-made or built to order by a cabinetmaker.
But planning the sizes, and determining how the cabinets will look when installed, can still be challenging, unless the new cabinets will be exactly the same sizes as the old ones.
Many stores selling cabinets have computerized-design services.
They are often free and can produce views of how the kitchen would look when completed and figure dimensions and prices.
But making scale drawings on graph paper is also a reliable and easy way to plan, one that allows making comparisons between cabinet models carried by different stores and frees you from dealing with salespeople until you have clear ideas of what you want.


State Department Simplifies Its Overseas Advisories
AS part of its task of safeguarding Americans while they are out of the United States, the State Department has for 15 years been issuing sporadic cautionary reports on conditions in foreign countries, advising citizens not to travel to particular places, to be wary of certain situations, or to be aware of the level of certain crimes against Americans.
These reports, known as travel advisories, went to the news organizations, the travel industry and companies operating abroad, and were available to members of the public by phone and computer.
The advisories had a strong influence on travel plans.
Abercrombie &amp; Kent said it lost $300,000 in retail bookings for Kenya safaris in 1991 when a warning was issued about Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.


Plan the Kitchen and Avoid Pitfalls
READY-TO-ASSEMBLE kitchen cabinets make remodeling a kitchen much easier than when cabinets were just available ready-made or built to order by a cabinetmaker.
But planning the sizes, and determining how the cabinets will look when installed, can still be challenging, unless the new cabinets will be exactly the same sizes as the old ones.
Many stores selling cabinets have computerized-design services.
They are often free and can produce views of how the kitchen would look when completed and figure dimensions and prices.
But making scale drawings on graph paper is also a reliable and easy way to plan, one that allows making comparisons between cabinet models carried by different stores and frees you from dealing with salespeople until you have clear ideas of what you want.


UConn Recovers and Stops Providence
Connecticut 68, Providence 61


Reflecting Strengths Of Education
I question your headline characterization of Morgan Monceaux  [ "From Homelessness to Showing Art in a Gallery," Dec. 27 ]  as homeless, a word that implies a lack of life's physical necessities and of social supports as a result of severe financial misfortune.
The story Mr.
Monceaux tells reflects an education that stimulated and supported his intellectual curiosity and a family that provided him with values, inspirations and goals.
He deserves credit for taking advantage of what was available to him and realizing the breadth of his choices and opportunities.
Mr.
Monceaux, whether working in Chicago or "bumming around in San Diego," was part of a social network and a family and was able to support himself.
When his mother was ill, his grandmother knew where to phone him.


Bases Unloaded
"I have been a chief executive of something or another for 15 years, and now that I have some time to myself I realize that working is overrated." -- FAYE VINCENT  commenting last week on plans for an extended vacation after his rough ride as commissioner of baseball.


Once-Sleazy Timeshares Gain New Vacation Respectability
THE concept of a timeshare vacation had never appealed to Sandy Bowman of Cincinnati.
"Buying a studio for a specific two weeks at the same resort didn't seem that attractive," she said.
Like many vacationers, she had been pestered by hard-sells and even toured a few resorts.
"But nothing persuaded us to buy," she said.
Last spring, when Ms.
Bowman, her husband, Chuck, and son, Adam, now 11 years old, visited Disney World, in Orlando, Fla., they took a look at the Disney Vacation Club, the company's first time-share venture, started in December 1991.


Disabled Fight to Insure Their Rights
JOE BRAVO'S young life changed in the space of a few seconds.
When he was 12, he was struck in the chest by a sniper's bullet while riding his bike near his home in the Bronx.
Mr.
Bravo remembers being a tough street kid back then, a boy who held his own in a gritty neighborhood.
After being shot, he said, he was paralyzed from the waist down, forgoing his bike for a wheelchair.
Mr.
Bravo is now 38, and he still thinks of himself as tough -- but he is fighting a different kind of battle.


Decked Out In the Capital
Americans and foreigners alike made a special effort dressing up for the sweeping display of pageantry and ceremony on Capitol Hill on Wednesday at the inauguration of President Clinton.
Among the throng were dignitaries -- like John Frundi (below, far left), the chief opposition leader in Cameroon -- in regal national dress, including colorful crocheted hats.
There were men and women in the latest mix of Annie Hall and grunge.
And many people wore fashions reminiscent of the opulent first Reagan inauguration, with black mink, sable and fox coats often accessorized with matching hats and Chanel gold chains.
There was even a rare brown chinchilla coat.
Members of the diplomatic crowd wore tailored fur-collared town coats.
Native Americans were bedecked in necklaces of feather bones and glass beads, while two African-American women had waved hair that made them look like they had stepped out of a Fernand Leger painting.
A Pennsylvania man topped his helmet with a campaign bus and buttons.
An Atlanta woman attracted smiles with a yellow hat suggesting a burst of sunshine.
A man with a portable telephone sported a suede baseball hat, Ray-Ban sunglasses and an AIDS-awareness ribbon, while a woman wore a cap embroidered with rhinestones in a flag motif that captured the exuberance and hope of the day.


Bevin M. Maguire And Craig P. Hunt
Lieut.
Col.
Frank J. Maguire of the Army, retired, and Mrs.
Maguire of Wilton, Conn., have announced April wedding plans for their daughter Bevin Mary Maguire and Craig Phillips Hunt, the son of Sarah Hunt of Leesburg, Va., and Roger Hunt of Fountain Hills, Ariz.
Ms.
Maguire, 30, is the manager of marketing communications for the Rockefeller Center complex in New York.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father is the assistant director of veterans' employment and training for New York State, in Manhattan.
Her mother, Maureen R. Maguire, retired as a director of special projects at the New York City Board of Education in Brooklyn.


Their Songs Were America's Happy Talk
Once upon a time, America dreamed of itself as a singing fairy tale for grown-ups, with a happy ending.
Norman Rockwell painted this storybook country, and Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein 2d wrote its songs.
More than just pop confections, they added up to a kind of secular catechism that sweetly but firmly instructed people on the rules of behavior in a world where America knew best and good triumphed over evil.
Certainly, Rodgers and Hammerstein didn't invent the code of values that their songs taught.
With their stern, semioperatic melodies and know-it-all lyrics, they offered an idealized mirror image of American middle-class morality in the heady afterglow of Hitler's defeat.
At a moment when everyone understood what was meant by terms like "maturity," "good citizenship" and "mental hygiene," they helped define the notion of a national culture.


More Ideas but Few Solutions to Deer Herds
THE battles go on between gardeners and deer.
Each season brings more solutions, more repellent sprays and more ideas to protect plants from the animals.
Two points remain, however.
The deer herds continually increase and it is more convenient for them to devour "fast foods" in the garden than to hunt for their dinner.
Serious gardeners usually learn that the only sure solution is a fence, a high one of at least eight feet, and if electrified, all the better.


New Mexico
To the Editor: While it was nice to see Jemez Springs mentioned in The Times, I do take exception to the statement that it seems to be "one of the oddest little places on the planet." In just about every conceivable way, this town is far more normal than New York City.
ROBERT BORDEN Jemez Springs, N.M.


Jo Ann Komar, Timothy Jecko
Jo Ann Komar and Timothy Jecko, consultants in business communications with Communispond Inc., a management consulting company in New York, were married Friday at the Appellate Division Courthouse in Manhattan.
Associate Judge George Bundy Smith of the New York State Court of Appeals officiated.


Ambiguity And Worse
To the Editor:
In his essay "Mamet's Women"  [ Jan. 3 ] , the works David Richards cites as showing an evolution in David Mamet's female characters, "House of Games," "Speed-the-Plow" and "Oleanna," are, if anything, a continuation of the playwright's misogynistic world view.


Year of the Rooster Dawns With a Crackle


Sound Bytes; A Biophysical Take on the Network Phenomenon
AS an undergraduate and self-described telephone hacker, Reese Jones founded the Berkeley Macintosh Users Group, one of the largest computer user groups in the world.
In 1986, after developing a system for using standard telephone wires to allow two Macs to communicate, he left graduate school to start Farallon Inc.
The company, in Emeryville, Calif., is a leading maker of networking products for Macs and personal computers.
Question: What's the connection between biophysics and computers?


Jonathan Harwitz, Aileen Atkins
Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Allan Atkins of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Aileen Debra Atkins to Jonathan Michael Harwitz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mitchell Harwitz of Buffalo.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Atkins, 24, is an associate at Latham &amp; Watkins, a law firm in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
She and her fiance received law degrees from Harvard University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
Her mother, Laurie Atkins, is an executive recruiter at Battalia Winston International, an executive recruitment concern in New York.


Topics of The Times; A Just January
When the sky isn't spitting rain it's spitting snow -- enough to be a nuisance, too little to make things pretty.
After a few fitful appearances the sun disappears for good along about noon.
Which is just about the time the wind is picking up speed.
Waiting for the bus is even less fun than usual.
Getting up in the morning is no joy either.
Going to bed is a pleasure.
So celebrate!
After several years during which August sometimes seemed like April, October like July and one winter (last winter, to be precise) like a peculiarly extended March, one month at least has finally gotten its act together.


County Draws Up A Wish List For Albany
EACH year at this time, lawmakers in the county sit down with experts in the executive branch to draw up a legislative shopping list for Albany -- legislation that Westchester's political leaders believe would reduce costs, increase revenues or simply enhance the quality of life.
The proposals must run a challenging political gantlet in order to be acceptable not only to Democrats and Republicans on the Board of Legislators but also to County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke and Westchester's Albany delegations in the State Assembly and the State Senate.
The Assembly delegation is controlled by Democrats, the Senate delegation by Republicans.


It Figures: Massimino Has Ace Up His Sleeve
Rollie Massimino has been talking a lot about rejuvenation since he's moved West.
Now we know why.


Corrections
Because of a producer's schedule change, an events listing on page 6 of the Arts and Leisure section today, with an article about Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein 2d, includes an outdated reference to a Columbia University benefit.
It is being delayed and will be rescheduled.


Baymen and Supporters Aren't Really Pernicious
In his cynical commentary on the controversy between recreational anglers and Long Island's baymen  [ Letters, Jan. 3 ] , Richard Reagan of the Norcross Wildlife Foundation allows his apparent disdain for Long Island's traditional fisheries to cloud his stated concern for marine resources.
As a local nonprofit environmental and planning organization in Bridgehampton, we are aware of the magnitude of this conflict, and we are beholden to neither the recreational nor the traditional fishing industry.
In fact, we support and value the legitimate interests of both, as well as of the fish stocks and the marine environment.
Nonetheless, we must object to Mr.
Reagan's portrayal of East End baymen as a small, "privileged" and "greedy" lot whose ancestors, in his view, sold their vast lands, reaped huge profits, polluted the waters, promoted the destruction of marine ecosystems and now seek to fatten their bulging purses through the "plunder" of the bass fishery.
In brief, Mr.
Reagan portrays baymen as the absolute enemy.


SILENCE OF THE FROGS
So I pick up your magazine expecting to be enlightened on some major issue only to find a frog staring out at me.
Then I read the headline that frogs are mysteriously disappearing from the planet.
And I think, What are we going to do without frogs?
Will we no longer be able to go to French restaurants?
Will biology teachers all across the country be laid off?


Correction
A review of "The Island," by Gustaw Herling, on Dec. 27 misstated the year of the American publication of his book "A World Apart." It was 1951, not 1986.


Playing the Odd Sayles Role
Rennie, David Strathairn's romantic character in the new movie "Passion Fish," has a knack for communicating more than it at first seems -- maybe on purpose, maybe not.
"No matter where you are, there you is," Rennie says matter-of-factly when asked if he has gotten his guests -- a paraplegic and her attendant -- lost in the steamy Louisiana bayous.
Rennie is only the latest slightly odd, more-than-a-little inexplicable man Mr.
Strathairn has played in a John Sayles movie.
The two have teamed up in six films to create compelling characters ranging from a backwoods sheriff to a bounty hunter from another planet.
All the movies are offbeat, while still clearly trying to convey something universal.


Goalie Winning at a Dangerous Game
On a good day, Mark Fitzpatrick puts on his Islander jersey, straps himself into his goaltending equipment and uses his body as a shield against an ice-cold puck that moves like a missile, hurts what it hits and hurts most of all when it eludes him and winds up in the net.
On a bad day, Fitzpatrick, despite getting his requisite 10-hour slumber, struggles out of bed exhausted by the effort of simply waking up.
Sometimes his legs are so swollen that it hurts to walk from one room of his Westbury townhouse to the next.
He feels like a marathoner with a post-race hangover, looks like an invalid and knows that's inappropriate for a National Hockey League player with aspirations of again becoming his club's No. 1 goaltender.


After-School Centers Fill a Gap in Students' Lives
AT an hour when most elementary school students are still rubbing the sleepy dust from their eyes and scrambling to make the school bus on time, 10-year-old Tracy Green and her 7-year-old brother, David, are already engrossed in a board game at the Ardsley Children's Center at the Concord Road Elementary School.
Several children are reviewing the previous day's homework assignments as they sprawl on a rug in front of a picture window, while others sit quietly and read in a brightly lighted corner.


Members' Muscles Only
WEARING black leggings, a hairnet and dark sunglasses, Suzanne Bartsch, who is perhaps Manhattan's most infamous nightlife hostess, worked the room.
She was pumping iron -- 20-pound weights, 12 repetitions with each arm.
"I never in my entire life thought I would go to a gym," she said.
"I mean really."


A Pose for Everybody
To judge from the hype still being produced about Jean Cocteau -- as if, nearly 30 years after his death at the age of 74, he were still orchestrating his own public relations campaign -- the poet, playwright and film maker was a brazen self-promoter.
To be fair, this teen-age runaway turned bohemian darling did strike a pose before the cameras of almost every major photographer who crossed his path: Robert Doisneau, Arnold Newman, Paul Strand, Irving Penn, Philippe Halsman.
As shown in the collection JEAN COCTEAU: The Mirror and the Mask (Godine, cloth, $40; paper, $24.95), Cocteau invariably affected a neurasthenic vulnerability -- the latter-day Rimbaud look -- but the effect of that look changed radically over the years.
At first it glamorized a sexy young dandy (in an anonymous vacation snapshot taken when he was 26), an elegant
artiste
(in a Man Ray portrait taken when Cocteau was 33) and a stylish prankster (in Berenice Abbot's gangster-with-gun shot, taken when he was 38).
But Cocteau's fame caught up with him, and the photographs became less about him and more about the elements of his much-cultivated image: the veined hands, the troubled eyes, the tense mouth.
Of Cocteau's later portraitists, only Cecil Beaton and Jacques-Henri Lartigue picked up on how small he seemed to feel, how defeated by the world around him.
The introduction by the book's editor, Julie Paul, the owner of a New York City art gallery, and the sketch by Francis Steegmuller, the author of a biography of Cocteau, are informative, but they tend to enforce the myth of Cocteau -- the unflappable showman, the quintessential celebrity -- that the photographs themselves do a lot to undo.


The Man in the Big White Jail
Objection has been taken about the origin of the metaphoric place now occupied by our new President:
to be in the bubble
.
Comes now Philippa Brophy, literary agent: "My client, Richard Ben Cramer, author of 'What It Takes: The Way to the White House' (Random House, 1992), is the journalist who coined the phrase
in the bubble
, not the two reporters you mentioned.
In fact, both these guys called Cramer yesterday to point out the error."


A 'Captive Market' For Auto Insurance
The Dec. 27 article "A State Crackdown on Insurance Fraud" inadvertently alighted upon the reason for New Jersey's astronomical costs for insurance.
It stated that the Insurance Fraud Division, which was financed by 1,200 insurers paying $5.6 million for its upkeep, brought in $4.6 million in fines from 1,200 insureds for 1992.
Who would run an operation that on the surface loses $1 million annually unless there were a taxpayer guarantee of a bailout?


A FATHER'S RITE
Higgins should have historical data to support the premise that his ancestors come from Egypt.
He links Egypt and Ethiopia as if they were one country, but makes no mention of Egypt's link to Nubia, which is established as the most significant black connection.


IN SHORT: FICTION
TORNADO PRATT By Paul Ableman. McPherson, cloth, $20; paper, $11.


No Headline
Now that sex and drugs have become acceptable, yuppies will be judged by the immigration status of their baby sitters.
PROF.
MITCHELL MOSS, director of the Urban Research Center at New York University.  [ 32:2. ]


Restored Elegance At Huntington Hotel
WHEN President-elect Bill Clinton spent part of his Thanksgiving holiday enjoying some R &amp; R at the Huntington Hotel in Pasadena -- attending a birthday party given by the television producer Linda Bloodworth-Thomason and ordering room service pizza at 3 A.M. -- he brought unexpected attention to one of Southern California's better kept hostelry secrets.
Indeed, the 86-year-old Huntington, one of the region's more storied resort hotels, is frequently overlooked by Angelenos who, as a rule, tend to spend weekends at the beach in the summer and the desert in the winter.
Pasadena, about 25 miles inland from the Pacific and perhaps best known for its annual Tournament of Roses Parade on New Year's Day (and this month Super Bowl XXVII), tends to be ignored the rest of the year.
Yet, this anonymity wasn't always the case.
Indeed, the Huntington, now under the management of the Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company, had originally been a fashionable winter resort.
When Henry Huntington, a wealthy Pasadena resident, bought the Hotel Wentworth in 1911, renamed and expanded it, including the installation of a pool, the Huntington became a popular November-to-May watering hole where Easterners and Midwesterners could hobnob with Hollywood royalty while acquiring out-of-season tans.


Bathed in Glory
MORNINGS ARE A delicate time.
But a shower of natural light can be as invigorating as a splash of hot water.
In the bathrooms on these pages, light has a bracing effect.
With its 16 1/2-foot vaulted ceiling and a bathtub sunk in marble and tile, the room at left, by Robert Kahn, hints of antiquity on a grand scale.
But despite its lofty proportions, its owner considers it almost cozy.
"There's something about it that feels very natural and comfortable and well balanced," she says.


A Pox on the Consumption Tax
To the Editor:
Regarding "In Tax Policy, Clinton Provides Hope of Change" (Market Watch, Jan. 17), about arguments for "some new consumption tax":


Clinton Steps In, and the World Locks On
JUST three hours after President Clinton returned to the White House from his inaugural balls, Saddam Hussein's radar was back in action, locking on to American warplanes over Iraq.
American pilots retaliated, but a similar confrontation occurred the next day.
Suddenly, the Iraqi leader had maneuvered himself to the top of Mr.
Clinton's dance card.
Two months ago, when reporters asked Mr.
Clinton to define his foreign policy priorities, he ticked off an ambitious list: a multi-year plan for a defense budget, reducing nuclear weapons, ending the proliferation of biological and chemical weapons, continuing the Middle East peace process, strengthening global economic growth.


DIRECTOR OF F.B.I. GOES ON DEFENSIVE
His job in peril, William S. Sessions, the Director of the F.B.I., summoned reporters to his office today for an impassioned 90-minute defense of his conduct, saying he was the victim of a political attack and false accusations by the Justice Department.
In caustic, often emotional terms, Mr.
Sessions argued his case like a defense lawyer making a final plea to save his reputation.
He denounced former Attorney General William P. Barr and the Justice Department's internal ethics office, saying, "It is they who should hang their heads in shame."


On Sunday; And Politicians Roam Streets Unchecked
BRUCE STEWART manages a group home for 22 mentally ill drug abusers in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn.
Some still use crack.
Most are schizophrenic.
Often the men deteriorate and need hospitalization.
So where does he stand on the question of committing people against their will versus protecting their civil liberties?


Corrections
An article on page 26 of the Arts and Leisure section today about conservative talk shows on television misstates the source of "The McLaughlin Group." The program is sold through a syndicate to individual stations; it is not NBC's.


With Issues Unresolved, Police Get Powerful Guns
As 1,000 powerful semiautomatic 9-millimeter handguns are distributed this week for the first time to police officers in precincts throughout New York City, questions about whether the gun is suitable in the city's teeming streets have yet to be resolved.
The distribution is part of the department's yearlong pilot project to determine if the rapid-fire weapons should be issued throughout to the city's 30,000 officers.
Some 600 officers in special units have been armed with 9-millimeter handguns for two years in a test, but results of the study are inconclusive, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said.


Jennifer Griffith, Brian D. Black
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Griffith of Rumson, N.J., have announced the engagement of his daughter Jennifer Ann Griffith to Brian D. Black, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Black of Lakeland, Fla.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Griffith, 29, is an associate at Curtis, Mallet-Trezost, Colt &amp; Mosle, a law firm in Houston.
She graduated from Tufts University and received her law degree from New York Law School.


Oliver Hailey, 60, Author of Plays And Scripts
Oliver Hailey, a prolific playwright and writer of film and television dramas, died yesterday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 60 and died of cancer, said his wife, Elizabeth Forsythe Hailey.
The dark and humorous sides of families and of personal relationships were the broad theme of Mr.
Hailey's work, often described as black comedy by reviewers.
Among his many television credits were work on "Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman," "McMillan and Wife," "Family," and "The Cosby Show."


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Mid-Jan. auto sales, in millions, annual rate
5.3
6.4
Dec. existing-home sales, in millions
3.85
3.60
Tuesday
Consumer confidence index
78.3
80.1
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims
Friday
Dec. durable-goods orders, percent change
-1.9
2.0
Dec. personal income, percent change
0.2
0.1
Personal spending, percent change
0.5
0.5
Dec. purchasing managers' index
59.8
61
This Week's Developments Tuesday: 2-year Treasury note auction  Wednesday: 5-year Treasury note auction


Reinventing Foreign Policy
The case against the State Department is old and familiar.
State's ways are somnolent; its bureaucracy tilts reflexively toward caution and conciliation.
As if to reinforce this intrinsic inertia, President Clinton has named as Secretary a seasoned lawyer known chiefly as a negotiator, a Carter era survivor who has rarely uttered a foolish -- or boat-rocking -- word.
Whether Warren Christopher has more stirring qualities should soon become apparent.
No incoming Secretary since World War II has inherited so varied and chaotic an agenda: turmoil in Bosnia, Iraq, Somalia, Haiti, Russia and a score of former Soviet republics.


POSTINGS: Upper East Side Offices; New Froth on 94th
Something's brewing on East 94th Street.
In the 19th century and until more than halfway through the 20th, the area between Second and Third Avenues and 90th and 94th Streets was the site of giant brewery complexes.
Ruppert, the last of the old breweries, closed in 1965 and high-rise apartment towers went up in the 1970's.
But at 211-13 East 94th Street there sits a Romanesque-style brick building, built in the 1880's, that was occupied in 1905 by Charles Zoller Brewer's Supplies.
The old supply house and two adjacent apartment buildings at 207 and 209 are being renovated by Glenwood Management of New Hyde Park, L.I., into one of the few new office buildings on the Upper East Side.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
MOON WAS TIRED OF WALKING ON AIR.
By Natalia M. Belting.
Illustrated by Will Hillenbrand.
Houghton Mifflin. $15.95. (Ages 5 and up) According to the introduction to this selection of 14 creation myths from South America, "The Ancestors scattered over the earth." And told wonderful stories.


A City That Sunshine Built
AFTER the icy monochrome of New York, winter in Pasadena can make the most skeptical Easterner understand why 120,000 people put up with traffic and smog-choked summers to live here.
And those of us who are ex-Westerners may pause to wonder why we ever left.
People say southern California has no seasons, but on a recent December afternoon in Pasadena, I sampled the delights of several: a fragrant orange tree, roses in bloom, a maple dropping one flame-colored leaf at a time -- all against the background of the snow-powdered San Gabriel Mountains.
Occupying 23 square miles in the San Gabriel Valley under Mount Wilson, Pasadena slopes gently south from an elevation of 1,200 feet to 700 feet.
Thousands of trees -- palms, oak, Italian cypress, willow, olive, avocado, walnut, banana and eucalyptus, to name a few -- make the landscape a bewitching blend of the exotic and familiar.
You've seen each of these trees before, just not all in the same place.


UConn Recovers and Stops Providence
Connecticut 68, Providence 61


Where Treasures Wait to Be Wanted
GOODWILL INDUSTRIES' thrift store on Ditmars Boulevard in Astoria, Queens, is different things to different people.
To those who can't pay department-store prices, it's a place where they can get decent, wearable clothing for a few dollars.


South America's Mighty Iguacu
WHEN I saw the film "The Mission" on television last winter it never entered my mind that I too could visit those incredible waterfalls, much less with very little difficulty and at no particular risk to life and limb.
But soon afterward, at the end of March, I found myself accompanying a friend to Rio de Janeiro and Curitiba, capital of the southern Brazilian state of Parana.
A trip to the falls is a logical and relatively simple excursion from either city, so we went.
The cataracts, 275 in all, are collectively known as the Iguacu Falls and are situated in a bend of the Iguacu River between Brazil and Argentina.
They're big and powerful but, more important, they are heart-wrenchingly beautiful.


Remember the 'S Corporation'
To the Editor:
Many small incorporated businesses with one or a few owners are run as "S corporations" through which the Internal Revenue Service taxes the owners on a personal income tax basis on all current net income, even earnings left in the corporation.
Therefore, irregular patterns of funds taken from the business are taxed when earned by the firm, unless owners withdraw equity.


The Square Root
It takes a lot to like a turnip.
The squat little bulb is like a lover you'd rather not remember -- bitter and embarrassing.
But the turnip is so persistent, so omnipresent from May to November, that grudgingly you accept it into your stew pot.
There, simmering in its juices, its sulfurous aroma never fails to evoke the old sod.
As the Irish have always known, the only way to thrive on a turnip-rich diet is through lyricism and poignancy. (Stout doesn't hurt, either.) It's been a mainstay of northern European diets for centuries.
And yet it confers a kind of shame.


Public &amp; Private; I'm O.K., You're Bill
Like reporters covering Elizabeth Taylor, we Americans have been through a lot of honeymoons with Bill Clinton.
There was the apres Gennifer honeymoon and the apres draft honeymoon, the convention honeymoon and the transition honeymoon.
Last week was the inaugural honeymoon.


Nets' Coleman: No Ordinary 'Joe'
The Nets players sometimes jokingly call Derrick Coleman, of all things, Joe Jackson.
Joe Jackson?
Coleman says it comes courtesy of forward Rafael Addison.
If you remember, Joe Jackson, father of the singing Jackson family, has been portrayed by members of his clan as a bossy, sometimes heavy-handed man.
Clearly, Coleman didn't earn the nickname because he can moonwalk and sing at the same time.
"It's just something Raf started," Coleman said of the nickname.
"He took me home one time after a game. My cousin was visiting me, and I walked in the house and I started yelling at him, 'Yo man, I thought I told you to do this and do that.' My cousin said, 'Uh, oh, Joe Jackson is home.'


BEST SELLERS: January 24, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) Two police detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer at large in southern California.
2
7
24
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
1
8
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) After being accused of murdering her employer, a woman tells of killing her husband almost 30 years earlier and of her life ever since.
4
3
21
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
5
2
46
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
6
5
10
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.50.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
7
6
10
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter, unearths scandals in the military.
8
10
2
TERMINAL, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $21.95.) A medical researcher's pursuit of a treatment for cancer and a nurse's pursuit of him have extraordinary consequences.
9
4
15
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
10
8
14
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $24.) Lestat embarks on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
11 *
9
12
MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) While researching the lives of his ancestors, an American journalist learns about the history of the land south of the border. (LP)
12
13
29
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
13
14
28
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
14 *
12
15
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) The fortunes of a businesswoman are imperiled by secrets from her past. (LP)
15
9
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of 1950.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
19
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
2
24
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales to enable women to understand their psyches.
3
3
16
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general who commanded the allied forces in the gulf war.
4
4
18
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
5
5
32
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
6
12
32
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
7
11
10
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
8
6
21
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
9
1
NOBODY NOWHERE, by Donna Williams. (Times Books/Random House, $21.) The autobiography of an autistic woman.
10
7
7
JFK: Reckless Youth, by Nigel Hamilton. (Random House, $30.) The first 29 years of the 35th President.
11 *
9
14
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the co-host of the television show "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."
12 *
8
12
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life and achievements of Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
13
1
LIBERATION MANAGEMENT, by Tom Peters. (Knopf, $27.50.) How American industry is reorganizing to deal with the problems wrought by changing times.
14
10
21
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $19.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
15
9
MY LIFE, by Earvin (Magic) Johnson with William Novak. (Random House, $22.) The autobiography of the retired Los Angeles Lakers basketball player.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
46
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
2
2
28
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
3
1
7
CREATING LOVE, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $23.) Ways to establish healthy relationships with other people.
4
1
EXCESS BAGGAGE, by Judith Sills. (Viking, $21.) A psychologist's counsel about conquering character traits that make one's life harder.
5 *
3
YOUR MONEY OR YOUR LIFE, by Joe Dominguez and Vicki Robin. (Viking, $20.) How to adapt your financial situation to a more frugal, satisfying style of living.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
NOW YOU KNOW, by Michael Frayn. (Viking, $21.) Mr.
Frayn's eighth novel explores a profound ethical territory -- the borderlands between public and private life -- in a manic comedy whose protagonist, an English politico, trips over his principles.
MURDOCH, by William Shawcross. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) A sprightly life of the media-bestriding colossus Rupert Murdoch, portrayed as an undemonized capitalist more dedicated to making money than to ruling the world through journalism.
TALES OUT OF SCHOOL: Joseph Fernandez's Crusade to Rescue American Education, by Joseph A. Fernandez with John Underwood. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The school-reform wars as observed by a chief combatant, New York City's tough, intelligent, nimble and occasionally abrasive Schools Chancellor.
A BOWL OF CHERRIES, by Shena Mackay. (Moyer Bell, $16.95.) An adroit novel that incisively but compassionately deploys a dysfunctional family with familiar problems -- isolation, failed hopes, mutual deceit -- in comic configurations.
DANIEL BOONE: The Life and Legend of an American Pioneer, by John Mack Faragher. (Holt, $27.50.) A fine biography, based on the best eyewitness accounts and voluminous secondary material, of the man who led the first white settlers into Kentucky in 1775.
ULVERTON, by Adam Thorpe. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $23.) This promising first novel deals with English history through linked tales in voices from the Cromwellian to the modern documentary.
THE WORST OF TIMES, by Patricia G. Miller. (Aaron Asher/ HarperCollins, $22.) Ms.
Miller, a lawyer specializing in matrimonial law, interviewed some 50 people with firsthand experience for this memoir of abortion before Roe v.
Wade.


More Ideas but Few Solutions to Deer Herds
THE battles go on between gardeners and deer.
Each season brings more solutions, more repellent sprays and more ideas to protect plants from the animals.
Two points remain, however.
The deer herds continually increase and it is more convenient for them to devour "fast foods" in the garden than to hunt for their dinner.
Serious gardeners usually learn that the only sure solution is a fence, a high one of at least eight feet, and if electrified, all the better.


U.S. Plane Bombs an Iraqi Gun Position
In the latest in a series of skirmishes between United States and Iraqi forces, a Navy plane bombed an Iraqi position today after Iraqi antiaircraft guns fired at a Navy patrol in the no-flight zone in southern Iraq.
It was the first time that American aircraft had been fired on in southern Iraq since President Clinton took office on Wednesday, and suggested that the Iraqi Government has decided not to hold to the cease-fire it announced this week in what it called a gesture of good will to the new President.


Sounds of Venice
To the Editor: Your essay, "The Serene Sounds of Venice" (Dec. 20), brought to mind our trip there several years ago.
My wife and I went into a square at about 10 o'clock at night, in a residential neighborhood far from the usual tourist areas.
The silence was eerie.


World Markets; A Fairy-Tale Scenario for the Nikkei
CALL it the Theory of the Royal Rally.
Over the past year, the best that could be said of the Japanese stock market was that it was floundering.
When it was not floundering it was generally plummeting, as it has been for three years, and most analysts predict more of the same for 1993.
The economy is in recession, banks are mired in bad loans and a Government stimulus package of public works spending has had no apparent impact.


The Survival of a Tough and Tender Heroine
These days, "Anna Christie" pretty much boils down to the title role.
Everything else about Eugene O'Neill's 1921 drama has aged badly.
Its waterfront slang now sounds like parody.
Its male characters subscribe to the double standard with a vehemence that invites derision.
And its attempt to see in the fog-bound waters of "dat ole davil sea" a symbol of the world's malevolence fairly reeks of contrivance.
Anna alone has successfully resisted the erosions of time.


Louise Barrow, Sigurd Wendin 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
Simon R. Barrow of Plaistow, Sussex, England, have announced the engagement of their daughter Louise Ingrid Jean Barrow to Sigurd Robert Wendin 3d, the son of Mr.
Wendin Jr. of New Canaan, Conn., and Diane I. Wendin of West Palm Beach, Fla.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Barrow, 28, is a caterer in London.
She graduated from Godalming College in Surrey, England.
Her father, now retired, was a director of Kleinworth Benson, a merchant banking concern in London.


Parcells Hardly Innocent
To the Sports Editor:
I must take exception with Dave Anderson ("Mara, Tisch Should Rule on Parcells," The Times, Jan. 7).
He says that Mara and Tisch let Bill Parcells get away 20 months ago.
That's not the way it was.


It's Raining, It's Snowing


New Effort To Teach Homeless Children
A STUDENT at the Burnet Street School in Newark recently learned how to read.
For most elementary school students, that might not seem a notable accomplishment, but for this homeless sixth grader, who has attended 10 different schools in the last year and a half, it represented a major triumph.
Through intensive remedial instruction during school and a tutorial program after school and on weekends, he has been able to make up much of the learning time he lost while moving from temporary shelter to temporary shelter, surrounded by the chaotic welfare-hotel environment of drug dealing, gunfire and neglect.


Jill Paley, Richard Busch
Jill Paley, the daughter of Dr.
Marlene Winter and Dr.
Stephen Paley, both of Huntington, L.I., was married last evening to Richard Todd Busch, a son of Kenneth and Nikki Busch of Merrick, L.I.
Rabbi Neil Kurshan performed the ceremony at Temple Beth-El in Great Neck, L.I.
Mrs.
Busch, 28, is a sales representative for the Cohen Brothers Dress Corporation, a dress manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from Pace University.
Her father is an orthodontist in East Northport, L.I.
Her mother is a psychoanalyst who owns the Long Island Center Inc., a psychotherapy center in Huntington.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Dr.
Jacques Winter and Jill Richardson Paley.


Today's Paris Doesn't Look Back
THE astringent society columnist Taki once wrote of Paris, "Nostalgia is the city's cheapest commodity and everyone foreign gets it for free." You don't have to be a cynic to agree that the City of Light carries such a heavy freight from its past that visitors have difficulty seeing things here as they are because of the way they used to be.
Or at least the way they were depicted in novels, movies and memoirs.
As Janet Flanner put it, "Paris was yesterday."
I must admit that when I arrived in Paris 25 years ago as a Fulbright Fellow I was so busy searching for the ghosts of Hemingway and Fitzgerald, so obsessed with scenes that appeared to spring full blown from Truffaut films, I was in danger of tripping over my own feet.
But on a recent return it began to register on me that the city no longer corresponds to my callow recollections.
I think it was the rabbits that shocked me into recognition.
Landing at Charles de Gaulle Airport after an all-night flight, I gazed groggily out the window and noticed that the grassy patches beside the runway were aswarm with rabbits.
Suddenly, like Alice falling through the looking glass, I tumbled into an altogether new place and realized that Paris is today.


Pump Food
WHAT THEY ARE: Trendy nutritional supplements for body builders and the body-obsessed.
Hot Stuff is a protein powder that, its manufacturer claims, helps build muscles.
Razor Cuts is an herb and amino-acid caplet that, its maker says, helps metabolize fat and eliminate excess water.
The goal: that "ripped" look of sharply cut, well-defined muscles.
Example: Marky Mark.
CELEBRITY USERS: Marky Mark does Hot Stuff.
So do Hulk Hogan, Evander Holyfield, New Kids on the Block and W. Axl Rose.
Richard Barretta, a trainer and nutritional adviser at the David Barton Gym in Manhattan, uses both Hot Stuff and Razor Cuts.
He has also advised many clients -- among them William Norwich, the gossip columnist; Blaine Trump, the socialite, and Linda Wells, the editor of Allure magazine -- to do the same.
Some do.
Some don't.


No Headline
AN ELUSIVE ARTIST
More than 40 drawings in pastel, watercolor, acrylic and gouache and a collection of prints make up the first retrospective of Sylvia Plimack Mangold's works on paper, opening today at the Neuberger Museum of Art on the campus of the State University of New York at Purchase.
During her 25-year career, Ms.
Mangold has achieved a formidable reputation in America as a skillful drawer and printmaker.
Her unusual choice of subjects and innovative techniques have eluded categorizing, sometimes seeming to place her with the American Realists or European Modernists, sometimes with the Minimalists or Conceptualists.


A FATHER'S RITE
Higgins paints a poverty of inheritance for his daughter.
By sentimentalizing the bonding of father and son, he perpetuates the bias that only men are heirs to the power and glory of their ancestors.
This reinforces the debilitating notion that men inherit the cultural landmarks of society and women inherit the familial.
AUDREY SHIMKAS
Mill Valley, Calif.


Recent Sales
Bedford, N.Y.  $315,000
107 Seminary Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 73-year-old ranch; fireplace, vaulted ceiling, dining room, 1-car garage, 1.3 acres; taxes $5,490.
Chappaqua, N.Y.  $310,000
65 Seven Bridges Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 51-year-old ranch; fireplace, dining room, family room, living room, 8.5 acres; taxes $6,445.
South Salem, N.Y.  $250,000
45 East Street  7-bedroom, 4-bath, 93-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, breakfast room, eat-in kitchen, guest cottage, 4.5 acres; taxes $11,002.
Woodbridge, Conn.  $175.850
44 Newton Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 160-year-old cape cod; fully restored, artist's studio in barn, 4 horse stalls, 2.1 acres; taxes $3,610.
Orange, Conn.  $184,500
520 Overlook Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old ranch; central air conditioning, stone fireplace, hardwood floors, 0.5 acre; taxes $3,217.
North Haven, Conn.  $194,000
19 Turner Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old ranch; sun room, above-ground pool, 2-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $2,493.
OTHER AREAS Edison, N.J.  $307,500
44 Livingston Avenue  6-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old colonial; finished basement eat-in-kitchen, 0.5 acre; taxes $5,449.
Jackson, N.J.  $176,000
64 Chelsea Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; fireplace, full basement, c/a; taxes $4,100.
Bay Shore, L.I.  $525,000
33 Lawrence Lane  5-bedroom, 5-bath, 66-year-old colonial; fireplace, basement, 2-car detached garage, 110 feet of bulkheading; taxes $9,800.


Hussein Rebuilds Iraq's Economy Undeterred by the U.N. Sanctions
Two years after a strict embargo was imposed on Iraq, the country has repaired almost all the 134 bridges cut by allied bombing, rebuilt hundreds of miles of damaged road and railway track, and restored ravaged electrical grids, communications networks and broadcast equipment.
Just how Iraq has succeeded in repairing all this damage while bound by an import embargo and under intermittent threat of attack is a closely guarded secret.
But experts assume that a combination of sanctions-busting, improvisation and domestic manufacture of needed parts has allowed Mr.
Hussein to stabilize Iraq's economy at a low but sustainable level of activity, making outright collapse unlikely.


Donna Krupp and Jeffrey Jepson
Joseph M. Krupp Jr. of Jersey City, has announced May wedding plans for his daughter Donna Marie Krupp and First Lieut.
Jeffrey Freeman Jepson, a son of John K. Jepson Sr. and Anne Hastings, both of Simsbury, Conn.


Jeffrey R. Peltier, Valerie H. Speyer
Valerie Hope Speyer, a daughter of Lynne Tishman Speyer and Jerry I. Speyer, both of New York, was married last evening to Jeffrey Richard Peltier, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Peltier of Tipp City, Ohio.
Rabbi Peter Rubenstein performed the ceremony at the Rainbow Room in New York.
Mrs.
Peltier and her husband graduated from Harvard University.
She is a third-year law student at Columbia University, where her husband received a master's degree in real-estate development.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Tishman Speyer Properties, the real-estate development and management company in New York.
Her mother is a social worker in New York.


Making a Street: Forget About Logos On the Skyline
Building as object, building as icon: that was the mode corporate architecture favored in the 1980's, when the goal of every company indulging in the act of construction seemed to be to end up with a trademark on the skyline.
The most important criterion for judging a building's success as a symbol of corporate aspirations in that extravagant decade was not whether it functioned well, or whether it contributed anything to its surroundings, but whether it looked strikingly different and created an easily identifiable form.
The best proof around that such times are past -- and the best paradigm for urban corporate architecture in the 90's -- is the set of buildings finished late last year for Capital Cities/ABC along West 66th and West 67th Streets on the West Side of Manhattan.
This is the utter opposite of architecture as logo.
First, it isn't a single structure, standing apart like a prima donna; it is an array of five new buildings and a couple of renovated ones that contains the headquarters and a large chunk of the production facilities for this communications company and its television network.
As a complex, the buildings make a statement about the workplace that is good, and a statement about urban architecture that is essential.


A Swinging Union Station


Wall Street; The Fuss Over Nonrated Bonds
IN the municipal bond market, where great urban woes can mean great investment gains, new attention is being directed to nonrated bonds -- many of them "junk" bonds -- that are finding their way into the portfolios of individuals and mutual funds.
Nonrated bonds are issued by tax-exempt borrowers -- cities, hospitals, school districts and housing agencies -- and are sold without being reviewed by a standard credit rating agency.
Many of these bonds are below investment grade; others come from creditworthy borrowers who don't want to face the time and expense of being reviewed by a rating agency.


Corrections
A chart last week with an article about weapons makers referred incompletely to the military operations that the General Electric Company recently agreed to sell.
In addition to aircraft electronics, G.E. agreed to sell businesses listed under these chart headings: space systems, Strategic Defense Initiative, other electronics, other weapons, training/simulation and military services.


Hungarians Think The Darndest Things
GENIUS IN THE SHADOWS A Biography of Leo Szilard: The Man Behind the Bomb.
By William Lanouette with Bela Silard.
Illustrated. 587 pp.
New York: A Robert Stewart Book/ Charles Scribner's Sons. $35.


Making a Call? Hail a Cab
TAXICABS in New York City may soon be equipped with pay phones in the back seat.
After years of rejecting the service, the Taxi and Limousine Commission voted last week to let yellow cabs carry phones that take credit cards and cost $1.20 to $2 a minute for a call to anywhere in the continental United States.


All's Quiet on Western New York Front
The week leading up to the Super Bowl is an endless carnival.
Hoopla abounds.
Players find themselves the featured performers on a rather large stage and some feel compelled to entertain.
It's become customary for a player, or two, to do or say something outlandish to keep the festivities rolling along and make the participants bigger than the game -- at least for a day.


Today's Paris Doesn't Look Back
THE astringent society columnist Taki once wrote of Paris, "Nostalgia is the city's cheapest commodity and everyone foreign gets it for free." You don't have to be a cynic to agree that the City of Light carries such a heavy freight from its past that visitors have difficulty seeing things here as they are because of the way they used to be.
Or at least the way they were depicted in novels, movies and memoirs.
As Janet Flanner put it, "Paris was yesterday."
I must admit that when I arrived in Paris 25 years ago as a Fulbright Fellow I was so busy searching for the ghosts of Hemingway and Fitzgerald, so obsessed with scenes that appeared to spring full blown from Truffaut films, I was in danger of tripping over my own feet.
But on a recent return it began to register on me that the city no longer corresponds to my callow recollections.
I think it was the rabbits that shocked me into recognition.
Landing at Charles de Gaulle Airport after an all-night flight, I gazed groggily out the window and noticed that the grassy patches beside the runway were aswarm with rabbits.
Suddenly, like Alice falling through the looking glass, I tumbled into an altogether new place and realized that Paris is today.


The Clinton Challenge Is Hardly Self-Image
To the Editor:
"America," Mr.
Finn writes, "needs Mr. Clinton to help us restore confidence in ourselves." Fair enough, since the President-elect has spent the last 12 months telling us how badly off we are.


Sounds of Venice
To the Editor: In "The Serene Sounds of Venice," Louis Inturrisi remembers the sound of the locals talking -- "that energetic blend of lilting intonation and slushy sibilants."
For my part, I enjoy just watching a Venetian conversation out of earshot, the gesticulating.
They paint air pictures of the spoken words that I've never seen watched by the listener.


On the Talkies, a Cruder Face of Conservatism
The pro-Bush cadre that complained during the campaign about a pro-Clinton tilt to news programs and sitcoms should find comfort in the talk shows.
Here, as Mr.
Clinton takes over, the right is rampant.
The flowering of right-wing yakkers no doubt owes something to their cultivation by like-minded sponsors.
But there is more to it.
Just as Patrick J. Buchanan defied the Republican establishment in the Presidential primaries and in effect took over the convention with his appeal to the disaffected, so John McLaughlin, Rush Limbaugh, Robert Novak and less lustrous presences are showing a cruder face of conservatism than such fixtures as the patriarchal William F. Buckley Jr., the professorial George F. Will and the PBS-style David Gergen.


Streetscapes: Scaffolding; A New Technology Promises Changes
SIDEWALK sheds and scaffolding, products of a centuries-old technology, have now been joined by a newcomer, the Mobile Elevating Work Platform.
These machines are expensive, but for many projects they have profound advantages and they promise to change the city's skyline.
Both the street-level sidewalk shed, a timber-supported, protected shelter, and the construction scaffold, allowing access to the upper facade of a building, were known in ancient times and had not changed much by the time they appeared in photographs of New York City of the 1870's and 80's.
At some point before then they were joined by the hanging scaffold, a lightweight deck let down from the top of a building on pulleys.


Inside Cuomo's Budget: A Discreet Fee or Two
With budgets, as with life, the devil is often in the details.
And with the 1993-94 budget proposed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo last week, the details were sometimes buried far beneath the surface.


On Sunday; And Politicians Roam Streets Unchecked
BRUCE STEWART manages a group home for 22 mentally ill drug abusers in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn.
Some still use crack.
Most are schizophrenic.
Often the men deteriorate and need hospitalization.
So where does he stand on the question of committing people against their will versus protecting their civil liberties?


JAN. 17-23: Token Withdrawal; 1,100 Troops Leave Somalia On Inauguration's Eve
With a brief departure ceremony on a sand-swept airfield, the first American combat troops left Somalia last week.
The redeployment was mostly symbolic -- it was carried out on the eve of Bill Clinton's inauguration, fulfilling a bit of President Bush's early reassurances that the troops would be home by then.
Although 1,100 troops throughout the week headed back to California, 24,513 American soldiers and marines were left behind with no timetable for withdrawal.
Lieut.
Gen.
Robert Johnston, the operation's commander, said the move was long-planned and spurred by the arrival of Australian forces.
But another American official called it a reminder to the United Nations that the United States is ready to hand over the expensive operation to U.N. peacekeepers.
"If we don't let them know we're looking to get out of here, they'll just dilly-dally around," he said.


Using Nuts or Spices to Coat the Fish
ONE way to keep fish moist and juicy and also to add a touch of flavor is to coat it with a crust before lightly sauteeing it.
This technique also makes fish, which is sometimes cooked through before it takes on inviting color, more attractive to serve.
Instead of a simple coating of bread crumbs or seasoned bread crumbs, many chefs are turning to other ingredients.
Nut crusts are quite popular, as are spice crusts.


JACKSON, IN HAITI, CAUTIONS MILITARY
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson, in Haiti for a two-day visit, said today that he had come to warn the country's military rulers that they would face harsh action, perhaps even force, if they failed to cooperate with a plan to move toward restoring democracy here.
Mr.
Jackson, who met on Thursday in Washington with Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher said he had not been officially authorized to carry a message to Haiti's military leaders.
But he said the Clinton Administration had assured him that it intended to restore Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to power.


Case Receives 30-Day Suspension
WALTER CASE JR., the record-setting harness driver, has received a 30-day suspension for failing to take a urine test, a New Jersey state racing commission official said yesterday.
HUGH GALLAGHER, chief steward for standardbred racing for the New Jersey Racing Commission, said he issued the suspension Thursday.
But Case appealed and the commission granted a stay.


Ms. Brennan, Whitney Palache
Dr. and Mrs.
Edward N. Brennan of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth L. Brennan to J. Whitney Palache, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John G. Palache Jr., also of Greenwich.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Brennan is an associate with Whitman &amp; Ransom, a Greenwich law firm.
She and her fiance graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She received her law degree from the University of Connecticut.
Her father is a psychoanalyst in Greenwich and New York, and is an assistant clinical professor of psychiatry at Columbia University.


Patricia Brooks, 59, a Soprano Known for Acting Talent, Dies
Patricia Brooks Mann, a lyric soprano who helped fashion the modern standard for opera performers, died on Friday at her home in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
She was 59.
She died of complications of multiple sclerosis, said her husband, Theodore D. Mann, the artistic director and co-founder of Circle in the Square Theater.


Technology; Inside Human Cells, a New Frontier
MOST drug discovery has focused in recent years on the development of molecules that either interact with or block receptors -- proteins that act as on-off switches for genetic activity -- on the surfaces of human cells.
Now, a young biopharmaceutical company has developed a technology that targets receptors inside the cell, opening a new and compelling avenue for drug discovery.


POSTINGS: Harvard Honors Its Own; A Pride of Architects
As alumni lists go, this one goes a very long way, indeed: Barnes '42, Johnson '43, Pei '46 and Rudolph '47.
That is because the degrees are in architecture.
And the first names are Edward Larrabee, Philip, Ieoh Ming and Paul.


Defining a Man by His Heart, Not Fists
In 1960, Floyd Patterson brought his heavyweight championship back to P.S. 614, the Manhattan school for troubled boys from which he had been graduated.
He was 25 years old and his message was simple: If I can get to the very top of the world, you can at least aspire to become somebody in a corner of it.
In that seemingly simpler time, the message was received seriously: Patterson, who had just regained his title from Ingemar Johansson, had often visited the school; boxing was accepted as an appropriate way out of poverty for minority males, and the mystique of the heavyweight championship conferred a dignified celebrity on all the spiritual sons of Jack Johnson, Jack Dempsey, Joe Louis and Rocky Marciano.


Reds' Bowden Going for the Cycle (in Trading)
Faced with the formidable task of toppling the two-time champion Atlanta Braves, the Cincinnati Reds this winter have used every means in the player-acquisition book to try to improve their chances.
But General Manager Jim Bowden has one trick left.
"One thing I haven't done but I'm working on is a three-way deal," Bowden said.
"It's become a lost art in baseball, but it's something I think should be used more. Jack McKeon was an expert on that when he was with San Diego. I've discussed theories with him. He was very helpful. It's real challenging."


SILENCE OF THE FROGS
You don't have to go as far as Bangladesh to be attacked by insects, where the frogs who ate them have died out ("Silence of the Frogs," by Emily Yoffe, Dec. 13).
Right here, on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, I was attacked by chiggers in such quantity that I was covered from shoulders to toes with bites.
A naturalist of the area saw me and said: "Oh, you've been to Eastern Neck. Since the frogs are dying, the chiggers are thriving." ERIKA SALLOCH
Chestertown, Md.


Supreme Court No Longer Protects Privacy
To the Editor:
William Safire suggests but does not mention in "Peeping Tom Lives" (column, Jan. 4) one of the main reasons so much personal information is now easily available to the Government.
That reason is the Supreme Court, which has resolutely refused to adapt the Fourth Amendment to modern conditions of life.


Two Are Slain, Three Injured At Loud Party
Two people were shot to death and three others were wounded early yesterday after a dispute erupted at a warehouse party in Brooklyn and spilled out onto the street, the police said.
The shooting occurred about 4:30 A.M. in front of S &amp; S Corrugated Paper Machinery Inc., at 160 North Fourth Street in Williamsburg, where the party was held, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
John McCluskey.


The World of Nancy Kwan
NAME: Nancy Kwan
IDENTITY: Actress; spokeswoman for Pearl Cream, a skin cream.


Waiting and Watching in the Quest for Ducks
I chambered three shells in my 12 gauge and made my way through the New Jersey darkness.
My host, Tommy Cornicelli, held the strands of a barbed wire fence apart so that I could pass through.
I leaned my shotgun against a tree trunk and repeated the maneuver for Tommy and Cody, his Golden Labrador.
As we walked, I heard the peaceful, unhurried morning sounds of wakening ducks.
I entered the blind while Tommy put on his waders and set our decoys.
When he returned, he called the ducks, sparingly.
I could hear them set their wings and then, in the dim light, I saw them.
We fired.
I dropped a hen wood duck.
Tommy shot a mallard drake.


Reds' Bowden Going for the Cycle (in Trading)
Faced with the formidable task of toppling the two-time champion Atlanta Braves, the Cincinnati Reds this winter have used every means in the player-acquisition book to try to improve their chances.
But General Manager Jim Bowden has one trick left.
"One thing I haven't done but I'm working on is a three-way deal," Bowden said.
"It's become a lost art in baseball, but it's something I think should be used more. Jack McKeon was an expert on that when he was with San Diego. I've discussed theories with him. He was very helpful. It's real challenging."


Bowe Is Banking on a British TV Deal
MICHAEL DOKES would do more than score an upset if he wins the world heavyweight title by beating RIDDICK BOWE at Madison Square Garden on Feb. 6.
He would also throw a monkey wrench into an optimistic new contract between Bowe and Britain's Independent Television.
Under the deal Bowe has agreed to allow ITV to televise his first five title defenses, beginning with a delayed telecast of his Dokes fight.
ITV hopes that Bowe will stay champion long enough to take on the British fighter, LENNOX LEWIS, who inherited the World Boxing Council heavyweight title after Bowe relinquished it rather than face Lewis as a mandatory first opponent. (AP)


Recent Sales
Bay Shore  $525,000
33 Lawrence Lane  5-bedroom, 5-bath, 66-year-old colonial; fireplace, basement, 2-car detached garage, 110 feet of bulkheading; taxes $9,800.
Copiague  $196,500
7 Marlin Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 9-year-old ranch; fireplace, 1-car attached garage, 0.5 acre, water view; taxes $6,000.
Islip  $425,000
56 East Bayberry Road  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 38-year-old Cape Cod; 2 fireplaces, 1 waterfront acre, 2-car garage; taxes $11,700.
Massapequa  $185,000
9 Roy Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old ranch; basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,300.
Roslyn Heights  $367,500
83 Shepherd Lane  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 42-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $7,000.
Seaford  $240,000
639 Kildare Crescent  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 38-year-old split level; sunken living room, family room, dining room, eat-in kitchen; taxes $6,700.
OTHER AREAS South Salem, N.Y.  $250,000
45 East Street  7-bedroom, 4-bath, 93-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, breakfast room, eat-in kitchen, guest cottage, 4.5 acres; taxes $11,002.
Woodbridge, Conn.  $175,850
44 Newton Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 160-year-old cape cod; fully restored, artist's studio in barn, 4 horse stalls, 2.1 acres; taxes $3,610.
Edison, N.J.  $307,500
44 Livingston Avenue  6-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old colonial; finished basement eat-in-kitchen, 0.5 acre; taxes $5,449.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-16  U.S. SUSPECTS SERB-RUN CAMPS


More Effective Than the Gestapo
To the Editor:
Peter Wyden is to be congratulated for having written "Stella" (review, Nov. 1), the biography of Stella Goldschlag, the infamous Gestapo informer.
A Jew herself, she was responsible for the arrest and subsequent murder of several hundred Jews who lived in hiding in Berlin to save their lives (possibly even more than 2,000, according to Mr. Wyden's carefully researched book).
I myself lived underground in Berlin during the last two and a half years of the war and was acquainted with Stella from an earlier time.
I still felt a chill coming down my spine (almost 50 years after the fact) when I read the description in the book of an arrest by Stella of a Jewish friend of hers at a Berlin subway station that I occasionally used.
For those of us who lived underground in Berlin and who were known to Stella from earlier times, she was a source of constant terror.
All of our activities were governed by the need to evade her.


Hangin' With the Nintendo Generation
For more than a year, "hard-core" has been the most vibrant dance-music cult in Britain.
The term comes from "hard-core techno," a brutal, high-speed style of electronic rave music.
Early on, hard-core meant bombastic synthesizer -- programmed machine-rhythms and a clinical though crazed atmosphere.
But the music evolved into a hybrid of hip-hop and techno, merging the former's grit with the latter's futuristic weirdness, as disk jockeys and producers started to take beats from rap records and speed them up.
In the process, they retained hip-hop's funky syncopation, yet at tempos (140 to 150 beats per minute) far faster than any flesh-and-blood drummer could sustain.
Combining the revelry of disco and the disorientation of psychedelia, rave music tends to be brazenly druggy, in both its sound and its lyrical allusions.
Hard-core is no exception.
Its manic pace has been influenced by the fact that ecstasy, the raver's stimulant of choice, has become steadily more adulterated with amphetamine.


Redmen Continue Their Big Surprises
The coach wears a suit and tie.
The team is in first place in the Big East.
The university is St.
John's.
What's wrong with this picture?


Pirates to Reduce Stadium Capacity
The Pittsburgh Pirates want to make Three Rivers Stadium more than a huge chunk of concrete where baseball is played, so they plan to eliminate about 11,000 seats.
"It will make Three Rivers more intimate and baseball-oriented," a Pirates spokesman, Rick Cerrone, said.
"It will keep people out of what are considered undesirable seats for baseball."


RECORD BRIEF
Sibelius: Symphony No. 1
Vienna Philharmonic conducted by Leonard Bernstein.  Deutsche Grammophon 435 351-2; CD.


SETTLING IN: The Old Order; Conferring on Future, Conservatives Long for the Past
In their first major gathering since the election last November, many prominent conservatives vowed today to stage a comeback even as some spoke almost in awe of President Clinton's political skills.
As if they had already put the Bush Administration out of their minds, speakers at what was billed as a "Conservative Summit" spoke longingly about bringing back the era of Ronald Reagan.
The gathering here was sponsored by the National Review Institute, an offshoot of the conservative magazine.


Business Diary/January 17-22
COMPANIES Now, What'd That Stand for? 'I've Been Mauled'?


In Old Japan, Silk Robes Were Wrapped in Beauty
Real life upstaged almost everything happening in Hollywood on a recent morning, when 100 kimono-clad women from Kyoto filed through the Japanese costume extravaganza at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.
They had come to see "When Art Became Fashion: Kosode in Edo-Period Japan," an exhibition of the forerunners of the modern kimono.
"It was quite a sight," said Sharon Sadako Takeda, an assistant curator of costumes and textiles who organized the show with Dale Carolyn Gluckman, an associate curator.
"These women looked like a procession of courtesans from an earlier age."


JAN. 17-23: Former Headmistress Freed; Jean Harris, 69 and Frail, Paroled for 1980 Murder
For Jean S. Harris, the penalty for killing her lover 13 years ago was finally lifted last week.
A state parole board, acting in the wake of a sentence commutation by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, freed Mrs.
Harris, now 69, who was convicted in 1981 of murdering Dr.
Herman Tarnower, the author of a best-selling diet book.
Mr.
Cuomo had rejected her appeals for clemency three times, acting only after she suffered a second heart attack in prison and was scheduled for surgery.


Anne Walton, Andrew Stenzler
Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley A. Walton 3d of Hinsdale, Ill., have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne Ford Walton to Andrew Marc Stenzler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Stenzler of Scarsdale, N.Y.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Walton, 24, graduated from the University of Michigan, as did her fiance.
She is a third-year law student at Harvard University and will be a clerk for Judge Charles S. Haight Jr. of the United States District Court in New York after graduation in June.
Her father is a partner in the Chicago law firm of Seyfarth, Shaw, Fairweather &amp; Geraldson.
Her mother, Karen Walton, is a travel agent at Lefte Banque Travel Ltd. in Hinsdale.


A Synergy of Ecology And Photography
PHOTOGRAPHERS, like seeds in a rich environment, take root, grow and prosper.
For Ansel Adams, the place was the West Coast -- Carmel, Calif., and Yosemite National Park.
For Ted Spiegel, it is the Hudson River Valley -- Bear Mountain, Cold Spring and the United States Military Academy at West Point.
Mr.
Spiegel's love for this landscape developed early, when as a student at private boarding schools in Tarrytown and five miles farther north, in Ossining, he would walk along the Hudson and read about the area.
And as weather and seasons changed, he would see vast stretches of acreage on both banks of the river.
His interest only increased when he became a photographer.


Barbara Bush Was Boss, But Another Duty Called
Anna Perez, who was Barbara Bush's press secretary, spent Tuesday, her last full day on the job, working a decidedly different beat.
Ms.
Perez helped handle publicity for one of the many parties last week celebrating the inauguration of President Clinton.
"I certainly didn't celebrate the election, but an inauguration is something that all of us should be celebrating," Ms.
Perez said at the party, a luncheon that was given by Elle magazine in honor of the poet Maya Angelou.
The hosts were Johnnetta B. Cole, the president of Spelman College in Atlanta, and Peggy Cooper Cafritz, the founder of the Duke Ellington School of the Arts in Washington.


In a Nikolais Work, There's Always Depth With the Dazzle
There was a time when modern dance was an art of new beginnings, a concept that was brought home again with special force at a tribute to Alwin Nikolais's teaching and artistry in New York earlier this month.
The evening, a benefit for the school directed by Mr.
Nikolais and his longtime collaborator, Murray Louis, had a family atmosphere and included performances plus reminiscences from alumni.
Now 82 years old, Mr.
Nikolais has so accustomed us to the delights of his mixed-media universe that it is hard to recall how strange it once looked.
Nowadways we take for granted that his dancers' bodies are disguised by sacks, masks, cylinders, props and slide projections.


Bush Sets Out to Prove He Can Go Home Again
Riding up in the elevator to work Friday morning, the new ninth-floor tenant at the pink-granite office building on Memorial Drive turned to the lone photographer riding up with him and said politely but firmly that he could come to his office door but no further.
"I've been in public for more than 20 years," said George Bush, who was wearing a windbreaker, checked shirt and running shoes and was lugging a briefcase and three duffel bags.
"Now I just want a little time to myself."


A RIVER OF ONE'S OWN
Marjorie Sandor should take heart (Hers: "A River of One's Own," Jan. 3).
As the daughter of a backwoods-raised father, I was brought up with the philosophy that you fish to eat.
In fact, the more we caught the better.
We would freeze our extra fish and share it with friends, in what we Southerners call a "fish fry."


Using Nuts or Spices to Coat the Fish
ONE way to keep fish moist and juicy and also to add a touch of flavor is to coat it with a crust before lightly sauteeing it.
This technique also makes fish, which is sometimes cooked through before it takes on inviting color, more attractive to serve.
Instead of a simple coating of bread crumbs or seasoned bread crumbs, many chefs are turning to other ingredients.
Nut crusts are quite popular, as are spice crusts.


Mimi Brody, Harry Appelman
Janice and Arthur Brody of Bethlehem, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Miriam Anne Brody, to Harry Stewart Appelman, the son of Mary and Evan Appelman of Downers Grove, Ill.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Brody, 31, is known as Mimi.
She is a legislative aide in Washington to Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts.
She graduated from the University of Michigan, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a law degree from Harvard University.
Her father is a retired professor of psychology at Lehigh University in Bethlehem.


Proper Bostonian?


The Rehabbing of America
THE MAKING OF A DRUG-FREE AMERICA
Programs That Work. By Mathea Falco.  254 pp. New York:  Random House/Times Books. $22.
RECKONING
Drugs, the Cities, and the American Future.
By Elliott Currie.  405 pp.
New York:  Hill &amp; Wang. $25.


Data Bank/January 24, 1993


BENEFITS
All Souls Church Auction
TUESDAY -- The Unitarian Church of All Souls, 1157 Lexington Avenue, at 80th Street, is holding an auction and cocktail party to benefit its programs for children, the homeless and people with AIDS.
Jewelry, cruises, hotel stays in Europe, Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, opera tickets and hairstyling, among other items, will be sold to the highest bidders at the law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling, 599 Lexington Avenue at 53d Street, at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 535-5530.
Lighting the Way
WEDNESDAY -- A dinner and dance at the Plaza will benefit the music school at The Lighthouse, which provides many services for the visually impaired.
New music rooms are being built on 59th Street near Third Avenue as part of the organization's new headquarters.
Lawrence J. Aiken, president and chief executive of Sanofi Beaute Inc., will be honored.
The black-tie benefit starts with cocktails at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 614-0400.
Preserving Colonial History
WEDNESDAY -- The Morris-Jumel Mansion, at West 160th Street, east of St.
Nicholas Avenue, was built in 1765 and is Manhattan's only remaining colonial residence.
The mansion was once used by George Washington as his headquarters and by Aaron Burr as a residence.
Bought by the city in 1903, it was turned into a museum in 1904. .
A benefit for the museum will be held from 6 to 8 P.M. at Christie's, 502 Park Avenue at 59th Street, with a cocktail party and preview of an upcoming sale of fine English furniture and Chinese export porcelain.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 923-8008.
Party for Italy Boys' Towns
WEDNESDAY -- Three homes in Italy maintained by Boys' Towns of Italy for orphaned or troubled boys and girls will benefit from a 9 P.M. party at the Surf Club, 415 East 91st Street, organized by the group's junior committee.
Tickets, $10, at the door.
Information: (212) 534-7873.
Books and Champagne
THURSDAY -- A three-day book fair at the New York Genealogical and Biographical Society opens with a black-tie and champagne reception at the society, 122 East 58th Street, from 6:30 to 10 P.M.
There will be strolling musicians, games, prizes and an auction of books, including recently published and autographed works.
The evening will benefit the society's research library.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 755-8532.
An Evening for Cancer Care
THURSDAY -- From 7 to 10 P.M., there will be a party at Bar New York, at 1819 Second Avenue near 94th Street, given by the junior committee of Cancer Care.
There will be an open bar and dancing.
Tickets, $20, from (212) 221-3300, extension 468.
Viennese Opera Ball
FRIDAY -- The annual Viennese Opera Ball to benefit cancer research at the Columbia University Comprehensive Cancer Center will start with cocktails at 8 P.M. at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The white-tie, tails and long-gown benefit, sponsored by the United States Austrian Chamber of Commerce, was established to honor Margit Bokor and Norman Scott, opera singers who died from cancer.
West Point cadets will lead a grand march to be followed by dinner, ballroom dancing and contemporary dancing.
Tickets, $270, from (212) 819-0158.
Aiding Balkan Victims
SATURDAY -- "A Call for Bread" to raise funds to aid victims of the fighting in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, will held at the Paramount Theater at Madison Square Garden starting at 3:30 P.M.
Martin Sheen will head a list of entertainers, politicians and religious leaders seeking to raise funds for food to be distributed by the Croatian Franciscan Emergency Relief Fund to refugees in the two states.
A 7:30 P.M. dinner at the New York Hilton will follow.
Tickets, $150 for the Paramount show and dinner, $45 for the show alone, from (718) 263-2540.  'Midsummer' in Midwinter
SATURDAY -- The 7 P.M. performance of Shakespeare's "Midsummer Night's Dream" by the Roundabout Ensemble at the Hudson Guild Theater, 441 West 26th Street, followed by a 9:30 P.M. party at La Boulangere, 49 East 21st Street, will benefit the theater company.
Tickets, $10 for the performance, $15 for the party, from (212) 719-9393.
Party in New Science Center
SATURDAY -- There will be cocktails, dinner and dancing from 9 P.M. to 1 A.M. at the new Liberty Science Center in Liberty State Park, N.J., overlooking the New York Harbor.
Ferry service between the World Trade Center and the park will be provided throughout the evening, which will benefit the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel.
Dress is casual.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 779-2500.


Robin C. Stopsky, Anthony C. Grow
Mr. and Mrs.
David C. Stopsky of Plainview, L.I., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Robin Carrie Stopsky and Anthony Clay Grow, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clayton C. Grow of Winchester, Ind.
Miss Stopsky, 22, is a day-care worker at the Ann Arbor (Mich.) Jewish Community Center.
She graduated from the University of Michigan, where her fiance is a senior in the Navy R.O.T.C. program.
Her father is a vice president in the legal department of R. H. Macy &amp; Company in New York.


Kathleen Kenny, Glenford Nixon
Dr.
Kathleen Haeger Kenny, an internist at the United Presbyterian Residence, a nursing home in Woodbury, L.I., was married on Friday to Dr.
Glenford Delacy Nixon, a co-director of geriatric medicine at the Parker Jewish Geriatric Institute in New Hyde Park, L.I.
The Rev.
Mario Costa performed the ceremony at St.
Paul the Apostle Roman Catholic Church in Brookville, L.I.
Dr.
Kenny, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the City University of New York and received a medical degree from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Kenny Jr. of Glen Cove, L.I.
The bride's father, who is retired, was a director of labor relations at New York Telephone in Manhattan.


Jennifer Crimmins and Lee Sterne
Jennifer Catherine Crimmins, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred S. Crimmins of Ridgewood, N.J., was married there on Jan. 2 to Lee Winslow Greene Sterne, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph R. L. Sterne of Lutherville, Md.
The Rev.
Charlotte Sommers performed the ceremony at the West Side Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Sterne, 24, is a senior accountant at Deloitte &amp; Touche in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Colgate University and she received a master's degree in accounting from New York University.
Her father is the president of the international division of Dominion Textile Inc., a Montreal textile manufacturer.
The division is in Zug, Switzerland.
Her mother, Catherine Crimmins, is a financial consultant in Ridgewood.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Fifth Avenue; Doldrums? Not Along Fifth Ave.
IT is rare enough to sight a building nearing completion in New York City.
On Fifth Avenue, however, there are two: a 30-story office tower at 46th Street and the 20-story Takashimaya Building, between 54th and 55th Streets, which will house a specialty shop, art gallery and restaurant, as well as offices.
These new structures stand as proof -- at least to their developers -- that the avenue's commercial allure is undiminished, especially in the international market.


Robin Gethers, LeVerne Summers
Dorothy Tilghman of Mount Vernon, N.Y., and Alfred Gethers of the Bronx have announced the engagement of their daughter Robin Denise Gethers to LeVerne Summers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marion Summers of Bowman, S.C.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Gethers, 37, is a news assistant at The New York Times and a textile artist.
She graduated cum laude from Wells College.
Her father is a foreman at the General Rags Textile Corporation, a maker of industrial clothing and rags in Brooklyn.
Her mother, who is retired, was an administrative assistant at the Bankers Trust Company in New York.


Nina Train, Christopher Choa
Nina Train, a daughter of Maria Teresa Train and John Train, both of New York, was married there yesterday to Christopher J. Choa, a son of Andrew and France Choa of Hong Kong.
The Rev.
John Davis performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer.
Mrs.
Choa, 30, graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and received a master's degree in anthropology from the University of London.
Her father is the chairman of Train, Smith Investment Council, an investment-management concern in New York, and an author.
Her mother is the director of Scala Books, a book-packaging concern in New York.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Frances Cheston Train of New York.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Jan. 10  MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village  $530,000
1 Fifth Avenue (8th St.)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining room, 3 exposures; maintenance $2,082, 38% tax-deductible (Brokers: Eychner Associates-Corcoran Group)  Greenwich Village  $808,000
32 Morton Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in an elevator loft building; 1,100-sq.-ft., planted roof deck, fireplace, 4 exposures; maintenance $1,735, 70% tax-deductible (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  TriBeCa  $325,000
530 Canal Street  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; elevator, renovated kitchen and baths, Jacuzzi, Hudson River view; maintenance $623, 45% tax-deductible (Brokers: Herbert H. Kleigerman &amp; Associates-Tabak Real Estate)  Upper West Side  $175,780
176 West 87th Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, 2 exposures, Central Park view; maintenance $1,008, 42% tax-deductible (Broker: Halstead Property Co.)  Upper West Side  $410,000
173 Riverside Drive (89th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, entrance gallery, dining area, herring-bone floors, 2 exposures, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,092, 38% tax-deductible (Broker: Wendy Walters &amp; Associates)  BRONX  City Island  $218,000
104 Bay Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family wood-frame Victorian; dining room, 1-car garage, private beach; 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  Wakefield  $163,000
1027 East 212th Street  2-family detached frame house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; dining room, 1 bath in each; finished basement, 2-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Brokers: Century 21/Metro-Star-Carribbean Estates
BROOKLYN  Gravesend  $208,000
2554 Hubbard Street  2-family semi-attached brick house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; dinette, 1 bath in each; 27.4- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Sure Sale Realty)  Manhattan Beach  $280,000
104 Amherst Street  2-family detached,brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room, Jacuzzi in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; c/a, 2-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,100 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  Park Slope  $436,600
422 7th Avenue  2-family, 3-story limestone; 4 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths in primary duplex; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in simplex; dining room in each, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,725 (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  QUEENS  Corona  $330,000
111-16 42d Avenue  2-family attached brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each unit; hospitality suite in finished basement, 22- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,900 (Broker: Veteran Realty Co.)  Forest Hills  $269,000
90-17 68th Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family attached brick Tudor; raised-dining room, dinette, 2 fireplaces, finished basement, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,676 (Broker: Glenjay Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  New Brighton  $117,000
28 Kirby Court  2-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached colonial; dining room, c/a, heated sun porch, semi-finished attic, 1-car garage, 50- by 70-ft. lot; taxes $760 (Brokers: Foreman/ Rand Properties-Coldwell Banker/ DeSimone Real Estate)  Oakwood  $154,600
330 Fairbanks Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family semi-attached frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 23- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,450 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/Schlott Realtors)


Judith Brous, Jeffrey R. Poss
Mr. and Mrs.
David B. Brous of South Orange, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Judith Brous to Jeffrey R. Poss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Poss, also of South Orange.
A May wedding is planned.


Q and A
Walking in Norway
Q.
Do you know of organizations that offer walks in Norway? -- L. D. Lewis, New York, N.Y.


Playing the Cowboys For a Turnaround
Everyone knew that this Texas outfit was damaged goods by early 1989.
A brash innovator, perennial leader and occasionally dominant force for 20 years, it had lost its way and become mired at the bottom of a high-profile industry.
The quality of its only product plunged to its lowest level since the business opened in 1960, sending sales into a tailspin.
Even when customers bought, they booed.
The press was brutal, employee morale was shattered and a once-mythic image was mocked across the nation -- and beyond.


Exposing Oceanfront Property and Human Folly
The December storm that carved two new inlets in the narrow barrier beach here and ripped acres of sand away from summer homes has also exposed a reality long buried in promotional fiction along the region's shore:
A rising ocean, part of a long geologic process, is relentlessly claiming parts of the coast faster than man can reclaim it.


More Ideas but Few Solutions to Deer Herds
THE battles go on between gardeners and deer.
Each season brings more solutions, more repellent sprays and more ideas to protect plants from the animals.
Two points remain, however.
The deer herds continually increase and it is more convenient for them to devour "fast foods" in the garden than to hunt for their dinner.
Serious gardeners usually learn that the only sure solution is a fence, a high one of at least eight feet, and if electrified, all the better.


The Clinton Challenge Is Hardly Self-Image
To the Editor:
David Finn's claim, in "Boost America's Sagging Self-Image" (Viewpoints, Jan. 10.), that "America needs Mr. Clinton to help us restore our confidence in ourselves" and that "to do that, he must cultivate a constructive relationship with the media" (i.e., make himself look good) is an excellent illustration of how the pop-therapy mentality seems to be infesting everything nowadays, even (or maybe especially) politics.


DIALOGUE: Last Word on the October Surprise?; Missing Link
O n Inauguration Day 1981, Iran released the hostages minutes after Ronald Reagan became President.
The timing gave rise to claims of a secret deal between the Reagan-Bush campaign and Iran.
As a White House official involved in the hostage negotiations, I refused for many years to accept those allegations.
But in April 1991 I wrote an article on this page summarizing new evidence of secret contacts between the Reagan-Bush team and Iran during and after the 1980 campaign.
Although there were many unanswered questions and no "smoking gun," I found the evidence of political deception compelling.


Sounds of Venice
To the Editor: "The Serene Sounds of Venice" struck a resonant chord.
On my only visit to that city on the sea some years ago, I didn't understand until now that it was sound that made Venice so memorable.
It was an Easter weekend; I was a recent widower on a too-early romantic foray.
On our first day, we attended part of a service at the church on the Piazza San Marco as tourists.
I was overcome with tears.
"You are still grieving," my companion said.


Celebrating In Israel
Family tours of Israel that include the opportunity to celebrate a bar or bat mitzvah at the Western Wall in Jerusalem and at the Zealot's Synagogue in Masada are being sponsored by the American Jewish Congress.
There are four departures this year: June 20 to July 4; July 11 to 25; Aug. 8 to 22, and Dec. 21 to Jan. 2, 1994.
Boys who are 13 years old and girls who are 12, according to the Hebrew calendar, can celebrate their bar or bat mitzvah during the tour.


Moving Along on Reeves
General Manager George Young of the Giants said yesterday that he was still ironing out details of a contract that would make Dan Reeves the Giants' head coach.
But no announcement is indicated before Tuesday, and if Reeves sticks to the timetable of his current golfing vacation, the earliest announcement would be Wednesday.
Reeves and his wife, Pam, are playing golf in Indian Wells, Calif., near Palm Springs.
The short vacation was planned before the Denver Broncos failed a month ago to renew his contract as head coach.
When Young started talking with Reeves last week, he said the first thing Reeves told him was that he wanted to take this vacation.


Hungarians Think The Darndest Things
GENIUS IN THE SHADOWS A Biography of Leo Szilard: The Man Behind the Bomb.
By William Lanouette with Bela Silard.
Illustrated. 587 pp.
New York: A Robert Stewart Book/ Charles Scribner's Sons. $35.


JAN. 17-23: Roe's Momentous Anniversary; Undoing Republican Rulings, Clinton Lifts Bans Meant to Curb Abortions
The 20th anniversary of Roe v.
Wade, the Supreme Court decision that established a constitutional right to abortion, scarcely passed unremarked on Friday.
Even as a crowd of nearly 75,000 protesters gathered in Washington for an annual rally against the ruling, President Clinton commemorated the date by signing five abortion-related memorandums that revoked a decade of bans imposed by Republican Administrations.
The effect of some of the memos was symbolic, others direct.
Mr.
Clinton repealed a rule against abortion counseling at Federally financed clinics, which a Federal appeals court had blocked last fall.
He also directed Federal regulators to reassess the Bush Administration's prohibition on importing a French abortion pill, RU486, for personal use, which may be seen as encouraging its makers to enter the American market.


Copying, Copying. It Never Stops


SILENCE OF THE FROGS
If only we could still share the optimism of E. B. White when he wrote 17 years ago of pollution and change in his beloved Maine: "I know, too, that on some not too distant night, somewhere in pond or ditch or low place, a frog will awake, raise his voice in praise, and be joined by others. I will feel a whole lot better when I hear the frogs." JOHN STANBACK
Camden, Me.


Making a Street: Forget About Logos On the Skyline
Building as object, building as icon: that was the mode corporate architecture favored in the 1980's, when the goal of every company indulging in the act of construction seemed to be to end up with a trademark on the skyline.
The most important criterion for judging a building's success as a symbol of corporate aspirations in that extravagant decade was not whether it functioned well, or whether it contributed anything to its surroundings, but whether it looked strikingly different and created an easily identifiable form.
The best proof around that such times are past -- and the best paradigm for urban corporate architecture in the 90's -- is the set of buildings finished late last year for Capital Cities/ABC along West 66th and West 67th Streets on the West Side of Manhattan.
This is the utter opposite of architecture as logo.
First, it isn't a single structure, standing apart like a prima donna; it is an array of five new buildings and a couple of renovated ones that contains the headquarters and a large chunk of the production facilities for this communications company and its television network.
As a complex, the buildings make a statement about the workplace that is good, and a statement about urban architecture that is essential.


Laura Kohl, Ethan Brecher
Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph A. Kohl of Newton, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Laura Shana Kohl to Ethan Andrew Brecher, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen M. Brecher of Greenwich, Conn.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kohl, 27, is an associate at the New York law firm of Dewey Ballantine.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
She and her fiance received law degrees from New York University.
Her father is the lead project manager at Lincoln Laboratories, a research arm of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Lexington, Mass.
Her mother, Marcia G. Kohl, owns Marcia &amp; Bea, an antiques store in Newton.


LAUGHING OFF THE RECESSION
It was I who, with my colleague Bob Freedman, hired Diane English as a secretary at WNET ("Laughing Off the Recession," by Hilary de Vries, Jan. 3).
We had a wonderful time, and indeed, Diane and her husband, Joel Shukovsky, have remained my friends.
What Diane may not remember, or may never have known at the time, is that at a certain point it became clear that we needed to give her a real raise if we wanted to keep her.
Public televison wasn't exactly Fort Knox, and all any of us were getting as raises that year were cost-of-living increases.
I tried to get my boss to take the percentage I was supposed to get and add it to Diane's increase.
He couldn't do it.


From Bach to Berlin, Vocal Works Abound
"THIS is a rich, inspirational work, full of lush harmonies in a very traditional style," said Timothy Vernon, music director of the Choral Arts Society, about Bach's "St. John Passion." "It is exciting for the singers and wonderful for the audience." The society, the oldest continuous community chorus in Westchester, has engaged a professional orchestra and six vocal soloists for the performance this afternoon at 2:30 in Ossining High School.
The number to call for reservations is 741-1365.
The Westchester Choral Society, another vocal ensemble with a long history -- last season was its golden jubilee -- has decided to take a break from oratorios, requiems and the other sober works of its customary repertory.


Data Update
INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS
N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Dec. 92
Nov. 92
Dec. 91
Rents
177.9
-0.2
+3.1
Homeowner's costs
180.7
0.0
+3.7
Fuel and utilities
109.1
+0.7
+3.3
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.22
8.28
8.67
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.31
5.37
6.05
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.10
8.15
8.51
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.15
5.23
5.82
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.12
8.16
8.51
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.84
4.97
5.82
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.29
8.30
8.77
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.85
5.88
6.47
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.50
3.60
4.17
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.49
7.49
8.43
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


Should Doctors Tell the Truth? -- The Case Against Terminal Candor
After her surgery, my Mother would ask how her
growth
was and I'd say, 'Your
growth
is fine,' " says Dr. William G. Cahan, senior attending surgeon at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York. "She died at 91 without ever hearing the word
cancer
.
It was a death-knell word then.
It would have burdened her.
So I went along, which turned out to be a nice bit of palliation.
Today, we can't keep truth from people, nor do I say we should.
But total candor can be the rape of hope."
Truth never used to be an issue in medicine.
If the news was bad, it was simply not told, a reflex response first identified by Dr.
Ronald M. Weintraub, chief of cardiothoracic surgery at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston, as the Uncle Moe Shouldn't Know Syndrome: The family begs the doctor to lie to the patient, which the doctor does, and would have done anyway.


Dieting a la Paris: Foie Gras, Wine and Chocolate
A new dietary guru named Michel Montignac has emerged in this food-obsessed city and is rapidly building a business empire of boutiques, spas and restaurants around the unlikely premise that foie gras, red wine and chocolate are not incompatible with losing weight.
Dismissed by many nutritionists as a quack, but reverently followed by a growing number of people who say they have never grown thin so painlessly, Mr.
Montignac has already sold more than 1.6 million copies of his two basic diet books.
At Paris dinner parties, it has become de rigueur to be au courant with the so-called Montignac phenomenon.


Remember the 'S Corporation'
To the Editor:
"Perils of Small-Business Success" (Your Own Account, Jan. 10) omitted mentioning a most important option for the small-business man, namely the "S corporation." It has many advantages for a closely held business and since its profits are allocated to its shareholders for income tax purposes, it eliminates the problem of double taxation.
At the same time, the problem of excessive compensation is solved because it does not matter what component of a shareholder's income is salary or distributed profit.
PAUL KLINGENSTEIN Longboat Key, Fla., Jan. 11


A Danger to Themselves and Others
EVERY now and again a heinous crime or bizarre act by a homeless mentally ill person shocks the public and inspires a spasm of governmental concern about the shoddy state of mental health care for the poor.
It is a cycle of mindfulness and forgetfulness that plays out in cities across the country.
The issues were back in the spotlight in New York City last week after an 80-year-old churchgoing woman was beaten to death with a pipe by a mentally ill drug abuser who lived in a nearby shelter.


Maryanne Blacker, Nicholas Baker
LAST year, 13,126 couples were married in the Marriage Chapel at City Hall in Manhattan.
On a recent visit, it seemed as if wedding parties were arriving as often as airplanes do at Kennedy International Airport, one after another after another, all day long.
While waiting, couples sit in a blue room with views of the Brooklyn Bridge until their names are called, doctor's-office style.
And it's possible to find all kinds of twosomes there: parents who had never got around to marrying, a bride and bridegroom in traditional African wedding garb, and bankers taking their vows during a lunch break.


Freelance Musicians in 9 Small Orchestras Strike
The freelance musicians who make up nine of New York City's smaller orchestras went on strike just before midnight Friday night, when the orchestras and Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians were unable to reach an agreement on a new contract, said Leonard Leibowitz, the lawyer for the musicians.
The players had earlier voted to authorize their negotiating committee to strike.
Two of the orchestras had concerts scheduled for today.
They are the American Composers Orchestra, which was to play at Carnegie Hall at 3 P.M., and the Little Orchestra Society, which was to give children's concerts at Florence Gould Hall at 12:30 and 1:45 P.M.


Riding School To Stay Closed Through April
The Spanish Riding School at the Imperial Palace in Vienna will remain closed until the end of April because of water damage sustained during a fire in the Redoubtensaal wing of the palace in late November.
Damage at the indoor school, where the Lipizanner stallions perform, made the emergency exit route unusable, said an official of the Austrian National Tourist Office.
Normally, from mid-February to late June and from August to October (10 A.M. to noon Tuesday through Saturday) the public is admitted to morning training sessions.
The renowned equestrian performances generally begin in early March and continue through December, with shows on Sunday mornings, Wednesday evenings and some Monday mornings.
Reservations are required for the performances but not for the workout sessions.


Using Nuts or Spices to Coat the Fish
ONE way to keep fish moist and juicy and also to add a touch of flavor is to coat it with a crust before lightly sauteeing it.
This technique also makes fish, which is sometimes cooked through before it takes on inviting color, more attractive to serve.
Instead of a simple coating of bread crumbs or seasoned bread crumbs, many chefs are turning to other ingredients.
Nut crusts are quite popular, as are spice crusts.


Mutual Funds; A Shift in the Role of Equities
THE equities part of mutual fund portfolios is shrinking even as funds hold a growing part of the corporate stock outstanding in the United States, the Securities Industry Association found in a recent study.
During the 1950's and 1960's, nearly 90 percent of all fund assets was invested in stocks.
Then came the bear market of the 70's and a shift into bonds and money market funds.
By the early 80's, individual investors had become more financially sophisticated and the mutual industry expanded its product line.
So despite the long bull market of the past decade, and despite the enormous growth of the industry, the equity portion of fund holdings slipped to 44 percent.


For Too Many, Clemency Program Raises and Dashes Hopes
To the Editor:
"Clemency Given Jean Harris Leaves Three Others Wondering" (front page, Jan. 1) demonstrates that clemency, while a potentially valuable incentive for prison inmates to rehabilitate themselves, has become little more than a false hope.
The article describes the situations of three women inmates unlikely to receive clemency although apparently as qualified as Jean Harris.


'The Gamblers,' a Riverboat Drama
"THE GAMBLERS" comes to the American Stage Company with its advantages on the table.
The setting, a Mississippi riverboat in the mid-19th century, is florid and uncommon.
The atmosphere seethes with suggestiveness (a press release promises lust, deceit and revenge).
And the plotting is thick enough to stuff a season full of plays.
Add a cast of sly characters, including the scheming Eugenie O'Bannon, who detests her detestable husband, Titus O'Bannon; the scoundrel, George Crossman, whom she entices to swindle Titus; the double-dealing preacher, Jackson John Hayes, himself a maneuverer, who is on to Eugenie's finagling; and Gerhardt, the government deputy snooping about in the interests of law and morality.


The Islanders Find Someone to Pick On
All month, the Islanders had been grousing about their inability to take control on their home ice and win a certain sort of game, this kind of game.
It was one where they didn't face a superstar, they didn't face a stone wall in net and they didn't have to worry about deciphering an offense that operated with any more sophistication than their own.
In tonight's case, they also had the luxury of hosting a divisional rival with even less stature in the standings than themselves, the moribund, Lindros-less Philadelphia Flyers.


The Hinterland Of Hockey
To the Sports Editor:
George Vecsey wrote in "Say This for N.H.L.: Goofy, Eh?" (The Times, Dec. 11): "The hockey owners . . . were a sour, conservative lot who didn't understand why nine-tenths of the United States population said, 'Hockey? Isn't that the sport where people punch each other around on the ice?' It is a far better sport than that, when a couple of good teams are actually trying to score goals."


Money, Prestige, T-Shirts -- and Even Art
One of the more curious spectacles this autumn was the sight of out-of-towners frantically checking their watches.
Like amateur air-traffic controllers, they were calibrating traveling time from the Modern to the Metropolitan, from the Whitney to the SoHo Guggenheim, factoring in tricky variables like closing days and, of course, arranging everything around the Matisse tickets they had bought months in advance.
The lines that stretched all the way from the Modern down 53d Street and up Fifth Avenue for the poor souls who had not bought advance tickets were eclipsed only by the mob at the Met on the Sunday the Magritte show closed.
You would have thought the museum was giving the art away.
Every week, it seemed, another important show opened in New York City.
Not only Matisse at the Modern and Magritte at the Metropolitan, but also an exhibition of the 17th-century master Jusepe Ribera at the Met, a survey of the Russian avant-garde at the Guggenheim uptown, Rauschenberg's early work and Chagall murals at the downtown Guggenheim, retrospectives for Agnes Martin and Jean-Michel Basquiat at the Whitney, and an overview of the 19th-century French painter Frederic Bazille in Brooklyn.
When the Matisse show closed this past Tuesday, it effectively brought to an end an exhibition period so frenzied, even by the standards of this city, that it had everyone wondering what had happened.


Paris and Bonn Wrestle With New Roles in Post-Cold-War Europe
Early in 1963, with the wounds of World War II still healing, President Charles de Gaulle and Chancellor Konrad Adenauer met in the Elysee Palace to sign a French-German cooperation treaty that the French leader predicted would put an end to "centuries of rivalry."
Yet this week, when they met to mark the 30th anniversary of the treaty, President Francois Mitterrand and Chancellor Helmut Kohl were at pains to stress that rivalry between their nations was not resurfacing, that their special relationship would survive any passing differences.


NOTES
Tereza Scharf, the Brazilian-born wife of the artist Kenny Scharf, has gone into the restaurant business.
She and six partners plan to open Aqua in Miami's South Beach on Feb. 1.
"I'm taking care of the juice bar," Mrs.
Scharf said.
"It's called Suco, which is 'juice' in Portuguese."
William Burroughs (below), who appeared in Gus Van Sant's "Drugstore Cowboy" in 1989, shot a cameo on Jan. 15 for the director's next movie, "Even Cowgirls Get the Blues."


Pure Baltimore, Right Down to the Steamed Crabs
Barry Levinson takes a look at the suspect through the window of "the box," the tiny interrogation chamber tucked into the squad room of the Baltimore Police Department's homicide unit.
Inside, a man with a hand-held camera circles the two detectives questioning the suspect.
"We designed this whole set to be shot in 360," Mr.
Levinson says, after the director inside the box yells, "Cut!" Mr.
Levinson points to the cameraman, and then to the open expanse of the squad room, where associate producers, technicians, script coordinators, makeup artists and gofers sit at detectives' desks, drinking coffee, sorting through supplies, reading the sports pages of The Baltimore Sun.


Wendy Zeller, David Leason
Dr. and Mrs.
Malcolm M. Zeller of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Wendy Michelle Zeller to David Geoffrey Leason, a son of Ruth L. Meyer of New York.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Zeller, 28, is an associate at the New York law firm of Kaplan &amp; Kilsheimer.
She graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received a law degree, as did her fiance, from Yeshiva University.


Results Plus
GOLF Tied in Tucson: The Saga Continues Two of the top young guns on the PGA Tour, Phil Mickelson and Dudley Hart, each shot a 69 yesterday and remained in a tie for the lead after three rounds of the $1.1 million Northern Telecom Open in Tucson, Ariz.
Mickelson, the 22-year-old lefty who won this title as an amateur two years ago, and Hart, 24, who led through 54 holes here a year ago, each completed 54 holes in 201.
They are three shots in front of Larry Mize, who has not won on the tour since his 1987 playoff victory in the Masters.
After the second round, Mickelson and Hart were tied for first at 132, two shots in front of Mize. (AP) SKIING Heinzer Edges Ortlieb by .01 Second The world champion, Franz Heinzer of Switzerland, won his third downhill of the season yesterday, holding off Patrick Ortlieb, the Olympic gold medal winner from Austria, by .01 second in Veyzonnaz, Switzerland, in the closest downhill finish in four years.
Heinzer mastered the tough 3,347-meter course, about two miles, in 1 minute 59.53 seconds.
It was the last World Cup downhill before Heinzer sets out to defend his title at the Alpine world championships in Japan. (AP) Too Warm for Women's Race: A women's World Cup downhill in Haus, Austria, was called off yesterday because high temperatures melted snow on the course.
Until the cancellation, the defending World Cup downhill champion, Katja Seizinger of Germany, was in position to record her second downhill victory of the season. (AP) YACHTING Once America
Teammates, Now Rivals Bill Koch and Buddy Melges, co-skippers in the 1992 America's Cup races, sailed as rivals last week during Yachting Race Week in Key West, Fla.
The two former America
teammates finished eighth and ninth respectively.
They were competing in Class A, for boats of about 40-62 feet, in the five-race series.
In first place were the co-skippers Robert Crompton of Coatesville, Pa., owner of the teams' new 50-foot yacht, Full Cry, and Jim Brady of Annapolis, Md., an Olympic silver medalist.


ISRAELIS ACCEPT 17 EXILED ARABS
Red Cross officials evacuated 17 deported Palestinians from a tent camp in southern Lebanon today, flying them aboard three British helicopters to Israel or to territory under its control.
It was the largest movement of exiles in a crisis that began five weeks ago when Israel expelled more than 400 Palestinians from its occupied territories as accused instigators of Islamic fundamentalist violence.


JAN. 17-23: Organized Crime; The F.B.I.'s Catch, Wrapped Up in a Towel
After a 32-month search, the pursuit ended in the shower.
With drawn guns and a battering ram, agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation burst into a house in New Jersey last week and found their quarry: Anthony S. Casso, said to be one of the country's most lethal Mafia leaders, emerging from a shower stall with a towel around his waist.


Reynolds Gets Warning From Federation
Disdaining American courts, the ruling council of track's world governing body yesterday warned BUTCH REYNOLDS, the world 400-meter record holder, that if he doesn't drop his legal action against it within a month he will face the possibility of further sanctions.
The action by the International Amateur Athletic Federation meeting in Jakarta, Indonesia, came seven weeks after Reynolds won a $27 million judgment against the federation from a Federal judge in Ohio.
The judge ruled that the federation had acted maliciously in imposing a two-year suspension on Reynolds after he supposedly tested positive for steroids at a meet in August 1990.


U.S. ASSERTS SERBS ARE STILL RUNNING PRISONER CENTERS
Five months after Serbian officials agreed to shut down a network of detention camps established during the Balkan war, American intelligence has reported that as many as 135 such camps may remain, some in Serbia itself.
American officials estimate that in these camps and in those run by Muslims and Croats, as many as 70,000 prisoners overall may held.
That figure is many times higher than international observers had officially counted.


Don't Turn Bombing Iraq Into a Crusade; The Mark Missed
To the Editor:
In "Just Punishment for Iraq's Offenses" (editorial, Jan. 14), you, along with virtually all other commentators, sanction the United States air strike against Iraq.


As Seen on TV
IN a television studio on the West Side, video cameras and monitors surrounded a set that had the look of a chic laboratory, with beakers filled with colored liquid.
A 46-year-old woman with her hair in rollers, wearing a baggy black sweater over zebra-striped leggings and no makeup, emerged from the bustling crowd of camera operators and technicians.
"Hello," she said to a visitor. "I'm Georgette Mosbacher."


Conversations/John Shelton Reed; Lamentations of a Good Old Rebel: The South Is Losing Its Accent
FOR John Shelton Reed the good news is that for the first time since Andrew Jackson and John C. Calhoun went to Washington in 1828, the country's President and Vice President both hail from the South.
The bad news is that they're Ivy League Democrats partial to Barbra Streisand, New Age embraces and state-of-the-art hair.


A la Carte; The Charm of Cold Spring Harbor Is Limitless
THE quaint North Shore village of Cold Spring Harbor has a seaside style of its own, and the cozy new Cold Spring Harbor Cafe, at 134 Main Street (367-6060), has a colonial look that fits right in.
The inside of this casual sidewalk cafe is inviting as well, with its Tiffany lamps, stained-glass skylight, impressive copper espresso machine and front-room dessert display.


New Mexico
To the Editor: As noted in "Roads to the Real New Mexico" (Nov. 8), northern New Mexico is charming and the churches in the mountain villages are folk baroque treasures.
There are two things we want to point out: First, San Jose de Gracia in Las Trampas is not a Penitente church.
Second, of concern to our organizations, none of the churches benefits from tourists.
On the contrary, these buildings are maintained by small communities whose economies don't profit very much from the visitor who stops to see their churches, unless the visitor makes a donation.
SAM BACA, New Mexico Community Foundation ELLEN BRADBURY, Recursos de Santa Fe MARINA OCHOA, Archdiocese of New Mexico BUD REDDIG, Spanish Colonial Art Society Santa Fe, N.M.


Gardens Focus Of Three Tours
Gardens, parks and forests are among the ingredients of overseas tours sponsored by the Missouri Botanical Garden, the Morris Arboretum of the University of Pennsylvania and the Santa Barbara Museum of Art.
A 10-day trip to COSTA RICA starting March 13 includes visits to the Jardines Lankester, home to more than 800 species of orchids, the Volcano Poas National Park and other areas noted for their tropical plants and wildlife, and a canoe trip along the Sarapiqui River.
Accommodations are in hotels and lodges in San Jose, the Selva Verde preserve, Las Cruces Research Station and Manuel Antonio National Park.
The cost of $2,419 a person, in double occupancy, includes round-trip air fare from St.
Louis to San Jose, bus and charter flight transportation within Costa Rica, most meals and transfers.
The trip will be led by Dr.
Barry Hammel, who supervises the Missouri Botanical Garden's research in Costa Rica.
Information: from the garden at Post Office Box 299, St.
Louis, Mo. 63166-0299; (314) 577-9517.


Justice Delayed Is Bitter Justice for Carter
With his one good eye, his left, still piercing out from behind steel-rim glasses, the black man, the onetime middleweight contender, half-blind because of a botched operation in prison, stood Friday night at the lectern and looked out over an audience of some 400 people in the Austin Hall auditorium here at Harvard University.
For nearly 19 years he had looked out from behind steel bars, until, in 1985, a Federal judge in New Jersey determined that he had been unjustly and wrongly convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment for a triple murder he did not commit.


Supreme Court No Longer Protects Privacy; A Free Speech Issue
To the Editor:
William Safire in "Peeping Tom Lives" (column, Jan. 4) decries our alleged loss of privacy to "the computer, the recorder and the eavesdropper." Mr.
Safire cites the Clinton passport escapade, State Department employee telephone eavesdropping and Ross Perot's credit report queries about volunteers.


Talking: Home Offices; Taking A Tax Deduction
EARLIER this month, the United States Supereme Court affirmed stricter standards for taking a home-office income tax deduction -- -- one of the significant benefits of property ownership.
The key question now is just who qualifies.


New &amp; Noteworthy
TROPICAL NIGHT FALLING, by Manuel Puig.
Translated by Suzanne Jill Levine. (Norton, $8.95.) The Argentine author's last novel, published posthumously, concerns two elderly sisters in Rio de Janeiro who become embroiled in their neighbors' lives.
Set in the late 1980's, it is told completely through dialogue, correspondence and police reports.
"Manuel Puig delivers his exit lines with great grace, good humor and much wisdom," Robert Houston said here in 1991.
FORTUNATE SON: The Autobiography of Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Bantam, $5.99.) At first there seems to be little that is fortunate in the life of Lewis B. Puller Jr.
Son of the much-decorated Marine general Lewis Burwell (Chesty) Puller, the author went off to Vietnam in 1968 for a tour that was brief but brutal: three months into his stay, he stepped on a booby-trapped howitzer round, losing his legs and part of both hands.
His book, which won a 1991 Pulitzer Prize, chronicles his long struggle to heal physically and psychologically.
Our reviewer, William Styron, said: "Because Mr. Puller writes with simplicity and candor, with touches of spontaneous humor, his outcry of agony and isolation, while harrowing, leaves one primarily overwhelmed with wonder at the torture a human being can absorb this side of madness."


New Bar in the Wilds of SoHo
Campion Platt, a co-owner of the perpetually under-construction Mercer Hotel in SoHo, can finally celebrate an opening.
In mid-February Mr.
Platt is set to open Mercbar, a cocktail lounge at 151 Mercer Street near Prince Street, just two doors down from the hotel-to-be that Mr.
Platt owns with Andre Balazs.
"There's a large outdoor theme," said Mr.
Platt (above right), an architect and former model whose partners in the bar are John McDonald (above left), a former owner of the defunct Rex, and Gary Pryor, an owner of the Crane Club on the Upper West Side.
"It's a cross between great camp architecture, meaning the Adirondacks, and an old boathouse that has been converted for an evening into a party."


LAUGHING OFF THE RECESSION
Your article on Diane English had an impressive amount of detail, including the information that her father was an alcoholic.
But there were only three paragraphs about a topic that the article states "earned headlines": her union-busting. (And of the three paragraphs, one was a rebuttal of the charges by English's husband. A union camera operator replaced by English had his say -- all three words of it.)


A Pianist's 10-Day Tour of Bridgeport
THE pianist Jose Ramos-Santana, a native of Puerto Rico whose most recent honor was his selection as the 1992-93 Xerox Affiliate Artist, is in the midst of a 10-day visit to the Bridgeport area.
He played a solo recital last Friday, has been giving informal programs in schools and for groups of older people, and performed yesterday for two organizations, Atteneo Latino and Aspira.
Yet to come is a free "Informance," which is described as "a casual blend of performance and candid conversation" at the Bridgeport Public Library, at 12:30 P.M. on Thursday, and a solo stint at 8:30 P.M. on Saturday with the Greater Bridgeport Symphony, a sponsor of Mr.
Ramos-Santana's visit to the city.
The concert, in Klein Memorial Auditorium, features Tchaikovsky's Piano Concerto No. 1 and Brahms's Fourth Symphony.
In addition, the group's music director, Gustav Meier, has scheduled an informal talk about both pieces, free to ticketholders, at 7:30 P.M.
For reservations, call 576-0263.


Audience and Actors Mingle at Yale
FOR those accustomed to environmental theater, where audience and actors mingle, the first 15 minutes of "Children of Paradise: Shooting a Dream" at Yale Repertory may appear quaint.
Spectators mill about in a vast open space, surrounded by harlequins, buffoons and barkers (some on scaffolds), pickpockets and acrobats, gendarmes and the demimonde.
Here, the popular street theater of Paris of the 1830's -- the Boulevard of Crime -- is re-created.
More to the point, the first scenes of the 1945 classic French film, "Children of Paradise," have sprung to life and Yale audience members are part of the crowd.
But nothing prepares the audience for its own entrance into the Yale University Theater's auditorium, a passage so thrilling even for jaded participants in theatrical experimentation, that the details should not be disclosed.
Except to say that the patrons in the balcony, "le paradis," are already seated, witnessing and applauding the arrival of the actors (the "children") along with the rest of the audience.
The moment, magical and empathic, indelibly links theater and film, artists and audience, reality and make-believe.


Brendon Kane and Judith Train
March wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
John K. Train 3d of Atlanta for their daughter, Judith Fuller Train, and Brendon Thompson Kane, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David H. T. Kane of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
Ms.
Train, 25, is a production editor in the publications department of the Council on Foreign Relations in New York.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father is a senior partner in Alston &amp; Bird, an Atlanta law firm.


Before the Balls, Some Supper
There was food and art for 1,000 at the National Gallery of Art on Jan. 20.


Sasha Lawer, Mark Noonan
Alexandra Lawer, the publisher of special publications at the Hearst Corporation in New York, was married yesterday to Mark Noonan, a vice president in debt markets at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
The Rev.
Steven Geckeler performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Harvard Club in New York.
Ms.
Lawer, who is 35 and is known as Sasha, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Rutgers University.
Her parents are Alexander and Anne Lawer of Oradell, N.J.
The bride's father, who is retired, was a pressman for The New York Times.
Her mother, also retired, was a secretary at Litton Publications, a medical publisher in Oradell.


Help in a Ship Fire
To the Editor: My husband and I were on the Seabourn Spirit Aug. 15, 1992, when a fire developed in the engine room.
At 5:30 A.M. the captain directed passengers to put on life jackets and report to their lifeboat stations.
He then announced that there was a fire in the engine room, which was under control.
We stood on deck at sunrise watching black smoke billow from smokestacks and after about 20 minutes were directed to get into lifeboats.
Someone in our lifeboat started to have a diabetic reaction and needed medication.
Fortunately, we were not in the lifeboat for more than two and a half hours, and medication was obtained as soon as we landed in Genoa. (As a precaution, people who require medication should be reminded to keep it close at all times.)


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SASSY The Life of Sarah Vaughan. By Leslie Gourse. Scribners, $25.


A Spooky Fascination With Disembodied Eyes
Photography is so multifarious and omnivorous that books and shows can be -- and are -- concocted around just about any subject in the real world that someone takes a fancy to: dogs, cats, horses, pigs, flowers, cars, trains, hands, feet, babies, crowds, diners, baseball fields.
Now the Laurence Miller Gallery in SoHo, in association with One Bond/Michael Senft, presents eyes, just eyes, in a show called "Eye for I."
This small show of 22 pictures (through Feb. 12) is actually the gallery's second feature.
The front room has work by Toshio Shibata, a Japanese landscape photographer with a cool, refined sense of formality, most recently on view in the "New Photography 8" exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art.
Landscape is a plausible and long-established pretext for a show, but eyes?
In fact, photographers have paid a great deal of attention to eyes, and highlighting that interest amounts to a perfectly respectable, even a piquant thing to do, although this little collection cannot quite keep up to the charm of its own better moments.


Tracey Fitzgerald, H. E. Sullivan 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
Walter P. Fitzgerald of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Tracey Andrea Fitzgerald to Howard Edwards Sullivan 3d, the son of Phyllis M. Sullivan of Rosemont, Pa., and the late Dr.
Sullivan Jr.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Fitzgerald, 29, is an associate at the New York law firm of Coudert Brothers.
She graduated magna cum laude from Georgetown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a law degree from Columbia University.


Sports of The Times; Dan Reeves's Flat Tires and Coin Tricks
IF a good football coach imposes his personality on a team, Dan Reeves has already given the Giants "the look," his stern stare that made his Denver Broncos players squirm.
Rather than disrupt a golfing vacation near Palm Springs, Calif., with his wife, Pam, the coach the Giants are apparently about to hire delayed settling his contract terms.


Aftermath of Missile Attack in Baghdad


Edberg's Back Injured; Stich Hits 131 M.P.H.
The record book shows that Stefan Edberg has won the Australian Open twice, the first time in 1985 and the second in 1987.
But those victories came on grass at Kooyong Stadium.
And when the tournament left its cozy ancestral home behind for state-of-the-art Flinders Park in 1988, Edberg's good fortune did not survive the transit.


Honecker Release Drawing Fire in Germany
Amid suggestions that the former East German leader, Erich Honecker, may not be at death's door after all, lawyers and human rights advocates are angrily condemning the court decision that led to his release last week.
One senior Berlin prosecutor, Dieter Neumann, denounced the decision as "patently absurd." He said the court had not checked Mr.
Honecker's health properly, and should have consulted "various medical experts" before ruling that he should be set free.


Driver Brings Skills at Fine-Tuning to Track
Whether it's a paper-cup factory or a junkyard Pinto, Joe Nemechek will tell you he has a way of getting things to run at peak efficiency.
Nemechek, who grew up in Lakeland, Fla., and now lives in Mooresville, N.C., the heart of stock-car country, is in position to move up to the sport's top level, Nascar's Winston Cup tour.
Last season, he won the championship on the Busch Grand National tour -- the top minor league -- and this year plans to run the Daytona 500 and a handful of Winston Cup races along with an entire Busch season.


Combating Stress for the Unemployed
ALMOST a year after he lost his job as a financial officer in a large Westchester corporation, a 52-year-old executive who was suffering from constant headaches and insomnia reluctantly agreed to see Dr.
Herbert Nieberg, a clinical psychologist on the staff of Four Winds Hospital in Katonah.
"The human resource manager of his old company referred him to me," said Dr.
Nieberg, a certified employee assistance professional who deals with emotional issues related to the workplace.


The Executive Life; It's Comedy at Night After McKinsey by Day
IT'S January.
The Bills are on their way to the Super Bowl.
There's bombing in Baghdad.
And another Stuart Flack play is poised to open in Buffalo.
Swelling the small audience at the Alleyway Theater next Thursday night will be a number of business consultants from McKinsey &amp; Company, the New York-based management firm whose offices ring the globe and whose client roster boasts some of the biggest of big businesses.


They Ride Hogs, These Romans
Whatever else the folks on Elba were expecting last fall, 90 Harley-Davidson motorcycles rumbling around the island for a day probably did not figure too highly on their wish list.
But with much tribal display of chrome and leather, and much thumping of 1,340-cubic-centimeter V-twin engines, that is precisely what they got.
As in other parts of Italy, the Harleys had arrived, in every sense of the word.


King Has Money, but No Team or Ring
BERNARD KING bears no grudge against the Washington Bullets and is now striving to resume his National Basketball Association career with a contender, his attorney said yesterday.
King, 36, released by the Bullets on Thursday, is free to negotiate with any team.
Money will not be an issue, since Washington is obligated to pay his $2.5 million salary for this season and $500,000 for next season.
Therefore, King might be willing to take the N.B.A. minimum salary of $140,000, prorated for the remainder of the season.


History May Not Help Millrose Milers
Two four-time Millrose champions will be on the line for the women's mile at the Chemical Bank Millrose Games at Madison Square Garden on Feb. 5, and neither may be the favorite.
The two are MARY SLANEY, the American indoor and outdoor record holder, and DOINA MELINTE of Romania, who has won the last three Millrose events.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
It's more or less a standard, well-done police procedural.
In BRIDES OF BLOOD, by Joseph Koenig (Grove, $19.95), there is a murdered prostitute, a police investigation complete with autopsy, a medical examiner's report and pathological studies.
It has an honest, efficient cop who is taken off the case but who stubbornly pursues it on his own.
Naturally, he gets into great trouble.
Sound familiar, all this?
Yes.
But one thing makes this book different. Wildly different.


INSIDE
U.S. Says Iraq Fired at 3 Jets
Three U.S.
Navy warplanes were reported fired on in the southern no-flight zone in Iraq.
One bombed the artillery that attacked them.
Page 7.
Seeking Safety in a Spray
Reports of carjackings and other random crimes in seemingly safe places have prompted a surge in sales of Mace, even in the suburbs.
Page 25.
Abortion: Protest and Praise
Outraged protests were held across the nation over President Clinton's lifting of some Federal restrictions on abortion, but family-planning officials praised his decision.
Page 21.


Don't Turn Bombing Iraq Into a Crusade
To the Editor:
Speaking on the day after the American-led bombing raid on Iraq, President Bush stated that United States pilots had returned from "doing the Lord's work." However justified he felt the action to be, the President of the United States must remember that he was elected to a secular and not a religious office.


Tar Heel Investment Pays Dividends
Far from the rarefied light blue air in the rafters of the Dean E. Smith Center, where two rows of retired jerseys honor the greatest basketball players in the history of the University of North Carolina, the coach who gave the building its name had an idea.
This was in October 1990, the second week of practice for the most highly publicized group of recruits the school had ever had.
With about 1,000 coaches in the stands, a clinic was turned into a dissection.


Fifth Horseman of Somalia: Stealing
On the hills of the city, the roofless, windowless buildings stand as a testament to war -- stucco shells that look like the remnants of bombing raids.
But the truth is, most of the buildings were not bombed at all, but systematically stripped of their roofs, windows, wiring and contents during two years of civil war.
Marauding gangs, many organized by warlords and merchants, cut down telephone cables and dug up electric wires for the copper inside.
They tore up the streets to steal the sewer pipes, leaving sewage to pour into the streets.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
In the Groove
IT'S not about winning.
It's family and friendship, and a commitment to both that propels the Vecchione Boys to the Sterling Bowl every Tuesday night.


New Voices for Two Silenced Russian Poets
CLAIRE BLOOM, THE BRITISH actress, had just ended her solo show, "Shakespeare's Women," at the legendary Moscow Art Theater, where an audience of Russians had listened intently for an hour and a half to the intricate subtleties of Elizabethan English.
Now, she was visiting Alla Demidova, a leading actress of the Moscow stage, who has more than once captivated non-Russian audiences with her readings of Russian poetry.
Together, the women talked of their next cross-cultural leap -- one they will make in unison -- as they drank tea and ate sweet jam in Miss Demidova's cozy apartment.
The actresses will take their reading of two of Russia's greatest poets, Anna Akhmatova and Marina Tsvetayeva, in the original and in English, to New York and four other American cities from Wednesday to Feb. 6.


Clinton's Blunt Reminder of the Mood That Elected Him
THERE were many "if only" post mortems offered last week after President Clinton was forced to withdraw the nomination of Zoe Baird as Attorney General in the first, dramatic failure of his Administration.
If only she had not been an exceedingly well-paid corporate lawyer, her nomination might have survived despite her admission that she hired two illegal aliens for child care and household help.
If only she had a more expansive track record on traditionally liberal issues that would inspire support from feminists or other core Democratic constituencies.
If only her name had not been introduced at the last minute as Mr.
Clinton cast desperately about for an appointment that would demonstrate his commitment to diversity.


Live, and in Sizzling Color, The Trashing of the Island
AFTER three made-for-television movies, at least one "quickie" paperback book, a top-rated edition of "Donahue" and day-after-day headlines, the question is not whether there is anyone who does not know the names Buttafuoco and Amy Fisher.
The question is, Is Long Island becoming a laughingstock to the rest of the nation?
Consider other recent Long Island news that has been on the network newscasts.
First there was the Islip garbage barge, all loaded up with no place to go.
Then there was Jessica Hahn, a church secretary in Massapequa who said she had a one-day stand in a Florida motel with the television evangelist Jim Bakker and was paid $265,000 in hush money.
Last year there was John McNamara, the automobile dealer from Port Jefferson who admitted bilking General Motors of $6 billion.
Then there was New York State's top judge, Sol Wachtler of Manhasset, who was arrested on the Long Island Expressway and charged with threatening a woman with whom he reportedly had had a romantic relationship.
And in the last two weeks, the Katie Beers case has gone national, starting when her godmother and her grandmother faced off, through a satellite hookup, on "Donahue."


Blasting Off In a Wild Bull Market
YOU wouldn't know it by looking at the Dow Jones industrial average, and certainly not by studying the performance of I.B.M., but this is a wonderful bull market.
Technology stocks are hot and the speculative juices are flowing.
One sign of that is the runaway stock, the type that goes straight up on a little business success and a lot of hope for the future.
Such tales used to be confined to the smallest of stocks, the type that had a total market capitalization of $20 million or so.
In those cases, it doesn't take much buying to push up a price, nor does it take much enterprise to come up with a story that the company could grow to be worth 10 times as much.


SETTLING IN: Abortion Policy; Protest and Praise Over Clinton's Orders
One day after President Clinton lifted abortion-related restrictions on an array of health programs, hundreds of people protesting the actions were arrested in demonstrations here and around the nation.
While family-planning advocates in the United States and abroad applauded Mr.
Clinton's decision, others denounced it.
The police arrested more than 300 people here who blocked access to abortion clinics with cars, metal blockades and human walls.


The Clinton Challenge Is Hardly Self-Image
To the Editor:
Presidents Reagan and Bush buried the national spirit under the "language of symbols." All Mr.
Clinton need do is deliver on the vision he projected during the campaign and his "public relations" will take care of itself.
TIMOTHY G. MANNERS Stamford, Conn., Jan. 10


DIALOGUE: Last Word on the October Surprise?; Case Closed
The House October Surprise Task Force has completed its 10-month investigation into accusations that representatives of the 1980 Reagan-Bush campaign made a secret deal with Iranian officials to delay release of the American hostages in Iran.
If true, these extraordinarily serious claims would have cast doubt on the legitimacy of the Reagan Presidency.
If false, it would have been unfair to allow this cloud to linger over the reputations of those accused of being involved.
The task force report concluded there was virtually no credible evidence to support the accusations.
Specifically, we found little or no credible evidence of communications between the 1980 Reagan campaign and the Government of Iran and no credible evidence that the campaign tried to delay the hostages' release.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the engagement of Gail Eilene Paley to Dr.
Samuel Fox misstated Dr.
Fox's age.
He is 34, not 43.


Cornell Campus Shaken By Death in a Chimney
As students returned this week from winter break, the bizarre death of Terrence Ward Quinn, the Cornell University senior who was found dead in the chimney of a fraternity house, dominated most conversations.
Mr.
Quinn, who was 21, was last seen alone outside a bar at 12:30 A.M. on Jan. 15 after several hours of drinking, and his body was discovered three days later after his shoes and jeans fell out of the fraternity's chimney when the flue was opened.
The coroner's report said he died of asphyxiation caused by a prolonged bending of the neck.


'Mystery of Irma Vep,' A Ludlam Masterpiece
CHARLES LUDLAM was a master at taking bits and pieces from theatrical and literary classics and rearranging them into original and entertaining mosaics.
One of his masterpieces, "The Mystery of Irma Vep," is receiving a wickedly funny production at Theater Three in Port Jefferson.
On its surface "The Mystery of Irma Vep" is a Gothic melodrama in which a naive young woman marries Lord Edgar Hillcrest.
It happens that she is his second wife.
The first, Irma Vep, was killed by a werewolf, as was the lord's only son.


Corrections
The Perspectives column last Sunday, about Westchester co-ops, misstated the stake still owned by the sponsor of the conversion of 2035 Central Park Avenue in Yonkers.
He owns one-third of the units, not two-thirds.


Rap's Embrace of 'Nigger' Fires Bitter Debate
One of America's oldest and most searing epithets -- "nigger" -- is flooding into the nation's popular culture, giving rise to a bitter debate among blacks about its historically ugly power and its increasingly open use in an integrated society.
Whether thoughtlessly or by design, large numbers of a post-civil rights generation of blacks have turned to a conspicuous use of "nigger" just as they have gained considerable cultural influence through rap music and related genres.


Using Nuts or Spices to Coat the Fish
ONE way to keep fish moist and juicy and also to add a touch of flavor is to coat it with a crust before lightly sauteeing it.
This technique also makes fish, which is sometimes cooked through before it takes on inviting color, more attractive to serve.
Instead of a simple coating of bread crumbs or seasoned bread crumbs, many chefs are turning to other ingredients.
Nut crusts are quite popular, as are spice crusts.


Let Medicare's Errors Guide Health Reforms
To the Editor:
The report by Comptroller General Charles A. Bowsher that finds excessive waste in Medicare claims processing (news article, Jan. 8) strikes a chord for all who have fought to obtain the full benefits owed to older and disabled Americans.
Millions of Medicare beneficiaries must pay out of their own pockets for health care that Medicare covers because insurance companies (which contract with the Government to process Medicare claims) routinely deny payment or underpay erroneously.
The Government's statistics show that two of every three benefit determinations appealed result in additional payments (more than $130 on average at the first appeal level alone).


JAN. 17-23: Chatting With the Enemy; Israelis Nod at the P.L.O. And Talk With Palestinians
Israelis sidled closer last week toward what many of them consider to be shaking hands with the devil.
Their Parliament repealed a 1986 law that had barred them from contacts with terrorist groups, a category that in Israel includes the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Although the Government says it still refuses to talk directly with the P.L.O. in the continuing, if stumbling, Middle East peace negotiations, suspicion ran high that such dealings are now a matter of time.


Plan the Kitchen and Avoid Pitfalls
READY-TO-ASSEMBLE kitchen cabinets make remodeling a kitchen much easier than when cabinets were just available ready-made or built to order by a cabinetmaker.
But planning the sizes, and determining how the cabinets will look when installed, can still be challenging, unless the new cabinets will be exactly the same sizes as the old ones.
Many stores selling cabinets have computerized-design services.
They are often free and can produce views of how the kitchen would look when completed and figure dimensions and prices.
But making scale drawings on graph paper is also a reliable and easy way to plan, one that allows making comparisons between cabinet models carried by different stores and frees you from dealing with salespeople until you have clear ideas of what you want.


POSTINGS: Beneath the Brooklyn Bridge; Repairing the Damage of Debris
For more than 50 years debris has been raining on the New York City Department of Purchase warehouse beneath the Brooklyn Bridge.
Now the 40,000-square-foot Art Moderne-style building, which is still in use, is being renovated, with special attention paid to the roof, onto which decades of hubcaps, tools, nuts and bolts, road salt and cleaning residue have fallen from the bridge 10 stories above.


No Bank, Movies or Privacy: Welcome to Union, Pop. 600
THE town of Union is so small that even those terrible old jokes about life in a small town don't apply.
For instance, the old chestnut about the most excitement one can expect in a very small town is going down to the barbershop to watch a few haircuts, or to the bakery to watch the bread rise.
"We have no barbershop," said Union First Selectman Roy B. Bradrick Jr.
And no bakery, either.


The Seeds Of Yore
EVER wonder what kind of apples your ancestors grew?
Or what their first greens were in the spring?
Or when their peas came up?
Here's the March 6, 1771, entry from Thomas Jefferson's garden book, which chronicled his days at Monticello, his home near Charlottesville, Va.: "Sowed a patch of peas after steeping them in water 24 hours." Next day: "Rain snow &amp; hail with an Easterly wind for 4 days." And later, on May 30: "Peas of Mar. 6 come to table."


Q and A
Quorums by Proxy Question: Since a quorum always refers to the number of members present and not to the number voting, is it legal under New York State Business Corporation Law to establish a quorum by adding proxies to present members? . . .
Theodore R. Smith, the Bronx


Rebecca Mosher, William Dietrich
Dr. and Mrs.
Paul W. Mosher of New Scotland, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Rebecca Emily Mosher, to William Frank Dietrich, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard F. Dietrich of Butler, Pa.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Mosher, 26, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University and is a medical student at Columbia University.
Her father is a psychoanalyst in Albany, where her mother, Paula Mosher, is a psychotherapist and a clinical assistant professor of psychiatry at Albany Medical College.


Elisabeth Murdoch, Elkin K. Pianim
Rupert Murdoch, the head of the News Corporation media empire, and Anna Murdoch of Beverly Hills, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elisabeth Murdoch, to Elkin Kwesi Pianim, a son of A. Kwame and Cornelia Pianim of Accra, Ghana.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Murdoch, 24, is the program director of KSTU-TV in Salt Lake City, a Fox station owned and operated by the News Corporation, based in Sydney, Australia.
Ms.
Murdoch and her fiance graduated from Vassar College.
Her father is the News Corporation's chairman and chief executive.
Her mother is the author of three novels, including "Coming to Terms," published in 1991 by HarperCollins.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
BACK YARD WILDLIFE
"We're in This Yard Together" is the title of a series of seminars on wildlife management in suburbia, organized with a humorous touch by the Nature Center in Westport.
The first of three programs, scheduled today at 2 P.M., is "Quick, Martha, Call the Nature Center! There's Something Moving in the Back Yard!"


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 24, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The death of a woman leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
2
52
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
4
MCNALLY'S SECRET, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A sleuth's pursuit of a stolen block of priceless stamps uncovers scandals.
4
41
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
5
1
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor and the part a childhood experience plays in it.
6
13
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (Pocket, $4.99.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
7 *
10
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) An American probes a mysterious balloon accident in the Alps.
8
2
BEYOND EDEN, by Catherine Coulter. (Onyx, $5.99.) A young woman trying to escape menaces from her past is aided by a private investigator.
9 *
27
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
10
18
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a farming family.
11
4
COMPELLING EVIDENCE, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A woman charged with murdering her husband is defended by her former lover.
12 *
5
FUGITIVE NIGHTS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Bantam, $6.50.) Three people on the trail of a dangerous fugitive in Palm Springs.
13 *
1
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of the state of Nebraska on behalf of an Indian tribe.
14
12
HIDEAWAY, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A resuscitated man is haunted by visions of evil.
15
1
LINE OF FIRE, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $5.99.) The fifth volume of the series "The Corps" tells of an attempt to rescue two marines on an island in the Solomons during World War II.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
13
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MALCOLM X, with the assistance of Alex Haley. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The life story of the black leader, originally published in 1965.
2
4
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save the earth.
3 *
481
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
4
15
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
5
9
DIANA: Her True Story, by Andrew Morton. (Pocket, $5.99.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
6
88
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
7
2
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
8
74
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
9 *
12
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Vintage, $11.) Essays about the recent political and cultural scene.
10
10
SEX, ART, AND AMERICAN CULTURE, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $13.) Twenty-one essays on contemporary subjects, ranging from Madonna to Anita Hill to date rape.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
118
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
76
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
7
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1993. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
4
101
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
27
LIVE AND LEARN AND PASS IT ON, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Morsels of what they've learned about life, from people aged 5 to 95.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Pentagon Agrees to Delay a Reactor Test in Space
Pentagon officials, responding to complaints by astronomers, have agreed to defer for at least six months any commitments to carry out a nuclear reactor test in orbit.
The delay would give scientists time to assess the chances that the test might produce radiation that could interfere with astronomical observations.
The decision was reached last week after a meeting with astronomers, mission planners and scientists familiar with the Russian-made Topaz 2 nuclear reactor planned for use in the $150 million experiment.
The reactor test is part of the military's plan to investigate new technologies for generating electricity for missile defense monitors in space and for long-distance propulsion systems.


Building the Electronic Superhighway
AMID all the sweetness and light at Bill Clinton's seminar on the economy last month came a not-so-harmonious exchange between Robert E. Allen, chief executive of A.T.&amp;T., and Al Gore, then Vice President-elect.
The topic was the development of Mr.
Clinton's No. 1 priority for improving the country's infrastructure: a national "superhighway" for data.
This high-capacity, high-speed computer network could do for the flow of information -- words, music, movies, medical images, manufacturing blueprints and much more -- what the transcontinental railroad did for the flow of goods a century ago and the interstate highway system did in this century.


Julie E. Farris, Kevin Valentine
Mr. and Mrs.
David J. Farris of Bernardsville, N.J., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Julie Ellen Farris and Kevin John Valentine, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rene Valentine of Landing, N.J.
Miss Farris, 28, is a kindergarten teacher at the Bedwell Elementary School in Bernardsville.
She graduated from Lebanon Valley College and received a master's degree in education from Seton Hall University.
Her father is chief operating officer of the Beneficial Corporation of Wilmington, Del., a consumer-finance company, and heads the company's management subsidiary in Peapack, N.J.


Merchant-Ivory and Friends: On the Job Again
Deep in rural Gloucestershire is the village of Badminton, famous not only because it gave the world the game that still bears its name but also because it contains the ancestral home of the Dukes of Beaufort.
Walk through the great doors of the 18th-century mansion and in front of you is a magnificent entrance hall, packed with paintings of lords and ladies on horseback.
But go down the passageway to your right, and suddenly everything changes into drab, crabbed corridors and cramped rooms.
In the director James Ivory's words, "You have the lords living in grand theater sets, and behind them ghastly backstairs areas, into which the servants scuttle like beetles through horrid little holes in the woodwork."
Mr.
Ivory himself was to be found deep in the beetle warrens of Badminton House recently, crammed into a small, gray-walled room with some dull brown furniture, a film crew and two of Britain's finer actors.
There was Anthony Hopkins in a starched collar and a formal black suit, and there was Emma Thompson in a maroon jacket and gray skirt.
He was Stevens the butler; she, Miss Kenton the housekeeper, and the two were bringing to life a key scene in the latest Merchant-Ivory film, "The Remains of the Day."


Miss Kienlen, James Eberwine
Mr. and Mrs.
John Kienlen of Philadelphia have announced the engagement of their daughter Joan-Marie Kienlen to Dr.
James Eberwine, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Eberwine of Mount Vernon, Ohio.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Kienlen is an administrative assistant in the department of pharmacology at the University of Pennsylvania, where her fiance is an assistant professor of pharmacology and psychiatry.
The future bride, a soprano, sings with several groups in the Philadelphia area.
She graduated from Temple University, from which she also received a master's degree in voice performance.
Her father is a sales representative for Napco Inc., a fabricator of aluminum products in Valencia, Pa.


LAUGHING OFF THE RECESSION
Regarding Murphy Brown, did Diane English ever ask the little children of single mothers if they, too, feel "liberated" having no fathers?
SYLVIA DAY
Woodstock, N.Y.


Jimmy and Cindy Key Are Co-stars in 'Honey, I Blew Up Your Salary'
Meet Cindy Key.
She is a baseball wife, a mother, a new Yankee fan, a Clemson graduate, a former high school swimming champion and a baseball agent.
Say what?
A wife who doubles as an agent?
That sounds unusual.
But let Mrs.
Jimmy Key, the only baseball agent who shares a marriage certificate with her client, explain.


Fred B. Black Jr., 80, Figure in 60's Scandal
Fred B. Black Jr., an aerospace lobbyist who became ensnared in a political scandal in the early 60's, died Friday at a nursing home in Wheaton, Md.
He was 80 and lived in Bethesda, Md.
He died of heart failure, his family said.
Mr.
Black was widely known in Washington as a friend of politicians in his role as a consultant for military contractors in the post-World War II arms and space races.


Joanna Berwind, Shane Creamer
C.
Graham Berwind Jr. and Sandra M. Berwind, both of Bryn Mawr, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Joanna Ellen Berwind to J. Shane Creamer Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Creamer of Blue Bell, Pa.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Berwind, 26, is a market researcher with the Berwind Group, a conglomerate in Philadelphia; her father is the president and chief executive.
She graduated from Wesleyan University.
Her mother is a professor of English at Bryn Mawr College.
The prospective bride is a stepdaughter of Sigrid Berwind of Bryn Mawr.


Recent Sales
Edison  $307,500
44 Livingston Avenue  6-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old colonial; finished basement eat-in-kitchen, 0.5 acre; taxes $5,449.
Jackson  $176,000
64 Chelsea Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; fireplace, full basement, c/a; taxes $4,100.
Mahwah  $227,000
36 Birch Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old ranch; family room, h/w floors, full basement; taxes $3,066.
Metuchen  $159,900
241G Amboy Avenue  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2-year-old conodominium town house; microwave oven, monthly maintenance $125; taxes $3,777.
Oakland  $179,000
110 Seminole Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, over-50-year-old ranch; covered redwood deck, office, lake privileges; taxes $4,130.
Ramsey  $191,000
32 S. Central Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, over-50-year-old cape cod; fireplace, vaulted ceiling, deck; taxes $3,524.
OTHER AREAS Bay Shore, L.I.  $525,000
33 Lawrence Lane  5-bedroom, 5-bath, 66-year-old colonial; fireplace, basement, 2-car detached garage, 110 feet of bulkheading; taxes $9,800.
South Salem, N.Y.  $250,000
45 East Street  7-bedroom, 4-bath, 93-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, breakfast room, eat-in kitchen, guest cottage, 4.5 acres; taxes $11,002.
Woodbridge, Conn.  $175.850
44 Newton Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 160-year-old cape cod; fully restored, artist's studio in barn, 4 horse stalls, 2.1 acres; taxes $3,610.


Teen-Agers, Cats, Etc.
YOU'RE a socialite from another planet who's visiting Manhattan, and you're riding uptown in a cab to Planet Hollywood on Saturday night.
Knowing that you can be invited to many worldly parties by giving money to worthwhile nonprofit organizations, you made a donation to Citykids, a multicultural organization for adolescents in the New York area, and you received a ticket to the organization's benefit concert, "Healing the Rainbow," at the Paramount Theater.
Unfortunately, you had a disempowering experience with a hair dryer early in the evening and ended up missing the concert, in which Phoebe Snow, Herbie Hancock and Michael Bolton performed as guests with the Citykids Repertory Company.
With your hair finally looking human, at about 10 you get in a cab and go straight to the V.I.P. post-performance party at Planet Hollywood.


For Better or Worse, Year of Rooster Dawns
The Chinese-speaking world is celebrating its new year this weekend with deafening fireworks, homemade dumplings, family reunions and earnest discussions of whether the newly arrived year of the rooster will bring good luck or bad.
The year 4691 on the Chinese calendar formally arrived at midnight Friday, ending the year of the monkey, and Chinese communities from Penang in Malaysia to Taipei in Taiwan erupted in simultaneous explosions of tens of billions of firecrackers.


Hard Landing in Tokyo
THE BUBBLE ECONOMY
Japan's Extraordinary Speculative Boom of the 80's and the Dramatic Bust of the 90's.
By Christopher Wood. 210 pp.
New York: The Atlantic Monthly Press. $21.


Emission-Standards Ruling Could Upset Pollution Plan
The decision by a Federal judge blocking adoption of stringent emissions standards for automobiles sold in New York State beginning in 1995 could seriously set back the state's efforts to clean its air to meet Federal guidelines, which could cost billions of dollars in Federal aid, state officials and environmentalists said yesterday.
And they warned that the ruling, if upheld, could force the state to take drastic steps to reduce pollution, including the adoption of new regulations on industries and possibly even restrictions on the use of automobiles in the most polluted areas.


Two Motels Added to List of Shelters for Families
Confronted with families sleeping on table tops and dirty floors in city welfare offices, the Dinkins administration has announced plans to shelter more than 60 homeless families in two more motels, one in the Bronx and the other on Staten Island.
The two will join a list of 22 other hotels and motels throughout the city that are now housing about 1,100 homeless families.


Violence Spreads in Family Courts
Domestic violence turned another courthouse into a high crime zone in Dallas last week when a man shot his wife, himself and a bystander -- rather than face a judge.
That brought the body count to at least eight dead and seven wounded in incidents of courthouse violence involving family disputes since Jan. 7, 1992, when a man killed his wife and brother-in-law in Cleveland.
The state judges in Dallas were so angry at local officials for not providing adequate security measures that, as a protest, they stopped holding hearings.
The family court judges were the first to go out, and the rest followed.


Baseball Cards at Issue In Bizarre Murder Trial
ON the dance floor in the local V.F.W. hall, prosecutors set out to prove that an Armonk neurologist, Dr.
Daniel Pack, was killed in a baseball-card deal gone bad.
But by week's end, the unusual scenario and unlikely surroundings --  under a mirrored silver ball -- were eclipsed by the testimony in the increasingly bizarre murder trial.
In a courtroom scene reminiscent of Perry Mason, 17-year-old Chad Gordon was accused by the defense lawyer, William M. Kunstler, of committing the killing for which his father, Joseph Gordon Jr., is standing trial.


Hitting the Wall And Back Again
Throughout his childhood, tennis has been his judge, jury, taskmaster -- and sometimes his jailer.
Vincent Spadea went undefeated at 14, self-destructed at 17 and just last month experienced an 11th-hour resurrection at 18.
But in the manner of a model prisoner, he has not yet had his fill of tennis.
He understands the sport also represents his ticket to life's finer side.
"It's easy to be normal," the nouveau tennis pro said last week from Texas.
"But I don't do math better than I do tennis. Take any subject, I could study a million hours, and I wouldn't be the fourth-best student in the world. But I was the fourth-best at tennis. That's not normal, but it's not so bad."


CHRONICLE
A United States Senator from Hawaii, the Brooklyn-born chief rabbi of an Israeli West Bank community, and an organization of disabled Israeli war veterans will receive the 10th annual Defender of Jerusalem Awards.
The $100,000 prize that will be divided among the recipients will be presented by the Jabotinsky Foundation Thursday at the Plaza Hotel.
The foundation is named for Vladimir Jabotinsky, a Zionist, philosopher and mentor of many Israeli leaders.
Being honored this year are Senator DANIEL K. INOUYE , Democrat of Hawaii, Rabbi SHLOMO RISKIN , founder of the settlement of Efrat on the West Bank, where he is described as a peace-keeper and arbitrator between Jews and Palestinians, and the Zahal Disabled Veterans Organization, which operates two sports, rehabilitation and social centers in Tel Aviv and Haifa and is building a facility in Jerusalem.


Germans Plan to Make It Easier For Some to Obtain Citizenship
At the same time they are tightening laws to slow an influx of asylum seekers, German legislators are planning to make it easier for foreigners who have long lived here to become German citizens.
A change in citizenship laws could prove a great social and psychological step for the country, by suggesting that Germans are moving, at least legally, toward acceptance of a multicultural society.


Middlesex Water Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day last Monday, about the performance of the Equitable Companies, misstated the book value of a subsidiary, Equitable Capital.
It was carried on the parent company's books at $30 million on Sept. 30.


Dance in Review
Kenneth Tosti 'Time Piece' Joseph Papp Public Theater/Susan Stein Shiva Theater Through Sunday


Balkan Negotiators Urge an End To the Latest Fighting in Croatia
The leaders of talks aimed at solving the hostilities in Bosnia and Herzegovina spent much of the day urging an end to the fighting that has erupted in neighboring Croatia, where peace was achieved just over a year ago.
The Bosnia negotiations, sponsored by the United Nations and European Community, continued today, despite what a co-chairman of the talks, Lord Owen, called "the obvious overhang of the Croatian fighting."


Iraq Denies Firing
Saying its forces are observing a cease-fire, the Government today denied a report by the Pentagon that its air defenses had fired on three American fighter planes in southern Iraq on Saturday.
A spokesman for the Foreign Ministry said that air defense radars were switched off and that the authorities were still searching for the area where the United States said its planes had fired a laser-guided bomb.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet 'Jeu de Cartes' New York State Theater


Brett Weston, Photographer, 81; Saw Purity in Nature's Patterns
Brett Weston, a photographer long renowned for his magisterial, sharply delineated landscapes and close-ups of plant forms, sand dunes and other natural objects, died on Friday, at Kona Hospital in Hawaii.
He was 81 and lived in Carmel, Calif., and Paradise Park, on the island of Hawaii.
Mr. Weston died of complications from a stroke, his brother Neil said.


Many Legislators Reluctant To Hold Iraq Loans Inquiry
Dismayed by the collapse of the lengthy Iran-contra investigation, many in Congress say they are deeply reluctant to begin any major inquiry into another foreign policy morass: whether the Bush Administration covertly armed Iraq before the Persian Gulf war and later tried to cover up its involvement.
The decision by Congressional leaders to steer clear of the matter for the time being leaves the highly sensitive issue squarely in the hands of President Clinton and his Justice Department, still leaderless now that Zoe Baird's nomination for Attorney General has been withdrawn.


Brett Weston, Photographer, 81; Saw Purity in Nature's Patterns
Brett Weston, a photographer long renowned for his magisterial, sharply delineated landscapes and close-ups of plant forms, sand dunes and other natural objects, died on Friday, at Kona Hospital in Hawaii.
He was 81 and lived in Carmel, Calif., and Paradise Park, on the island of Hawaii.
Mr. Weston died of complications from a stroke, his brother Neil said.


Fighting for Custom House, Boston Appeals to U.S.
Towering 500 feet above the tourist-packed Quincy Market and only blocks from Boston Harbor, the gray granite Custom House sits dark, dank and empty, waiting for better times.
Plate-size paint chips hang off the walls of the yellow Counting Room, where, beginning in 1847, seafaring merchants once lined up to pay their taxes.
Light from the security desk filters weakly into a cavernous room under a grand dome, which formed the original roof before a 30-story tower was added over it in 1915.


Shift at Top Seen for Northwest Air
Alfred A. Checchi, who led the investor buyout of Northwest Airlines in 1989 and expanded the airline through turbulent times, plans to withdraw from running the carrier after completing several key financial steps, airline executives familiar with the planned changes say.
"He is going to play a less dominant role," said one airline executive who spoke last week on the condition that he not be identified.
"He's going to give more room to Dasburg and his management team."


BENTSEN SUGGESTS BROAD ENERGY TAX WILL BE PROPOSED
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen suggested today that the Clinton Administration would propose a tax on all forms of energy to help lower the budget deficit and encourage conservation.
In a television interview, Mr.
Bentsen, whom President Clinton has made the Administration's chief spokesman on economic matters, also indicated that a tax cut for the middle class was not in the offing.
In addition, he did not take issue with a questioner who asserted that an energy tax would fall most heavily on the middle class.


Texas Town and Fertilizer From That City
A tiny yellow engine and 18 bright red railroad cars stand out sharply as they trundle past dark creosote bushes and the occasional sotol plant, bringing another load of treated sewage from New York City to the high desert of West Texas.
Even such a brightly colored little train seems a mere detail in a landscape vast enough that one can stand in the sun and watch a rainstorm miles away.
But, depending on who is doing the talking, the sludge now arriving almost daily is either going to make the desert bloom or render it a dead zone.


Treasury to Sell Bills and Notes This Week
Treasury financings this week include today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and new issues of two- and five-year notes.
The two-year issue will be auctioned tomorrow and the five-year on Wednesday.
Traders said that by late in the day Friday, the rate on the three-month bill outstanding was 2.95 percent and on a six-month bill 3.05 percent.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note was being offered at a price to yield 4.29 percent and the five-year at a price to yield 5.75 percent.


Patents
THE PARHELION CORPORATION is using some of the latest tools of molecular biology to develop vaccines that are safer or more effective than existing ones.
While other drug companies use these techniques to tackle AIDS, malaria and similar illnesses, Parhelion is working to develop safer vaccines for animals.
Its recent victory is a patent for what it considers an improved vaccine for canine distemper, one of the most common illnesses among dogs, foxes and wolves.


Why Dr. Kevorkian Was Called In
Last Wednesday a man named Jack Miller dropped his hand, thereby pulling a clip off the plastic tubing that connected a canister of carbon monoxide to a mask over his face.
The gadget was yet another of the egregious Dr.
Jack Kevorkian's suicide devices, and Mr.
Miller was the ninth person to take advantage of his ingenuity.
Eighteen minutes later Mr.
Miller was dead.
Jack Miller wanted to end his life because the pain from metastatic bone cancer had made it unbearable.
In pulling that clip he put himself in the driver's seat -- which is precisely where most people want to be as they approach the end of their life.
If they aren't, it's not because of a lack of directives defining what is legally and ethically appropriate in the care of the dying.
It's because of the gap between the intellectual constructs and the realities of the respirator, the IV tube and the oxygen hose.


Capriati Recovers, As Does Fernandez
Jennifer Capriati and Mary Joe Fernandez are not lacking for common ground.
Both Floridians, both members of the world's top 10, they share the benefits and burdens of all who achieve tennis excellence at an early age.
This month in Australia, they have even shared a common opponent: their health.
Fernandez was the first to suffer, contracting a stomach virus during the Hopman Cup in Perth and missing more than a week of practice before the Australian Open.
Capriati fell ill with a similar virus after her first-round match here last week.


Imperial Credit Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Don't Duck Welfare Reform
The Health and Human Services Department administers hundreds of programs ranging from early childhood education to public health.
But nothing the department does will be more important this year than overseeing the nation's welfare and health care systems -- both of which need major overhaul.
That is why Secretary Donna Shalala's testimony during Senate confirmation hearings was dismaying.
She displayed knowledge of neither subject and, in the case of welfare reform, shocking indifference.
Mr.
Clinton has turned health care reform over to a White House-run task force on which Ms.
Shalala will play an important but supporting role.
That is only proper.
The new President has made health care reform a top priority, worthy of White House direction.


On the Menu, Steak Bucks Trend
The general manager was proud to report that Dan Quayle had once eaten in his restaurant, and so had George Bush as Vice President.
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York, he said, was a regular, and these days so is James Carville, the Clinton campaign strategist.
John Norris wasn't necessarily name-dropping.
Morton's steak restaurant in Georgetown has been a magnet for years to Washington's leading political figures.


Cuban Olympic Runner Badly Burned at Home
ANA QUIROT, Cuba's star middle-distance runner, was reported in critical but stable condition yesterday from extensive burns suffered in what was described as a household accident.
A midday bulletin by Hermanos Amejeiros Hospital in Havana said Quirot, 29 years old, spent a comfortable night, was fully conscious and was responding well to treatment.
It said 10 percent of the burns were third-degree burns, and the rest second-degree.


A Roller-Coaster Day At The New York Post
From midmorning to midafternoon, hundreds of New York Post workers voted to cut their paychecks -- meaning that for the next month they would work four days for three days' pay.
They worried that a "no" vote would mean no more jobs and a "yes" vote would only buy time until the money ran out once and for all.
And then came a reprieve, at least for the newspaper.


Public Defender Work Is Its Own Reward
To the Editor:
America's criminal justice system is overburdened with too many victims and too many accused, as Anthony Lewis notes in "The Soul of Justice" (column, Jan. 4), but I take issue with the American Lawyer magazine article critical of public defenders that he discusses.
The implication is that these lawyers do less for clients than paid lawyers would.


Brinker Names New Chief
In a hastily called meeting this evening, the board of Brinker International named a new chairman and chief executive, three days after the company's well-known leader, Norman E. Brinker, was rendered unconscious in a jarring collision during a polo match in Florida.
Ron A. McDougall, who has been president and chief operating officer of the rapidly growing restaurant company since 1986, was named to succeed Mr.
Brinker.
Mr.
McDougall, 50 years old, has been a close ally of Mr.
Brinker in several restaurant businesses for nearly 20 years.


Alpha Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


VLSI Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Airtran Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Oliver Hailey, 60, Author of Plays And Scripts With Dark Humor
Oliver Hailey, a prolific playwright and writer of film and television dramas, died on Saturday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 60 and died of cancer, said his wife, Elizabeth Forsythe Hailey.
The dark and humorous sides of families and of personal relationships were the broad theme of Mr.
Hailey's work, often described as black comedy by reviewers.
Among his many television credits were work on "Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman," "McMillan and Wife," "Family," and "The Cosby Show."


INSIDE
Fears of Ethnic Hungarians
Hungary is promoting autonomy for the three million ethnic Hungarians in neighboring countries, adding a potentially explosive element to a region torn by ethnic conflicts.
Page A3.
An Educational Partnership
Syracuse University is teaming up with New York City as part of an innovative program to create small, theme-based high schools.
Page B1.
Send Sewage, Please
In Colorado, Texas, Oklahoma and Arizona, farmers are carpeting the ground with a precious import from New York City: sludge.
Page B1.
Billion-Dollar Wish List
Made hopeful by the Clinton promise to rebuild America, mayors present the Administration with an array of expensive projects.
Page A15.
Gospel Music's 'Father' Dies
Thomas A. Dorsey, who composed many of the most popular gospel songs as well as many blues songs, has died at the age of 93.
Page B7.


Leo Lowenthal, 92, Professor of Sociology
Leo Lowenthal, a retired professor of sociology at the University of California at Berkeley who analyzed the role of literature in society, died Thursday at Alta Bates Hospital in Berkeley.
He was 92 and lived in Berkeley.
He died of pneumonia, colleagues at Berkeley said.


Review/Music; A Vision Sober And Clear
One happy result of post-Soviet-era stumblings toward free enterprise has been the Russian National Orchestra, organized three years ago by the conductor and pianist Mikhail Pletnev and recruited from Moscow's many symphonic ensembles.
The Russian National has been touring North America and alighted at Carnegie Hall on Thursday and Friday nights.
It is a splendid unit already, with the sheen and power of an international ensemble but husbanding the dark glow special to Russian orchestras of the past and largely lost to a worldwide one-size-fits-all performance style.
There is enough virtuoso technique to render inner details clearly and enough weight to keep them from sounding skeletal.
Most impressive of all on Thursday was the exquisite tuning of the wind chords, the product of musicians and a conductor who listen carefully and creatively.


Fred B. Black, 80; Lobbyist Was Part Of 1960's Scandal
Fred B. Black Jr., an aerospace lobbyist who became ensnared in a political scandal in the early 1960's, died Friday at a nursing home in Wheaton, Md.
He was 80 and lived in Bethesda, Md.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Lindberg Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10 ECONOMIC TENSION IN EUROPE
The former Communist nations of Eastern Europe, having made considerable progress in building free markets, say further advances could be blocked by rising strains over trade with Western Europe.
A1


Sports of The Times; Question: Can We All Run Together?
AT halftime of tomorrow night's Knicks-76ers game at Madison Square Garden, there will be another basketball game, one that season-ticket holders had not bargained for.
It will be a brief scrimmage played by black and Hasidic young people from the Crown Heights neighborhood's "Project CURE -- Increase the Peace" basketball teams.


Cancer Center Curbed In Radiation Incident
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission has suspended the license of Oncology Services Inc. of Harrisburg, Pa., to use radioactive iridium in cancer treatments.
The decision came after a treatment center owned by the company accidentally left a sliver of radioactive metal inside an 82-year-old Pennsylvania woman in November, apparently causing her death five days later.
About 90 other people, including employees of the nursing home where the woman died, were exposed to radiation as a result of the incident, the commission said Wednesday in announcing its action against the company.


Kurt Masur to Discuss Creation of Concerts
The New York Philharmonic is to open a series of five monthly talks on the orchestra's relationship to New York City tonight at 6:30 in the Bruno Walter Auditorium of the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center.
Kurt Masur, the Philharmonic's music director, and Carlos Moseley, the managing director from 1961 to 1970, are to discuss "Selecting the Music: How a Concert Is Created."
Other topics in the series are "The View From the Stage: The Professional Lives of Musicians" (Feb. 8); "The Significance of the Symphony in an Urban Setting" (March 15); "American Composers and the Philharmonic: An Evolving Tradition" (April 12), and "Music Criticism: What Is Its Role?" (May 3).


CHRONICLE
A United States Senator from Hawaii, the Brooklyn-born chief rabbi of an Israeli West Bank community, and an organization of disabled Israeli war veterans will receive the 10th annual Defender of Jerusalem Awards.
The $100,000 prize that will be divided among the recipients will be presented by the Jabotinsky Foundation Thursday at the Plaza Hotel.
The foundation is named for Vladimir Jabotinsky, a Zionist, philosopher and mentor of many Israeli leaders.
Being honored this year are Senator DANIEL K. INOUYE , Democrat of Hawaii, Rabbi SHLOMO RISKIN , founder of the settlement of Efrat on the West Bank, where he is described as a peace-keeper and arbitrator between Jews and Palestinians, and the Zahal Disabled Veterans Organization, which operates two sports, rehabilitation and social centers in Tel Aviv and Haifa and is building a facility in Jerusalem.


Israel Cool to Admitting A New Ethiopian Group
Although worried about inviting charges of racism, a committee of Israeli Cabinet ministers has decided against extending automatic immigration rights to perhaps tens of thousands of Ethiopians who descend from Jews but are themselves Christians.
The committee instead proposes allowing only some of these Ethiopians, known as Falash Mura, to join family members who are already in Israel, on what officials describe as an individual and humanitarian basis.


In Focus Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pascual Perez Was Hard to Hit, but Now He's Just Hard to Find
"Pascual Perez, please."
"I'm sorry," said the operator at the Jaragua Hotel, "there is nobody registered under that name."


Don't Duck Welfare Reform
The Health and Human Services Department administers hundreds of programs ranging from early childhood education to public health.
But nothing the department does will be more important this year than overseeing the nation's welfare and health care systems -- both of which need major overhaul.
That is why Secretary Donna Shalala's testimony during Senate confirmation hearings was dismaying.
She displayed knowledge of neither subject and, in the case of welfare reform, shocking indifference.
Mr.
Clinton has turned health care reform over to a White House-run task force on which Ms.
Shalala will play an important but supporting role.
That is only proper.
The new President has made health care reform a top priority, worthy of White House direction.


Elco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Keithley Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Saudis Call For Cuts By OPEC
In a move that could substantially lift sagging oil prices, Saudi Arabia, the world's largest oil producer and exporter, has called on the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to reduce its overall output of oil production by more than a million barrels a day.
The move signals at least a temporary end to Saudi Arabia's policy of maximizing production, which has increased its output to more than 8 million barrels a day, from 5.5 million barrels a day in 1990.
That is more than a third of OPEC's production, and gives the Saudis enormous clout.


Johnson Goes to Great Heights to Get Point Across
Dallas Cowboys Coach Jimmy Johnson tonight recalled a pep talk he gave to his team last week.
"I kind of told them a story that you have a two-by-four," he said, "and you lay the two-by-four across the room and most everybody in the room -- and I did say there were probably a couple of players that couldn't do it -- but most everybody in the room could walk across that two-by-four and not fall, because their focus was that they were going to walk that two-by-four.


Heico Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Abroad at Home; If It Were Mr. Baird
Look at the Zoe Baird nomination story and imagine that the genders had been reversed: The nominee for Attorney General was a man, Aetna's general counsel, earning $500,000 a year.
His wife was a Yale law professor; she made the child care arrangements, hiring illegal aliens after discussing it with immigration lawyers.
Would the nominee have been swamped by a storm of public indignation?
I am not sure, but I doubt it.
I think many who protested in Ms.
Baird's case would have said to themselves that child care was the woman's concern.
I think a male nominee, with all the other facts the same, might well have been confirmed as Attorney General.


Carjacking Suspect Killed
A police officer fatally shot a suspected carjacker and another suspect was arrested after a chase by car and on foot in Crown Heights late Saturday, the police said yesterday.
Christopher Stephenson, 19, of 662 East 95th Street in Brooklyn, was armed with a fully loaded .45-caliber automatic when he was shot in the side of the lower back near Union Street and Kingston Avenue.


Editorial Notebook; After 1492: A Utopian Encounter
It may be some consolation to George Bush that another popular idol experienced a steeper fall from grace in 1992.
To the astonished consternation of parade sponsors and movie producers, Christopher Columbus changed from hero to villain smack amid the 500th anniversary of his "encounter," the currently correct word for discovery.
Fair is fair: The time had surely come to see Columbus from the vantage of native peoples, for whom his advent prefigured pestilence and death, robbery and servitude.
But the revisionist versions of 1492 so popular in 1992 tended to omit anything that softened the tones of European villainy.
That's less than fair.
The "encounter" had another side.


Thurgood Marshall, Civil Rights Hero, Dies at 84
Thurgood Marshall, pillar of the civil rights revolution, architect of the legal strategy that ended the era of official segregation and the first black Justice of the Supreme Court, died today.
A major figure in American public life for a half-century, he was 84 years old.
Toni House, the Court's spokeswoman, said Justice Marshall died of heart failure at Bethesda Naval Medical Center in Maryland at 2 P.M.


People
*
Robert Smith was named to the new post of partner and head of the film division at Frankfurt Gips Balkind, Los Angeles.
He was previously executive vice president of marketing at 20th Century Fox's motion picture division, Los Angeles. *
Larry Weisberg, president and chief operating officer at Waring &amp; LaRosa, New York, said he had resigned from the agency, effective last Friday, confirming a report in Adweek.
Mr.
Weisberg described his departure, which he attributed to a divergence in philosophies, as amicable.
Saul Waring, co-chairman and chief executive at Waring &amp; LaRosa, said there were no immediate plans to replace Mr.
Weisberg.


Patricia Bleznak, H. A. Silverstein
Patricia Bleznak, the daughter of Sally Cooper Bleznak of Bryn Mawr, Pa., and Alan D. Bleznak of Penn Valley, Pa., was married yesterday to Howard Alan Silverstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Silverstein of Delray Beach, Fla.
Cantor Bruce Ruben officiated at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Silverstein is a vice president of the Whitney Group, an executive search and consulting company in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, he magna cum laude.
The bride received an M.B.A. from New York University.


Red-Hot Petrovic Pours It On, and On
In 1984, while he was still playing basketball in Europe, Drazen Petrovic once scored 112 points in a game.
Over there he was something else, and over here that hasn't changed.
Quite simply, he may be the best pure shooter in the National Basketball Association.
Tonight against Houston, he was unbelievable.
Making his bid to become an All-Star, Petrovic, the league's leading 3-point shooter, scored 32 points in the second half en route to a career-high 44 points.
His bombing run buried the Rockets, who entered the game on an eight-game winning streak but were visibly tired, playing their fifth game in seven nights.
They didn't have a chance.
When Petrovic's radar is on, no one has a chance.
It was: Nets 100, Houston 83.
It shouldn't have been that close.


Beverly Hills Fan Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Thorn Apple Valley reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 11


Dataflex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pedone Is Selected By Genesee Brewing
The Genesee Brewing Company in Rochester has selected Pedone &amp; Partners Inc. in New York to handle its beer brands account, previously at Mullen Inc. in Wenham, Mass.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.
Pedone was awarded the account after a four-month review that also included two other finalists, Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot in Boston and Grace &amp; Rothschild in New York.


Dance in Review
Sefa Jorques and the Klixbull Dance Company  Ohio Theater SoHo


Hepburn's Role As Ambassador Is Paid Tribute
They buried Audrey Hepburn here in a simple pine coffin in the village cemetery on a bluff overlooking Lake Geneva, surrounded by fields and vineyards with the Jura mountains dark blue in the background.
About 600 people gathered for the funeral of the actress, twice the population of Tolochenaz, where she had chosen to make her home after retiring from the cinema.


John Corbin Eddison Development Expert, 71
John Corbin Eddison, an expert on economic development who was a former director of Near East Affairs for the United States Agency for International Development, died Friday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 73 years old and lived in Lexington, Mass.
He died of lung disease, said his wife, the former Elizabeth Owsley Bole.


Otter Tail Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day on Tuesday with an article about taxis and buses that run on natural gas and electricity misidentified Tyrone Cunningham in some editions.
He is a driver for the Clean Air Cab Company of Washington.


Dance in Review
Otrabanda Company Downtown Art Company 64 East Fourth Street East Village


California Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Explaining the Check in 'TransitChek'
To New York City subway riders puzzled by those advertisements trumpeting "the Biggest TransitChek in History" and showing a man with an inexplicably oversized cardboard check under his arm: don't worry.
Nobody else gets it either.
"Transit Chex? It sounds kind of like a breakfast cereal," said Jeffrey Gartner, a graphic artist who was confused by the poster even after re-reading it a few times on the No. 3 train one recent morning.
"Is there some hidden prize? Where can I get one?"


Ex-Champions Haunt Skating Victors
This had been their week to frighten away the ghosts, to chase Brian Boitano, Katarina Witt and Kristi Yamaguchi from the stubborn American memory.
But as the medalists at the United States figure-skating championships performed today in a post-competition exhibition, there was a sense of another opportunity lost.
The American amateurs had done little to dissuade any Olympic-bound professionals from seeking reinstatement from the International Skating Union by April in the men's and women's events.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Gordon Gano The Knitting Factory


Courier Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Dance in Review
Sarah Skaggs St. Patrick's Youth Center 268 Mulberry Street Little Italy


Notes on Justice; Who's in Charge? Bush Holdover Says He Is, but Two Clinton Men Differ
Without a new Attorney General, the Justice Department is being run by a kind of three-headed monster.
Stuart M. Gerson, an ardently Republican holdover from the Bush Administration, says he is the agency's leader.
But ensconsed in the Attorney General's suite of offices two floors above Mr.
Gerson are two old friends of the Clintons, Webster L. Hubbell and Michael Cardozo, who are ready to call many of the more significant shots and act as liaison with the new power brokers in the White House.


Legg Mason Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Saudis Call For Cuts By OPEC
In a move that could substantially lift sagging oil prices, Saudi Arabia, the world's largest oil producer and exporter, has called on the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to reduce its overall output of oil production by more than a million barrels a day.
The move signals at least a temporary end to Saudi Arabia's policy of maximizing production, which has increased its output to more than 8 million barrels a day, from 5.5 million barrels a day in 1990.
That is more than a third of OPEC's production, and gives the Saudis enormous clout.


New York Post Finds a Reprieve In Investor Who May Buy Paper
On the brink of announcing a suspension of publication, The New York Post found temporary reprieve last night in a wealthy investor who said he might buy the embattled newspaper.
The Post, meanwhile, declared that it would publish today and fight on for survival.
"Contrary to what everybody has thought or said, The New York Post is not dead," Peter S. Kalikow, the owner, said at the end of a day of tabloid-style brinkmanship in which the newspaper's workers agreed to steep temporary pay cuts and a Governor, a Senator, a Cardinal and other prominent New York figures joined the fray to keep the paper afloat.


Kuwait City Journal; A Big Surprise for the G.I.'s: Back to the Desert
When Capt.
Michael P. Maughan left Kuwait after the Persian Gulf war two years ago, he thought he had seen the last of the flat desert wasteland that had been his home for six months.
But the 39-year-old company commander from Eugene, Ore., is once again putting his 120 men through live-fire exercises and training maneuvers just 25 miles from hostile Iraqi troops to the north.


A Judicial Firefighter Meets An Unusual Critical Flame
An inches-thick binder of press clippings -- "LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby &amp; MacRae in the News" -- rests in the waiting room of Frederick B. Lacey's law offices.
Although the big firm has offices across two continents and 11 time zones, half the items seem to be about Judge Lacey himself.
It is a stout testament to the busy public life of a retired Federal judge and leading corporate lawyer who has spent his working life as a leading member of New Jersey's legal and political community.


Reeves Will Be Busy Putting Pieces in Place
The reports on Dan Reeves's golfing vacation in Indian Wells, Calif., indicate he has been having a good time.
John Saeman, Reeves's friend and a cable-television executive from Denver, said that "he has been beating the devil out of me."
Reeves is trying to make the most of his vacation because once he flies East this week to become the head coach of the Giants, he will face busy months leading into training camp in July and the regular season in September.
Among other projects, he must name a coaching staff, decide which veteran players he wants to keep and which he is willing to cut loose, and decide with the Giants' personnel people which players and which positions to target in the college draft.


Two Games Too Long for Gartner
Mike Gartner was stuck at No. 29 for a mere two games, but it felt like forever.
He scored his 29th goal of the season on Jan. 13, against the Washington Capitals.
One more and he would set an all-time National Hockey League record, becoming the first player to score 30 or more goals in 14 consecutive seasons.
Gartner tried not to think about it, tried not to feel any sort of pressure, but that was impossible.
Every day, teammate Adam Graves talked about it in the locker room.
Every game, the television stations flashed up Mike Gartner graphics, suggesting that "tonight could be the night."


California Inmates Win Better Prison AIDS Care
In this state's huge, troubled correctional system, the prison at Vacaville, formally known as the California Medical Facility, stands out as a special monument to misery.
It is home to 3,000 physically and mentally ill inmates whose crimes range from credit-card fraud to serial murder, and it has been torn apart in recent years by overcrowding, violence, lawsuits, staff turmoil and, lately, by AIDS.


Results plus
GOLF Mize Wins by 2 Strokes Given an opening by the uncertain starts of the younger leaders, Larry Mize came on with a five-under-par 67 yesterday and scored his first victory in the United States since the 1987 Masters.
Mize pulled away from a tightly bunched pack with a 10-foot birdie putt on the 15th hole at Tucson National and won the Northern Telecom Open by two strokes.
Five other men had led or shared the final round lead before the steady Mize assumed control on the back nine.
He retained the top spot with a 10-foot par putt on the 17th, then assured the victory when he lashed a 4-iron approach to within 6 feet of the flag on the 18th.
Jeff Maggert, frequently a contender but not yet a winner since coming up from the Ben Hogan Tour two years ago, was second alone at 273 after a 67.
Maggert had the lead alone until he three-putted from the fringe on the 15th.
He parred in and could do nothing but hope Mize would stumble. (AP) SKIING Slalom to Austrian


U.S. WATCHING IRAQ FOR AIR DEFENSES
The United States and its allies are keeping a close eye on signs that Iraq is installing new air defenses in zones where Iraqi flights are banned, Defense Secretary Les Aspin said today.
But he said it might take a few days to determine whether Iraq is deliberately testing the Clinton Administration by flouting prohibitions against antiaircraft weapons in the zones, in the north and south of Iraq.


Review/Theater; A Hesitant Henry V On a Passive Course
When last sighted in Shakespeare, Mark Rylance was playing a pajama-clad Hamlet lolling around the castle at Elsinore like a late-rising house guest waiting for brunch to be served.
This Royal Shakespeare Company production was later restaged at regional theaters in the United States.
In "Henry V" (at St. Clement's), Mr.
Rylance is dressed in black and is seemingly ready to meet the demands of his kingly office.
But the performance is so enervated as to give the impression that the actor is still sleepwalking.
While moody indecisiveness is certainly not antithetical to playing Hamlet, it is debilitating when it comes to "Henry V." Although Henry does not have to be played heroically, one cannot believe Mr.
Rylance's King has triumphed over his misspent youth and is capable of leading his army against the French.


Flanigan's Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Some Act as if It's Summer When They Get a Spring-Like Sun in the Winter


Corporate Bonds Shine, Despite Flood of Issues
When Michael H. Walsh, the chairman of Tenneco Inc., announced last week that he had a brain tumor but would continue to run the company, some corporate analysts were expecting the price of the company's bonds to drop.
"Mike Walsh is Tenneco," James J. Drury, a corporate securities analyst at Prudential Securities, said.
"I had thought you would see some weakening."


Pentagon Chief Warns Clinton On Gay Policy
Defense Secretary Les Aspin has advised President Clinton in a confidential memorandum that a majority of Congress, in addition to top military leaders, would oppose any immediate attempt by the Administration to lift the ban on homosexuals in the armed forces.
Even if Mr.
Clinton ordered the ban lifted, Congress could pass a law reversing him.
The five-page memorandum, a draft copy of which was provided to The New York Times by someone not in the military who is critical of Mr.
Aspin, includes a detailed strategy to consult with senior officers and senators in the next six months to work out a new policy that lawmakers will not reject.
Aspin Asked About Plan
The new policy "must end discrimination" against homosexuals in the armed services, "maintain military morale and discipline" and "be defensible in Congress, so as not to be overturned," according to the memorandum, which a senior Pentagon official said was delivered to Mr.
Clinton this weekend.


Those Fighting Illness Give to Neediest
Pain dominates their lives.
They shuttle in and out of hospitals.
They are forever wondering whether they have the strength to make it through the day.
But even as they contend with serious illnesses that have left them weak and despondent, they are thinking about others who are also suffering.
In letters to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, they explain that when they make donations to charity, they put their own grief into perspective by acknowledging that they are not the only ones with problems.


Belgrade May Act on Croatia
The President and the military chief of Yugoslavia vowed to intervene in Serb-Croat fighting in Croatia unless the U.N. restored peace.
Page A9.


Child Welfare Problems Started at the Top
To the Editor:
Re "Who Killed Jeffrey Harden?" (editorial, Jan. 2), on New York City's Child Welfare Administration: For 14 years I have monitored and worked to reform the city's child welfare system.
Many times your articles have cited my studies criticizing one or another of 10 commissioners and 2 mayors for mishandling child welfare.
But Commissioner Robert Little is the best I've seen at running the city's child welfare system.


E.D.S. Silent On Deal Talk
A spokesman for the Electronic Data Systems Corporation declined to comment yesterday on reports that its parent company, the General Motors Corporation, might sell an equity stake in E.D.S.
On Saturday, The Dallas Morning News reported that British Telecommunications P.L.C. might buy 25 percent of E.D.S. or even merge the two companies.
Tony Good, an E.D.S. spokesman, said the company would not comment for competitive reasons.
British Telecommunications executives could not be reached yesterday.


Pressure on Oil Prices
After several years of pumping all they could, Saudi Arabia and Iran want other OPEC nations to join them in cutting production, hoping to bolster sliding oil prices.
Page D1.


Bridge
An American professional with little international experience scored a major victory Friday on the European circuit.
Gaylor Kasle of Tucson, Ariz., took the Sunday Times-Macallan title in London, partnering Bob Levin of Chicago, who has been a star since he won a world title 12 years ago at the age of 23.
They outdistanced a world-class field of 16 pairs, and captured $:4,000 in prize money, about $6,110.
Following are the final standings: 1.
Kasle and Levin, 575 victory points; 2.
Jeff Meckstroth and Eric Rodwell (United States), 515; 3.
Alain Levy and Herve Mouiel (France), 500; 4.
Bob Hamman and Bob Wolff (United States) tied Robert Sheehan (Britain) and Munir Ata-Ullah (Pakistan), 495.


Abortion Clinics Retain The Law's Protection
To the Editor:
Criticism of the Supreme Court's decision in the Operation Rescue case has missed the important point: under the decision, abortion clinics are entitled to the same legal protections against trespass and violent protest as are other controversial institutions in our society.


Georgia-Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


DMR Group reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


CHRONICLE
Dr.
WILLIAM T. SPECK , a 52-year-old pediatrician, has been appointed president and chief executive officer of Presbyterian Hospital at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, it was announced last week by SEYMOUR MILSTEIN , chairman of the hospital's board of trustees.
Dr.
Speck will assume the office on Feb. 1.
Dr.
Speck, formerly the senior vice president of University Hospitals of Cleveland and chief administrative officer of its Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital, has been chief medical officer at Presbyterian Hospital since July.


3 Pirates Left With Helpless Feeling
The statistics indicate that Seton Hall's front court did the job against North Carolina in a matchup of two of the nation's best college basketball teams.
But the Pirates' backcourt performed horribly against the No. 3-ranked Tar Heels, and that proved to be the difference.
Seton Hall's backcourt threesome of Terry Dehere, Danny Hurley and Bryan Caver combined to shoot 6 of 21 from the floor and had 14 turnovers in a 70-66 loss in front of a sellout crowd of 20,029 fans at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


A Veteran Mayor-Maker Signs On
EARLY in 1977, two New Yorkers embraced Representative Edward I. Koch, bestowing upon him a degree of credibility that distinguished him from the other half-dozen Democratic mayoral candidates.
One was Bess Myerson, whose own credibility has suffered since then.The other was David Garth, the political impresario who had been instrumental in twice helping elect John V. Lindsay as Mayor against the odds -- first as the Republican candidate in 1965 and four years later, after Mr.
Lindsay was rebuffed by his own party, as a Liberal.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Mike Kingery, outfielder, on a minor-league contract.
Basketball National Basketball Association  INDIANA PACERS -- Placed Kenny Williams, forward, on the injured list.
Activated LaSalle Thompson, forward, from the injured list.
MIAMI HEAT -- Named Chris Wallace coordinator of scouting services.


The Man at Clinton's Elbow Works to Fend Off Trouble
Bruce R. Lindsey has always been in the middle of the mix.
During the most brutal period of the primary campaign, when Bill Clinton was struggling to bat down accusations of marital infidelity and draft dodging, Mr.
Lindsey, an Arkansas lawyer, shadowed him every day.
When the public opinion polls slid, then soared, Mr.
Lindsey always had a seat at the strategy meetings.
He often delivered the bad news, to Mr. Clinton and from Mr. Clinton.


Easel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
Dr.
WILLIAM T. SPECK , a 52-year-old pediatrician, has been appointed president and chief executive officer of Presbyterian Hospital at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, it was announced last week by SEYMOUR MILSTEIN , chairman of the hospital's board of trustees.
Dr.
Speck will assume the office on Feb. 1.
Dr.
Speck, formerly the senior vice president of University Hospitals of Cleveland and chief administrative officer of its Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital, has been chief medical officer at Presbyterian Hospital since July.


Smith Runs Hip-Hop and Heads Up
For the funky, the hip-hop and the proper slant on all that really matters in Super Bowl XXVII, the MTV host Bill Bellamy last Friday turned to the spot where youth reigns in the National Football League: the Dallas Cowboys' locker room.
The Cowboys are the youngest team in the N.F.L.
Twenty-three players on Dallas's 47-man roster are 26 or younger.
Bellamy worked the locker room as if he were at a swank nightclub schmoozing with the stars, and the Cowboys simply ate it up.
Bellamy got with running back Emmitt Smith and together, in front of his locker, they introduced a music video called "Rumpshaker." It was an appropriate selection, given the way that Smith runs with the football.


Interleaf Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


YUGOSLAV LEADER THREATENS CROATS
Yugoslavia's Serbian President and a top military officer threatened today to intervene in fighting between Croats and Serbs on Croatia's Adriatic coast unless the United Nations restores peace.
"On Jan. 22, Croatia tore up the Vance plan," said Yugoslavia's president, Dobrica Cosic, referring to the accord that was worked out in late 1991 by Cyrus R. Vance, the former American Secretary of State.


Lately, More Antiquities Can Go Home Again
An ancient bronze-and-silver model of a leopard, which was a shadowy presence in the art market for years before it wound up in the hands of a leading New York City art collector, is going home, to England.
Last fall a group of 48 sacred, centuries-old textiles, which have adorned the walls of a California dealer and a New York collector for the last few years, were returned to the Coroma Indians who live high in the Andes of Bolivia.


Altera Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


All Is Glittery And a Bit Odd At Golden Globes
Tom Cruise was nervous.
Emma Thompson's feet hurt.
Al Pacino said he felt "out of control." And Gene Hackman was in a bad mood, and grumbled that he'd rather be home.
Despite all this Hollywood angst, the 50th annual Golden Globe awards on Saturday night turned out to be the glitziest and zaniest event of the new year.


Ultimate Alchemy: Sludge to Gold; Big New York Export May Make Desert, and Budget, Bloom
Whether the cargo wanders the world endlessly on a barge, or is hauled by rail to the Midwest where armed guards refuse to accept it, and whether it travels as solid waste or in giant mounds of processed sludge, nobody wants any part of New York's monumental collection of garbage.
Nobody, that is, except the savvy farmers of Colorado, Texas, Oklahoma and Arizona.
Out there, where people have a well-developed understanding of what human waste can do for winter wheat, New York City sludge is greeted like sweet rain in a drought.
Farmers in the arid desert will do almost anything to carpet their ground with the precious product of New York's enormous sewage system.


Lockout at Chen's Supercomputer Company
Supercomputer Systems Inc., whose financial support from I.B.M. is ending, locked out technical workers at its Eau Claire, Wis., building on Saturday and today, fueling speculation that the company is close to ending operations.
Supercomputer Systems executives did not return repeated telephone calls today.
A spokesman told The Eau Claire Leader-Telegram on Saturday that the workers would be paid while the plant was closed for the weekend for "administrative work." The newspaper reported today that about 15 employees had been locked out of the Supercomputer Systems building after the card access system that controls entry to the factory was changed.
I.B.M.
Aid Is Ending
The lockout came on the heels of news from executives of the International Business Machines Corporation that it had reached the end of its five-year commitment to finance Steve S. Chen, who founded Supercomputer Systems after leaving Cray Research Inc. in 1987.


Acme-Cleveland reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Now, a Children's TV Guide
TV Guide plans to publish a quarterly magazine, TV Guide's Parents' Guide to Children's Entertainment, starting May 27.
It will name the best programs for children from preschoolers to 12 years old, and will include reviews of children's television shows, grading them A+ to F.


Something Fishy Is Going On Here but Visitors Don't Mind


CHRONICLE
Dr.
WILLIAM T. SPECK , a 52-year-old pediatrician, has been appointed president and chief executive officer of Presbyterian Hospital at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, it was announced last week by SEYMOUR MILSTEIN , chairman of the hospital's board of trustees.
Dr.
Speck will assume the office on Feb. 1.
Dr.
Speck, formerly the senior vice president of University Hospitals of Cleveland and chief administrative officer of its Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital, has been chief medical officer at Presbyterian Hospital since July.


Troubles for Tomba
ALBERTO TOMBA assaulted a cable-car employee before a World Cup slalom yesterday at Veysonnaz, Switzerland, and the incident was reported to the International Ski Federation for possible sanctions.
The Italian star hit the employee in the back with his ski poles after accusing him of opening the cabin door too slowly from the outside, a spokesman for the race organizers said.
Tomba, who was going up to survey the course before the race, later kicked a desk in the cable-car station, shattering an adjacent window.


42d Street Project Remains on Track
While signs of 42d Street's long-planned redevelopment remain overshadowed by the area's boarded-up stores, bureaucratic delays and a lingering recession, business and government leaders say the project remains in full gear -- albeit on a smaller scale -- and that indications of a new commercial vitality are starting to emerge.
The evidence ranges from an uptick in sales for some of the businesses that remain open to the flowering of new enterprises adjacent to the project and a surge of interest in leasing new retail space.
Those involved in the redevelopment project say there is an increasing awareness that there is gold to be mined on 42d Street, and that the prospecting has already begun.


Jews Also Oppose West Bank Campus
To the Editor:
You report that the University of New Haven plans to delay opening of its HaSharon campus in the West Bank settlement of Ilkana (news article, Jan. 6).
In that report, you state, "Long before yesterday's announcement, Arab-Americans and American Jews had taken sides."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  NEW YORK POST GETS A REPRIEVE
On the brink of announcing a suspension of publication, The New York Post has found a temporary reprieve in a wealthy investor who may buy the embattled newspaper.
The paper declared that it would fight on for survival.
"Contrary to what everybody has thought or said, The New York Post is not dead," Peter S. Kalikow, the owner, said at the end of a day of tabloid-style brinkmanship in which The Post's workers agreed to drastic temporary pay cuts and political leaders joined the fray to keep the paper afloat.
Chomping on a cigar, clad in a casual sweater and jeans and looking relaxed for the first time in three days of round-the-clock crisis, Mr.
Kalikow announced that he had struck a deal with Steven Hoffenberg, a multimillionaire investor and businessman, to rescue The Post.
A1.
FROM FINANCE TO NEWSPAPERS
Steven Hoffenberg, the businessman who has emerged as the latest potential savior of The New York Post, is a 48-year-old self-described workaholic who built a small credit business into a $1 billion-a-year enterprise.
B3.


High School In Rare Link With College
A few years ago, while dabbling in some fund raising for public schools, Donald Schupak, Syracuse University class of 1964, was taught a lesson by a savvy Harlem principal: an entire generation of unmotivated, unfocused and disenfranchised students was being lost in large, anonymous New York City high schools.
Now Mr.
Schupak, an investment banker and a former Horn &amp; Hardart chairman, has persuaded his alma mater to do something about it: Syracuse University is sponsoring a new kind of city high school -- and offering its graduates special preference for admission and scholarships to cover tuition to the university.


Accounts
*
Clairol Inc., New York, to Ahern New York as the first agency to handle a new undisclosed haircare product line for the professional salon market.
Billings were estimated at $2 million to $3 million. *
Dawson Home Fashion Inc., New York, to Altschiller Reitzfeld Inc., New York, as the first agency to handle its Collage bath merchandise brand.
Altschiller was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $3.5 million, in a review that also had two other New York-based finalists: Earle Palmer Brown and Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore.


EAST EUROPE SAYS BARRIERS TO TRADE HURT ITS ECONOMIES
The former Communist nations of Eastern Europe say that further advances in building their free-market economies could be blocked by rising trade tensions with the European Community, by far their biggest export market.
With Western Europe suffering through an economic slump and rising unemployment, the European Community has been increasingly wary of competition from the East, where wages and other costs are relatively low.


Essay; Clinton and Iraqgate
The scandal called Iraqgate began, I am told, with a personal request in early 1989 from a foreign head of state to George Bush on a matter requiring the assistance of Saddam Hussein.
The State Department's Middle East bureau was asked to come up with some way of buying the dictator's favor.
Foreign aid was impossible, given Congressional resistance to helping the man who had just poison- gassed the Kurds.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.


Chelsea Clinton Can Transfer to Public Schools; A National Tragedy
To the Editor:
The decision by President and Mrs.
Clinton that no Washington public school is good enough for their daughter may mean that ultimately Chelsea loses.
I will cite only two of many possible examples from my son's academic experience at Alice Deal Junior High, one of many public schools the Clintons did not bother to visit.


Anger at Illegal Help Threatens 2 in G.O.P.
Political professionals vary in their assessments of the damage to the Republican Party's two candidates for Governor in the wake of their admissions that they both hired illegal immigrants, but the judgment of the voters appears more severe: those who violate such laws are not qualified to hold office.
"I wouldn't trust them," said Denise D'Amato, 37, of Nutley, who was having lunch at the Willowbrook Mall in Wayne on Saturday with her three children, Kyle, 6, Courtney, 4 and Craig, 2.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Jan. 24:


Review/Music; A Young People's Guide To the Jazz Orchestra
The trumpeter Wynton Marsalis made it clear on Saturday morning at Alice Tully Hall that when performing for children, it's best to arrive equipped with tooth-brushing jokes and to play "Happy Birthday," over and over.
As host of his second Jazz for Young People concert at Lincoln Center, Mr.
Marsalis made a few mistakes along the way, occasionally talking over the heads of most of the children present, but it didn't matter.
While the children and parents watching the show may not have picked up all of Mr.
Marsalis' presentations -- he often used musical terminology he hadn't yet explained -- his amiable stagecraft and the rambunctious, joyously swinging music he and the band played more than carried the show.


Peacekeeper to Peacemaker: U.N. Confronting New Roles
While the United Nations probably enjoys a higher profile today than ever, its most important peacemaking missions are bogged down or threatened with collapse in trouble spots as varied as Angola, El Salvador, the former Yugoslavia and Cambodia, raising the possibility of a damaging reversal to its influence.
Despite these setbacks, demand for the organization's services as peacekeeper, mediator, election monitor and distributor of aid remains so strong that Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali fears it may be unable to cope with the strains.
In addition, members owe more than $1 billion in dues.
Appeals to and From the U.S.
President Clinton and his top Cabinet officers have tried to address some of the Secretary General's concerns about meeting the needs of war-ravaged or threatened countries by suggesting ways to strengthen the United Nations in the post-cold-war era.


Thomas A. Dorsey Is Dead at 93; Known as Father of Gospel Music
Thomas A. Dorsey, who was widely known as the father of gospel music, died on Saturday at his home in Chicago.
He was 93 years old.
He had been suffering from Alzheimer's disease, said his daughter, Doris.


Tape May Help U.S. Prosecute In Beating Case
Ten days before a new trial of four police officers accused of beating Rodney G. King, a newly disclosed document suggests that the officers might have been punishing Mr.
King for leading them on a high-speed chase.
The document, a transcript of a radio conversation between two dispatchers, was reported today in The Los Angeles Times and confirmed by defense lawyers.
It quotes one of the dispatchers as saying of Mr.
King: "They should know better than to run. They are going to pay a price when they do that."


Now Hungary Adds Its Voice to the Ethnic Tumult
Adding a potentially explosive element to a region already torn apart by ethnic conflicts and economic hardship, Hungary is promoting autonomy for the three million ethnic Hungarians who live in neighboring countries.
The Hungarians outside of Hungary form the largest single minority in Europe, aside from Russians in former Soviet republics, and emerging nationalist movements in Romania, Serbia and Slovakia have made them targets of verbal and physical attacks.


Corrections
A picture caption in The Metro Section on Tuesday about a sculpture at 77 Water Street in Manhattan misidentified it.
It is "The Month of June," by George E. Adamy.


Sybron Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cosmetic Center reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Pop and Jazz in Review
Leny Andrade The Ballroom 253 West 28th Street Chelsea Through Jan. 31


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page last Monday about the competition among magazines aimed at teen-agers misidentified the first editor in chief of Seventeen.
She was Helen Valentine, not Enid Haupt.


Read-Rite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


AIDS in Latin America -- A special report; In Deception and Denial, an Epidemic Looms
Flourishing amid sexual promiscuity, hypocrisy and haphazard prevention, Latin America's AIDS epidemic is on its way to surpassing that of the United States, health officials say.
Much of the growth comes from rising infection rates among Latin American women, a fact that doctors attribute to a propensity for homosexual and heterosexual affairs by men and a traditional reluctance to discuss these with their wives.
While much of the world's concern about AIDS has focused on Africa, Asia and the United States, the rising number of infections in Latin America is prompting growing alarm about this region as well.
Six years ago, fewer than 8,000 AIDS cases had been recorded in the region.
Today, the number is approaching 60,000, and estimates of cases are even higher.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet 'In Memory of . . .' New York State Theater


Books of The Times; Fear, Loathing and Fun On the Thompson Trail
Hunter
The Strange and Savage Life of Hunter S. Thompson
By E. Jean Carroll
Illustrated. 341 pages. Dutton. $25.
At first, Hunter S. Thompson's writing won him fame; there were three remarkable works: "Hell's Angels" (1966), "Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas" (1971) and "Fear and Loathing: On the Campaign Trail '72" (1973).
Then the fame attended his decline as a writer, traceable in four uneven collections: "The Great Shark Hunt" (1979), "The Curse of Lono" (1983), "Generation of Swine" (1988) and "Songs of the Doomed" (1990).
In short, in the broadest outline of his career as an American writer, Mr.
Thompson seems almost boringly archetypal.
One detail does set him apart, however: the question of whether to believe what he wrote, and if so, how much.
As Mr.
Thompson himself once observed of the out-of-control, drug-abusing self he offers up in what he called his "gonzo" journalism: "The smart people in the media knew it was a weird exaggeration. The dumb ones took it seriously and warned their children to stay away from me at all costs. The
really
smart ones understood it was only a censored, kind of toned-down children's book version of the real thing."


A Breast Cancer Alert
To the Editor:
"Mammography Campaigns Draw In the Young and Healthy" (The Week in Review, Jan. 10) encourages the myth in the medical and general population that a 20-year-old cannot get breast cancer.
Many younger members of the National Breast Cancer Coalition disprove this statistic.
Being 20 doesn't exempt you.
All suspicious lumps should be treated seriously until they are found to be otherwise.
ROSYLN SHARON Cliffside Park, N.J., Jan. 10, 1993


Post Rescuer Built Wealth From $2,000
Steven Hoffenberg, the businessman who emerged yesterday as the latest potential savior of The New York Post, is a 48-year-old self-described workaholic who built a small credit business into a $1 billion-a-year enterprise.
Five years ago, Mr.
Hoffenberg, chairman of the Towers Financial Corporation, made an abortive bid to gain control of Pan American World Airways, an attempt that was met with skepticism by the airline's unions and industry experts because his company was considered too small for the undertaking.
But the bid attracted considerable attention.


Malone, Magic Clear Air
KARL MALONE and MAGIC JOHNSON blame a lack of communication and intrusion -- by mainly the news media -- for reports in November that Malone helped push Johnson into retirement.
The two talked Saturday for the first time since the incident.
Johnson interviewed Malone as part of his duties for NBC-TV, which televised Sunday's game between the Utah Jazz and Portland Trail Blazers.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Treasury Secretary Bentsen suggested that a tax on energy would be proposed by the Clinton Administration to help lower the budget deficit and encourage conservation.
He also indicated that a middle-class tax cut was not in the offing, and he did not take issue with the assertion that an energy tax would fall most heavily on the middle class.  [ Page A1. ]  The nation's mayors have given the Administration a list of more than 7,000 "ready to go" construction projects that would cost $27 billion and create 400,000 jobs.  [ A15. ]
Restaurants that specialize in steak are thriving by bucking larger trends: stagnation in the restaurant industry and a steady decline in beef consumption.  [ D1. ]


Spanish Radio Leads in Los Angeles
For the first time, a Spanish-language radio station has surged to the top of the ratings among this city's 44 stations, but analysts wonder whether its success among listeners will carry clout with advertisers.
"People truly familiar with the market will jump," said Manuel Reyes, media buyer for La Agencia de Orsi in Los Angeles.
The Hispanic ad agency has been buying time on the station, KLAX, for Pepsico's Kentucky Fried Chicken and for Nestle since October.
"Mainstream agencies whose clients serve the general population are not likely to jump on the bandwagon."


Ackerley Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A First for American?
Japan's tradition-steeped world of sumo has gone eight months with no one considered worthy to hold its most exalted rank, and the next yokozuna (grand champion) probably won't be Japanese.
The American CHAD ROWAN moved into position yesterday to become the first foreigner to gain that rank by winning his second straight tournament, in Tokyo.
The 23-year-old Rowan, known in the ring as AKEBONO, would set a record for the fastest rise to the top -- 30 tournaments since his 1988 debut.


Health-Mor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Market Place; Investors seem to be paying irrational prices for LTV shares.
AMONG the many theories on Wall Street's workings, few have the devoted following of the Efficient Market Hypothesis.
Under this belief -- wildly popular among free marketeers and academicians -- the markets are simply one giant brain, absorbing all information and expectations before spitting out a value for a security.
Operating with that hypothesis, no stock can be priced incorrectly.
The market becomes a seamless entity binding knowledge and value, a thing of beauty with a perfection rarely found even in nature.


QUOTATION OF THE DAY
He is probably the only person ever to have been appointed to the Supreme Court who would have had a place in American history before his appointment. -- JAMES O. FREEDMAN, President of Dartmouth and former clerk to Thurgood Marshall.  [ B9:2. ]


Marshall Is Remembered as More Than a Justice
Those who worked closely with Justice Thurgood Marshall -- his law clerks, colleagues on the bench and fellow lawyers -- remembered him yesterday as a larger-than-life presence who left a lasting imprint on the nation, as well as on their personal lives and careers.
And admirers from President Clinton on down said it was hard to single out Justice Marshall's most significant contribution to American society, because those contributions seemed endless.


Review/Theater; A Family Victimized By Its Own Confusion
In "The Years," by Cindy Lou Johnson, sudden unforeseeable events drastically alter lives.
A young woman is robbed on a lonely ridge near her home.
The mugging, which takes place on the woman's wedding day, leaves her in a state of disorientation.
Her confusion lasts almost to the end of the play, a convoluted tale about siblings and cousins who live their lives without a sense of direction or destination.
Does change come through choice or chance?
Ms.
Johnson's answer is as elusive as her narrative.
One point she is evidently trying to make is that people are trapped not only by their past mistakes and but also by the actions of their parents.
For these characters, life can be as uncontrollable as a runaway roller coaster.
As the play (at the Manhattan Theater Club) veers from eccentric comedy to pathos, the theatrical role model it evokes is Beth Henley's "Crimes of the Heart." But where Ms.
Henley made us care deeply about her people, those in Ms.
Johnson's family play quickly wear out their welcome.


Bay State Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Theater; The Ties That Bind And Bind Too Tightly
In "A Distance From Calcutta" the playwright P. J. Barry returns to the imaginary town of Jericho, R.I., modeled on the place of his childhood, to explore the battles of another of those families that intrigue him: families whose members find their competition with one another so engrossing they scarcely notice, until it is too late, that they may be doing irreparable damage to people outside their ranks.
The characters in this, the 8th of what Mr.
Barry intends to be a 12-play Jericho cycle, are tough and fascinating and the dialogue is often rich, cutting and witty.
But as in some of his other plays, the plot of this one takes a long first act getting itself gathered together before it sprints to a conclusion in the quick second act.


As Civil War in Angola Intensifies, Pretoria Denies Aiding Rebels
Almost from the moment that Angola began slipping back into civil war after failed elections in September, South Africa has been fending off charges that it was secretly aiding the Angolan rebels led by Jonas Savimbi.
Last week, as Mr.
Savimbi appeared to regain the offensive, retaking his main headquarters from Government troops and besieging the northern towns where Western companies extract Angola's oil, the Angolan Government stepped up its charges that the rebel group's battles are waged with South African help.


Mayors Press Clinton on Promise to Rebuild Nation
Pressing President Clinton on his campaign promise to rebuild America, the nation's mayors have given Administration officials a list of more than 7,000 "ready to go" construction projects that would cost $27 billion and create 400,000 jobs.
The projects, in more than 500 cities, have already received all the local approval necessary and need only Federal money to begin.
They include the building and renovating of schools, jails, housing, streets and highways, bridges, police and fire stations, as well as sewers and waste-water treatment plants.
The mayors estimated that $13 billion would be needed to begin these projects, most of which would take more than a year to complete.


Don't Duck Welfare Reform
The Health and Human Services Department administers hundreds of programs ranging from early childhood education to public health.
But nothing the department does will be more important this year than overseeing the nation's welfare and health care systems -- both of which need major overhaul.
That is why Secretary Donna Shalala's testimony during Senate confirmation hearings was dismaying.
She displayed knowledge of neither subject and, in the case of welfare reform, shocking indifference.
Mr.
Clinton has turned health care reform over to a White House-run task force on which Ms.
Shalala will play an important but supporting role.
That is only proper.
The new President has made health care reform a top priority, worthy of White House direction.


Wright Stands Tall, But Hall Falls Short
Having inherited the unfortunate responsibility of defending the honor and dwindling glory of the Big East Conference -- hey, somebody had to do it -- the Seton Hall Pirates did their part today.
But after building a 5-point lead with less than 11 minutes to play against the North Carolina Tar Heels, before a sellout crowd at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, the Pirates' fortunes turned sour.
Imperfections that had been partly obscured by their own effort, and by North Carolina's first-half struggle, became decisive factors in the final minutes of the 70-66 Tar Heel victory.


William Francis Seifried Fire Chief, 73
William Francis Seifried, who retired in 1972 as the highest ranking uniformed member of the New York City Fire Department with the title of Chief in Charge, died on Thursday at Anderson Memorial Hospital in Anderson, S.C.
He was 73 and lived in Salem, S.C.
He died of cancer of the spine, said his wife, the former Joan Brown.


In Marshall's Own Words
ON SEGREGATION "The trouble with the doctrine of separate but equal  [ is that it ]  assumes that two things are equal." -- Argument before the Supreme Court in Brown v.
Board of Education (1954)


CHRONICLE
A United States Senator from Hawaii, the Brooklyn-born chief rabbi of an Israeli West Bank community, and an organization of disabled Israeli war veterans will receive the 10th annual Defender of Jerusalem Awards.
The $100,000 prize that will be divided among the recipients will be presented by the Jabotinsky Foundation Thursday at the Plaza Hotel.
The foundation is named for Vladimir Jabotinsky, a Zionist, philosopher and mentor of many Israeli leaders.
Being honored this year are Senator DANIEL K. INOUYE , Democrat of Hawaii, Rabbi SHLOMO RISKIN , founder of the settlement of Efrat on the West Bank, where he is described as a peace-keeper and arbitrator between Jews and Palestinians, and the Zahal Disabled Veterans Organization, which operates two sports, rehabilitation and social centers in Tel Aviv and Haifa and is building a facility in Jerusalem.


Cram Comes Out of Nowhere, Runs Off With the Miami Mile
When Steve Cram awoke today to participate in the elite mile portion of the American Airlines Miami Mile, he was told to expect windy, cloudy weather for the race.
"Great," said Cram, the world- record holder in the mile.
"I hope it rains, snows, you name it. The worse it is, the better."


Paperhandlers Reject Proposed Contract
The union representing paperhandlers at The New York Times voted yesterday not to ratify an agreement that its leadership reached with the newspaper in December.
The union, the Paperhandlers and Straighteners' Union No. 1, represents workers who receive newsprint rolls and prepare them for the presses.
The paperhandlers will continue to work under the terms of their current contract, which expires on March 30, according to Nancy Nielsen, a spokeswoman for The Times.


Devils' Failure Explained In Missing Persons Report
There was a valid reason that the negatives overshadowed the positives by a wide margin for New Jersey on Saturday night, but the Devils offered no excuses for their 7-5 loss to the Bruins at Boston Garden.
As the Devils played without five regulars because of injuries and illness, lack of communication between the forwards and defensemen was clearly a problem for New Jersey and its goalie, Chris Terreri.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Jan. 12 about a group of Saudi investors that bought a $100 million stake in Saks Fifth Avenue misstated the relationship between Investcorp, the Bahrain-based investment company that controls Saks, and Gucci S.p.A., the luxury goods retailer.
Investcorp owns a 50 percent stake in Gucci; Maurizio Gucci owns the other 50 percent.


Risk-Shy Utilities Avoid Trading Emission Credits
When Congress amended the Clean Air Act in 1990, backers said the law would cut $1 billion a year from the cost of reducing pollution, introducing free-market efficiencies to a command-and-control system by letting utilities trade "emissions allowances" among themselves.
So far, though, the market is a nonstarter.
With the first deadline looming, only a few trades have been announced, and the terms of those have not been made public.
As a result, utilities owning more than 15,000 megawatts of coal-fired power stations, nearly 20 percent of the affected total, have decided to build "scrubbers" without a clear idea of how much it would cost to meet their obligations by buying the allowances instead.
Benefits Unclear to Industry
Utilities are also unsure how much they could have earned by building extra scrubbers and "overcomplying" with the law, for which they would receive credits that they could sell to other companies.


Comptek Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Pop and Jazz in Review
Jackie Cain and Roy Kral The Chestnut Room Tavern on the Green


Review/Rock; Throwing a Tantrum That Speaks for Youth
One of rock music's uses is to proclaim what listeners can't muster the courage or the words to say themselves.
In songs that articulate the frustrated attempts of the young to claim a space in the world, the music's clamor and blast is as important as whatever fragmented lyrics break through.
The sound of sentences forming and falling apart draws youths to rock, because that sound is so much like their daily attempts at self-expression.
At Roseland on Friday night, three bands built a determined cacophony from familiar musical elements, constantly refreshing old notions of rebelliousness.
Flowerhead, from Austin, Tex., wore the long hair and unpretentious clothes of the so-called grunge scene.
But the band's music owed as much to Southern boogie as Pacific Northwest angst, and buoyant harmonies blended with the guitarist Eric Schmitz's sunny riffing to lend some of Flowerhead's songs a poignant sweetness.
"It's not your fault, forgive yourself," sang the vocalist Eric Faust, and the wash of music carried across his message of faith like primal comfort.


Cadmus Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


World Economies


Structural Dynamics Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Guatemala Indians in a Joyful Return From Exile
To the din of firecrackers and welcoming chants, the first organized group of returning Guatemalan war refugees marched into the center of the capital today, four days after they crossed the border from exile camps in Mexico.
About 2,400 people, many of them children born while their parents spent more than a decade in Mexico, made up the first group of returnees.
They were joined by several thousand supporters as they made their way to the plaza in front of the national cathedral and the presidential palace.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Don Grolnick Sweet Basil


Jim Burgess; Tenor, 39
Jim Burgess, a tenor and former disk jockey, died last Monday at his home in Philadelphia.
He was 39.
He died of AIDS, said his companion, Martin Dillon.


Birmingham Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Music; Cleveland In Angry, Eccentric Concerto
There was something impressively economical about the way in which Christoph von Dohnanyi led the Cleveland Orchestra in Carnegie Hall on Saturday night.
Though the program included an almost aggressively eclectic work by Shulamit Ran ("Concert Piece" for piano and orchestra) along with a late-Romantic symphony overflowing with sweet and robust instrumental conversation (Dvorak's Seventh Symphony), nothing was done to excess.
Whatever the music demanded was supplied, leanly and directly.
At times Mr.
Dohnanyi would almost step back and out of the music, letting the orchestra players breath; he could also push them forward, building to climaxes, while still keeping a steady, controlled pace.
Everything was clear; this was smart conducting and the music it produced was muscular and appealing.


Bell Sports reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Vanity Fair Is Doing Nicely, But Out of the Spotlight
How does a magazine become hot? More to the point, how does a hot magazine stay hot?
Vanity Fair, by all accounts the hottest magazine of the 1980's, is confronting those questions.
With its circulation above the magic million mark, its newsstand sales strong and its advertising pages up, it has all the earmarks of an exceedingly healthy magazine.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
American Re Corp., Princeton, N.J., initial public offering of 10.75 million common shares.
Merrill Lynch.


IDB Acquires New Company
IDB Communications Group, a small California telecommunications company that provides international long-distance service for corporations, said Friday that it had agreed to buy TRT Communications Inc. for 4.5 million IDB shares worth about $104.6 million.
The acquisition, which must clear the Federal Communications Commission, follows IDB's acquisition of Worldcom, which was completed in December.
Both companies provide international long-distance telephone, private leased line and telex services.


Chelsea Clinton Can Transfer to Public Schools; Opportunity Unseized
To the Editor:
"Choosing a School for Chelsea" (editorial, Jan. 7) struck a very sad note with me.


Television
NETWORK television has a new series that is an indisputable hit, one that defied expectations and made the conventional wisdom about the industry look silly.
In the process, "Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman," the new CBS drama about a frontier woman doctor, has also redeemed Saturday night for network television.


Chelsea Clinton Can Transfer to Public Schools
To the Editor:
"Choosing a School for Chelsea" (editorial, Jan. 7) is correct in saying that President and Mrs.
Clinton have every right to send their daughter to the school they think is best for her, but that they should have given the public schools serious consideration before deciding.


Sears is reviewing part of its merchandise account.  (That's an agency stampede you hear.)
SEARS, Roebuck &amp; Company will review part of its huge merchandise group account, hiring a prominent consultant to help find an agency for a campaign to convince consumers that Sears sells stylish apparel.
The move will set off a feeding frenzy among the nation's shops, eager to land such a large and prestigious, though challenging, assignment.
The review, disclosed Friday, was not completely unexpected.
For more than a year, analysts have speculated about discord between Sears and Ogilvy &amp; Mather Chicago, which has handled the estimated $250 million to $300 million merchandise group account since a consolidation in 1986.


4 Finalists Vie In Reebok Review
Reebok International Ltd. said that it had narrowed to four finalists a review on its Boks footwear account, handled for the last year by Toth Inc. in Carlisle, Mass.
In addition to Toth, the finalists are three New York-based shops: Ammirati &amp; Puris; Chiat/Day, which handles the company's Reebok brand, and Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated they could reach $10 million.


T2 Medical Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chevron Crop. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sex Adds to Fears of Parents of Retarded
A graying mother in Brooklyn, no stranger to worry, finds herself more troubled than usual in recent months.
Every morning, she buys an armful of newspapers and reads whatever they offer about the ongoing trial across two rivers in Glen Ridge, N.J., a trial that is now in its 15th week.
For her, those papers hold more than abstract headlines about four young men accused of sexually assaulting a retarded young woman with the mental age of a child.
More, too, than the legal debate over whether the girl was capable of consent.
To this mother, the case is her every worry made real.
Tough Issue Made Tougher
"When your daughter is retarded, you think about this kind of thing a lot," said the woman, who would not allow her name to be used because she did not want to violate the privacy of her daughter, who is in her late 20's.
"My daughter is affectionate. She wants to fit in. But she doesn't always know what's acceptable, what signals she might send. I want to give her independence, but I also want to keep her safe at home."


Computer Task Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Allied Healthcare Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mets Hire Wills as Instructor To Get Them Off and Running
The Mets, perhaps the slowest club in the majors in 1992, have turned to a 60-year-old man to become faster.
"I know I can make a difference in games," said Maury Wills.
"Maybe 10 more wins a season."


Gay Couples Also Need Economic Benefits; Indeed a Family
To the Editor:
"Healthy, Gay, Guilt-Stricken: AIDS' Toll on the Virus-Free" (front page, Jan. 11) quotes the comedian Jaffe Cohen: "Half my friends are dead. For a gay man, friends are everything. It's not like we have kids and families."


Sports of The Times; Silver Fox In the Shark Tank
ROLLIE MASSIMINO leaned back in one of the plastic seats in Thomas and Mack Arena and reflected on his new lease on life at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas.
It was Sunday afternoon and, a day earlier, Massimino's 11-1 Rebels had built leads of up to 35 points against visiting Georgetown before settling for a 16-point victory in front of 18,078 fans -- the Rebels' largest crowd since February 1991.
The game was U.N.L.V.'s first nationally televised contest since March 1991 and the audience received an eyeful as U.N.L.V. swept Georgetown away with breakaway dunks and full-court pressure.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Agreed to terms with Luis Polonia, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
National League


Iran to Market a U.S. Cigarette
A hard-line Iranian daily reported today that the Iranian Government would market Winston cigarettes, under the name Bistoon, asserting that it was squandering public money on "the lowliest of consumer goods."
The newspaper, Salam, said the Iranian Tobacco Organization would sell Bistoon cigarettes in an agreement with the R. J. Reynolds Company.
Winston had been the best-selling cigarette brand in Iran.


For Knicks, a Little Assertiveness Goes a Long Way
The Knicks, who will open a four-game homestand with a game Tuesday night against Philadelphia, are indicating that they are becoming a more consistent team.
They have won three consecutive games and four of their last five.
They have broken the 100-point barrier in five consecutive games for the first time this season.
John Starks and Patrick Ewing, who was named the National Basketball Association Player of the Week (Jan. 15-21) today, are asserting themselves offensively.


Business Digest
International  The Big Three auto makers told Federal trade officials that they would seek punitive duties on all imported cars.
The auto makers will charge that foreign cars are being sold illegally in the United States for less than in their home markets.  [ Page A1. ]
The Clinton Administration is said to be looking to undo a secret decision by the Bush Administration to approve a Japanese corporation's purchase of an American computer company.  [ D1. ]
Dozens of Japanese business sectors remain partly closed to foreign companies despite years of negotiations, according to the American Chamber of Commerce in Japan.  [ D2. ]
Iran will market Winston cigarettes in an agreement with R. J. Reynolds, a Teheran newspaper reported.  [ A10. ] Companies  Sears will close its catalogue operations, shut 113 stores and carve 50,000 jobs from its payroll in another revamping meant to halt a decade-long decline in its retail business.  [ A1. ]
American Express's chairman will remain in place and add the title of chairman of the troubled Shearson brokerage subsidiary.
The company's president was named chief executive.  [ D1. ]
Exxon, Chevron, Amoco and ARCO reported strong profits as oil prices and oil stocks surged amid talk of cuts in OPEC production and the imposition of a U.S. energy tax.  [ D5. ]
Domestic vehicle sales rose 15 percent in mid-January, short of the robust activity that the industry had been anticipating.  [ D5. ]
A reported plan by General Motors to sell class E shares or a stake in E.D.S. was looked upon favorably by analysts.  [ D5. ]
The founder of a venture to build the world's fastest computer is closing his company after I.B.M. ended its support.  [ D5. ]
Pacific Bell is undertaking a $1 billion plan to further modernize its local telephone service by 1997.  [ D5. ]
Olympia &amp; York's unsecured creditors approved an orderly liquidation of the company's bankrupt Canadian operations.  [ D6. ]
Motorola denied that cellular phones posed health risks, and said that safety concerns would have no impact on sales.  [ D7. ]
Westwood One has agreed to sell WYNY-FM, the New York country music station, for $50 million to a Chicago group.  [ D23. ]
The businessman who agreed to buy The New York Post has an uneven financial past, with his wealth climbing dramatically despite frequent lawsuits and battles with regulators.  [ A1. ] The Economy  Proposals for a new energy tax drew unenthusiastic responses from lawmakers and industry officials, and President Clinton said he was still undecided on the idea.  [ D1. ]
The Chicago Board of Trade agreed to acquire the New York Commodity Exchange in the face of rising competition.  [ D1. ]
Telecommunications companies and law-enforcement agencies are stepping up counterattacks on computer hackers.  [ B1. ] Markets  The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond fell to its lowest level in six years as hopes of deficit reduction rose.  [ D1. ]
Stocks posted their best performance of the year, with several averages setting records.
The Dow gained 35.39, to 3,292.20.  [ D10. ]
Crude oil prices soared on talks of OPEC production cuts and a domestic consumption tax.  [ D20. ]  The dollar declined on worry over high foreign interest rates.
Gold rose in New York.  [ D20. ] Today's Columns  A sale by General Motors of some class E shares probably would not be a bonanza for investors expecting a takeover of the company's E.D.S. unit.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D10. ]
Advertising time for the Super Bowl is sold out, even though NBC is charging record rates of $850,000 to $900,000 for each of the 56 half-minute spots.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D23. ]


Toronto Sun reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Amoco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Navy Seeks Data on Lung Disorders
Fearing that unsafe work conditions might have exposed thousands of deckhands to lethal dust clouds in the 1970's, the Navy has asked a Federal health agency to conduct a major review of naval personnel records.
At issue is whether hundreds of sailors who have a lung disorder for which Navy doctors could find no cause may instead have a job-related illness.
Such a determination could cost the Navy millions of dollars in damages.


Biotechnology Joint Venture
A New York biotechnology company will announce today that it has entered a strategic alliance with a Japanese pharmaceutical company to develop compounds that stimulate the growth of blood cells.
Up to $35 million for research will be provided to Imclone Systems Inc. by the Chugai Pharmaceutical Company, subject to the successful completion of intermediate steps and product approval in Japan, Imclone said yesterday.


Scherbo Wins Award
VITALY SCHERBO of Belarus, winner of six Olympic gold medals in gymnastics at Barcelona, Spain, has been chosen the recipient of the 1993 Jesse Owens International Trophy Award.


Near or Far? Mystery Grows Over Blasts of Gamma Rays
ASTROPHYSICISTS meeting recently in St.
Louis pondered one of the most recalcitrant enigmas in the heavens: those brief, blazing flashes of gamma rays that appear every few days from somewhere, though never the same place.
After reviewing new satellite observations and debating assorted theories, these experts could not even be sure whether the gamma ray bursters, as they are called, were coming from inside this galaxy, the Milky Way, or from far off toward the edge of the universe.
As long as their origins remain a complete mystery, the nature of the bursters and their importance in cosmic history are likely to elude understanding.


Schwarz to Replace Muti
Gerard Schwarz is to replace Riccardo Muti, who has the flu, in the Philadelphia Orchestra concert on Monday evening at Carnegie Hall.
The program remains unchanged: the New York premiere of Bernard Rands's "Canti dell'Eclissi," with the bass Thomas Paul as soloist; Stravinsky's "Monumentum pro Gesualdo di Venosa," and Brahms's Serenade No. 1 in D. Remaining tickets are $14 to $65.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Frank Freidel, Biographer of F.D.R., Is Dead at 76
Frank Freidel, a noted biographer of President Franklin D. Roosevelt who taught for 26 years at Harvard, died yesterday in the university's Stillman Infirmary in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 76 and lived in Belmont, Mass.
He died of pneumonia and had cancer, his son Paul said.


Pacific Bell Switch Deal Biggest Ever
Pacific Bell, California's main telephone company, said yesterday that it was undertaking an ambitious $1 billion plan to further modernize its local telephone service by 1997.
The project involves the largest contract ever for telephone switching equipment, the powerful computers that can route millions of phone calls a day.
The purchase would lead to wider availability of consumer services, as well as more sophisticated communications capabilities for California's many high-technology industries.


Heart Trouble Puts Futch in Hospital
EDDIE FUTCH, the 81-year-old trainer of heavyweight champion RIDDICK BOWE, was listed in fair condition yesterday after he was hospitalized in East Stroudsburg, Pa., because of a heart problem.
Futch awoke in the morning complaining of a shortness of breath.
He was driven from his hotel in Scotrun, Pa., to the Pocono Medical Center, where he is expected to remain for at least the next two days.


Gates/FA reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


UF Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SUPER BOWL XXVII: TV Sports; The Networks Leave Room for Dessert
For NBC, the Super Bowl is like a luscious creme brulee after a long, dyspeptic dinner.
Having lost about $100 million (including $40 million this season) on its National Football League contract, NBC heads to Pasadena for its first Super Bowl since 1989 in the hope of saving a smidgen of financial face.
NBC paid $752 million in 1990 for four years of N.F.L. games, the lowest outlay of the three networks (ABC paid $900 million and CBS paid $1.06 billion).
According to network insiders, NBC has valued the Super Bowl at $40 million.
There is no N.F.L.-specified Super Bowl rights fee, and a network can allocate its Super Bowl fee in any way it wishes.
To balance the $40 million cost, NBC is charging $850,000 for 30-second commercial spots during the game.
Anticipating 56 units in the game, that would total $45.9 million, a figure that is reduced to $40 million after advertising agency commissions, and perhaps to $39 million after production costs.


Insight; Strickly by Mail
When Sears announced yesterday that it was leaving the catalogue business after 100 years, investors searching for the major beneficiaries immediately alighted on Fingerhut.
Unlike J.C.
Penney, which has larger sales by mail but also a huge network of stores, Fingerhut is the third-largest catalogue company, and little else.


Jones Laterals to Johnson, Who Laterals to Jones
The current Dallas Cowboys are about oil and money, about plans first hatched in Jerry Jones's University of Arkansas dormitory room.
They are about Coach Jimmy Johnson's platinum hair and his supposedly superior 162 I.Q.
They are about young, unflappable players who see the Super Bowl as just another television game of the week.
"Experience? How much experience do you need to play in a Super Bowl?" asked Dallas running back Emmitt Smith tonight.
"I've been running the ball my whole life. What more experience do I need?"


Thompson Opens An Office in Vietnam
In anticipation of the lifting of America's trade embargo with Vietnam, the J. Walter Thompson Company said it had opened a representative office in Hanoi and formed an agreement with that country's national advertising agency, Vinexad, which has offices in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City.
Alex McKinnon was named to head the operation, as a liaison officer.
Alan Fairnington, president of Thompson's Asia-Pacific operation in Hong Kong, declined to identify clients planning to advertise in Vietnam because of the intense competition developing in that market.


Distinguished Others
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 5 graphic on the 103d Congress identifies senators and representatives of Asian-Pacific ancestry under "Race and Ethnicity" as "other." Japanese-Americans are proud of Senators Daniel Inouye, Daniel Akaka and Representatives Norman Mineta, Robert Matsui and Patsy Mink.
We welcome to Congress Jay Kim and the other unidentified person of color, Ben Night Horse Campbell.
LILLIAN C. KIMURA National President Japanese American Citizens League Bloomfield, N.J., Jan. 8, 1993


In Wood and in Words, The Art Is in the Details
JIM R. GRAY looks like one tough son of a farmer.
He talks tough, though not salty.
His hands are tough, very strong and scarred, not like the pasty paws of, say, a newspaper writer.


Fastenal Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chicago Board of Trade Agrees to Acquire Comex
The Chicago Board of Trade, the world's leading financial and agricultural futures market, said today that it had reached a preliminary agreement to acquire the troubled Commodity Exchange Inc. of New York.
The merger would be the first in which New York and Chicago financial exchanges set aside historic rivalries to unite against growing competition from overseas and from customized off-exchange deals between banks and other financial institutions.


Classical Music in Review
Moscow String Quartet
Washington Irving High School
The Moscow String Quartet, an all-woman group from Russia, fought an uphill battle on Saturday evening.
The ensemble's sound is not particularly lush, and in Mozart's Quartet in D (K. 575) the liveliness of the players' phrasing did not entirely counterbalance their slightly rough, occasionally squeaky tone.
The school auditorium's uncongenial acoustics gave them little support.


Review/Television; Palestinian Perspective On West Bank Life
"Journey to the Occupied Lands" gives a Palestinian-eye view of life under military occupation.
Farmers tell Michael Ambrosino, the producer and reporter of the 90-minute documentary, of having their property confiscated for military purposes or for the benefit of Jewish settlers, and of enduring daily harassment by the authorities.
Particular attention is paid to the 100,000 Jewish settlers who now live on the West Bank and in Gaza, with 50,000 more on the way.
Assisted by state subsidies, they have built attractive suburban communities with amenities beyond the reach of most Palestinians.
The camera pans slowly to give a sense of the settlements' size and the way they have changed the landscape.
An Israeli official calls the sites "state land," but a Palestinian negotiator in the current peace talks says, "All the settlements are illegal."


MERRILL LYNCH &amp; CO. (N)
Even if Merrill Lynch &amp; Company did not break $1 billion in profits, as some on Wall Street had predicted six months ago, the company's performance in 1992 was one for the books.
With earnings of $893.8 million, Merrill Lynch saw its annual results jump by more than 28 percent over the $696.1 million posted in 1991, its previous record.
Merrill Lynch finished the year with a strong quarter, as did many Wall Street firms.
For the fourth quarter, the brokerage firm's profits rose 30 percent from the comparable period in 1991, to $221.4 million.


The Basement Sacked Talley
Either Darryl Talley is a great storyteller, or he is incredibly accident-prone.
Talley, a linebacker for Buffalo, showed up for practice last Tuesday with 15 stiches in his tongue and the inside of his mouth.
Talley's story is so ridiculous, it almost has to be true:


Detroit Edison reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BELLSOUTH CO. (N)
Despite an increase in quarterly revenue for cellular telephone service, the BellSouth Corporation's earnings were hurt by a sharp rise in operating expenses.
Such costs rose 7.5 percent in the fourth quarter, to $3.2 billion, from $2.98 billion a year earlier.
Wireless communications revenue for cellular and paging devices rose 44 percent, to $334 million.
Local-service revenue rose 10 percent, to $1.59 billion.
As a result, Bell South's fourth-quarter earnings dropped 8.7 percent, to $353.4 million, or 72 cents a share.
"In the face of increasing competition and sweeping technological change," John L. Clendenin, BellSouth's chairman and chief executive, said in a prepared statement, "our telephone access lines grew at a faster rate than any other Bell holding company, and our cellular business capped a terrific year with an impressive holiday selling season."


Republicans Lining Up to Challenge Cuomo
In May 1990, after being turned down by dozens of potential gubernatorial candidates, desperate Republican Party officials came across the name of Pierre A. Rinfret in a Manhattan district leader's address book.
Within a week, they had nominated the bombastic economist and political neophyte at their state convention.
In an election that many Republicans consider a humiliating low point for their once grand old state party, Mr.
Rinfret finished 32 percentage points behind Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and less than 1 percentage point ahead of the Conservative Party candidate, Herbert I. London.
A Potentially Large Field
Less than three years later, more than a dozen Republicans from all corners of the state are considering the 1994 race for Governor.
They include past and present members of Congress, legislators from both the Senate and Assembly, businessmen, lawyers and professors.


Classical Music in Review
Cleveland String Quartet
Alice Tully Hall
Listening to some of the Cleveland String Quartet's early recordings, and then hearing them on Sunday afternoon, one cannot help but be struck by the ensemble's growth.
Granted, there have been a few personnel changes during the group's 24-year history.
Its current roster includes William Preucil and Peter Salaff, violinists; James Dunham, violist, and Paul Katz, cellist; only Mr.
Salaff and Mr.
Katz remain from the original lineup.
Still, in the quartet's current performances there is an easygoing, natural flow that was not there early on.


Ex-Communists Keep Key Posts in Slovenia
Slovenia got a new coalition Government today, approved by the 90-member Parliament constituted by national elections last month.
Politicians in Ljubljana reached by telephone said that the key members of the Cabinet are all former Communists whose program is essentially the same as that of the Slovenian leadership of three years ago, when the republic was still part of the Yugoslav federation.


Inter-Tel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Parkvale Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Policy Management Systems Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Variety Is The Spice Of Success For Bills
When Ted Marchibroda resigned as the Bills' offensive coordinator to become the Indianapolis Colts' head coach, everyone thought Buffalo's potent offense, characterized by the no-huddle scheme and prolific point production, would languish.
And after Bills Coach Marv Levy promoted the offensive line coach, Tom Bresnahan, to offensive coordinator to replace Marchibroda, whose background was working with quarterbacks, it looked as if the Buffalo offense would definitely take a turn to the right.
Everyone expected Bresnahan to hold to the conservative credo of most offensive line coaches -- run the ball,


Nature Offers a Rude Welcome


Premark International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Review/Music; An Austrian Baritone Makes New York Debut In All-German Recital
By the time the Austrian baritone Wolfgang Holzmair finished singing the Schubert selections in his New York debut recital at the Frick Museum on Sunday afternoon, it was clear that his is a remarkable voice and a remarkable talent.
The art of the lied is an art of compression: each vowel is an expression of deep sentiment; each vocal leap bears the weight of an operatic plot.
And that was how, in these songs, Mr.
Holzmair treated Schubert.
His baritone was warm and nuanced, his registers seamlessly integrated; playfulness and dread could combine in the same phrase.
But there was also a natural simplicity to the singing; there were no emotional ornaments imposed upon the line.
Interpretations were focused and refined; each song left a distinctive musical afterglow.
And if there were times, later in the recital, when the almost youthful confidence of the singer could mute intricate dramatic impact, there was still no doubt about the rare accomplishments Mr.
Holzmair showed in this rarefied art form.


Court Discourages Late Claims of Innocence From Death Row
The Supreme Court ruled today that a state death row inmate who presents belated evidence of innocence is not ordinarily entitled to a new hearing in Federal court before being executed.
The Court's 6-to-3 decision left open the prospect that "truly persuasive" evidence with an "extraordinarily high" chance of success might merit an exception to the general rule.


JOINTS CHIEFS HEAR CLINTON AGAIN VOW TO EASE GAY POLICY
The Joint Chiefs of Staff today took their objections to lifting the ban on homosexuals in the armed forces to the White House, but President Clinton told them that he would not reverse his campaign pledge to end the ban, Administration and military officials said.
In their first meeting with Mr.
Clinton, Gen.
Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, his vice chairman and the commanders of the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marines told Mr.
Clinton that his proposals would seriously undermine morale and discipline, disrupt military readiness and threaten recruiting, the officials said.


Robinson Finds Minutes Few and Far Between
Of all the players in the Nets' locker room, none is more charming than guard Rumeal Robinson.
His smile could power all of Manhattan.
He is smart, cares about the world outside of basketball and is extremely friendly.
And talking to him these days, one might not notice that Rumeal Robinson is fighting for his basketball life.
Again.
This is the same man who as a Michigan junior made two free throws on national television in the final second of overtime against Seton Hall to give the Wolverines their first National Collegiate Athletic Association championship.
But that sort of pressure must seem like nothing to Robinson now.
Playing time -- simply referred to as minutes by players and coaches -- is the blood supply of players.
If that's the case, Robinson's supply is rapidly dwindling, with more of his minutes going to 16-year veteran Maurice Cheeks.


Varian Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Ashland Coal Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Post Suitor Heads an Empire Often Besieged by Regulators
Steven Hoffenberg, who suddenly emerged as the possible purchaser of The New York Post, built a small credit business into a financial services conglomerate with $684 million in assets and along the way triggered frequent lawsuits and battles with Federal and state securities regulators.
Mr.
Hoffenberg tentatively agreed to buy the newspaper from Peter S. Kalikow yesterday, provided that he can reach an agreement with creditors and unions in the next 30 days.
Under the complicated deal, he agreed to cover any of the newspaper's losses during that period, assuring that it will have an adequate cash flow.  [ Page B3. ] 'Post Will Be Profitable'
The purchase would represent the first involvement in a newspaper for Mr.
Hoffenberg, the chairman of the Towers Financial Corporation, a credit business that buys accounts receivable at a discount.


Abington Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


McKesson Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Silver Fox In the Shark Tank
ROLLIE MASSIMINO leaned back in one of the plastic seats in Thomas and Mack Arena and reflected on his new lease on life at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas.
It was Sunday afternoon and, a day earlier, Massimino's 11-1 Rebels had built leads of up to 35 points against visiting Georgetown before settling for a 16-point victory in front of 18,078 fans -- the Rebels' largest crowd since February 1991.
The game was U.N.L.V.'s first nationally televised contest since March 1991 and the audience received an eyeful as U.N.L.V. swept Georgetown away with breakaway dunks and full-court pressure.


A Trip Straight Out of Brooklyn To the Sundance Film Festival
Leslie Harris, the director and screenwriter of "Just Another Girl on the IRT," sat in a nondescript coffeehouse this morning on Main Street of this lush ski resort, staring at the snow-covered slopes and the army of skiers parading past.
"Far cry from Brooklyn," she said with a laugh.


Uni-Marts Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Metro-Richelieu reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 19


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  DETROIT'S NEW ASSAULT
The Big Three auto makers told Federal trade officials that they would seek punitive duties on all imported cars.
The auto makers will charge that foreign cars are being sold illegally in the United States for less than in their home markets.
A1  U.S.
ATTACKS SOMALI FIGHTERS
Using helicopters, rockets and machine guns, American and Belgian forces in Somalia attacked factional fighters headed toward a southern city, officials said.
A U.S.
Marine was later shot dead in Mogadishu.
A3


Rally Drops Long Bond Yield to 6-Year Low
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond fell to its lowest level in six years yesterday in a bond-market rally touched off by comments of Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bensten over the weekend that raised hopes of deficit reduction.
Appearing Sunday on NBC News's "Meet the Press," Mr.
Bentsen said the Clinton Administration was likely to propose increased taxes on energy consumption.
He suggested that a broad-based tax on energy was the leading option.


Review/Fashion; In Lacroix's Hands, Couture Still Dazzles
The answer was evident at the Christian Lacroix show, one of the first of the spring-summer haute couture openings over the weekend: sufficient talent makes many solutions possible.
The question, which dominates conversations with couturiers, their backers and clients, is, "Is couture viable?"
In other words, are handmade clothes relevant 150 years after the invention of the sewing machine?
Is the opulence typical of couture clothes obsolete?
Should streamlined shapes and easy-care materials take over in a mechanized world?


Helping the Bidders for Soviet Scientists
To the Editor:
"World-Class Research for a Song" (Business Day, Jan. 11), on Russian scientists, fails to mention the Soviet Scientists Immigration Act of 1992, signed into law by President Bush last Oct. 24.


Challenger to Florio Will Pay Back Taxes for Illegal Aliens
Christine Todd Whitman will pay back taxes totaling about $25,000 for two illegal aliens she employed to care for her children for about four years, according to a supporter involved in settling the matter.
The supporter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said Mrs.
Whitman or her representative would pay the back taxes to the Internal Revenue Service on Tuesday.
The next day, she plans to announce her candidacy for the Republican nomination for Governor.


Review/Film; A Village's Pogrom and Its Wider Resonances
"Get Thee Out," the new Russian film opening today at the Walter Reade Theater, examines anti-Semitism in czarist Russia, the exact time being unspecified though it seems to be around the turn of the century.
It's the first feature to be directed by Dimitri Astrakhan, a St.
Petersburg theater director who was born in 1957 and is himself a Jew.
The screenplay, by Oleg Danilov and Mr.
Astrakhan, is based on stories by Sholem Aleichem, Isaac Babel and A. Kuprin.
Yet the film has a completely contemporary sensibility as it tells the story of Motl, a proud dairy farmer, the patriarch of the only Jewish family in his village, when he is faced by a state-backed pogrom.
Mr.
Astrakhan is less interested in Jewish culture than in the ways in which racism serves the purposes of nationalism.


Dow Jumps 35.39, to 3,292.20, on Stocks' Best Day This Year
A sharp run-up in the bond market propelled stocks to their best performance of the year yesterday, with several averages setting records.
Investors and strategists cheered Clinton Administration suggestions to reduce Government borrowing costs and impose an energy tax to trim the deficit.
The New York Stock Exchange composite index rose 2.06 points, to 242.47, and the Nasdaq composite index gained 5.32 points, to 706.95, both records.


20-Year Term for Woman In Death of Exxon Chief
Irene J. Seale was sentenced to 20 years in prison today for her part in the fatal kidnapping last year of a top Exxon executive, Sidney J. Reso.
The court rejected her argument that she was a battered wife who was forced into the crime by her husband, Arthur, but recognized her quick and full cooperation with law-enforcement officials after her capture.
Before she was sentenced, Mrs.
Seale read aloud, through tears, part of a letter she had sent to Judge Garrett E. Brown Jr. of Federal District Court, telling how she hopes to turn her life around and work with abused women and those in prison.


SUPER BOWL XXVII: TV Sports; The Networks Leave Room for Dessert
For NBC, the Super Bowl is like a luscious creme brulee after a long, dyspeptic dinner.
Having lost about $100 million (including $40 million this season) on its National Football League contract, NBC heads to Pasadena for its first Super Bowl since 1989 in the hope of saving a smidgen of financial face.
NBC paid $752 million in 1990 for four years of N.F.L. games, the lowest outlay of the three networks (ABC paid $900 million and CBS paid $1.06 billion).
According to network insiders, NBC has valued the Super Bowl at $40 million.
There is no N.F.L.-specified Super Bowl rights fee, and a network can allocate its Super Bowl fee in any way it wishes.
To balance the $40 million cost, NBC is charging $850,000 for 30-second commercial spots during the game.
Anticipating 56 units in the game, that would total $45.9 million, a figure that is reduced to $40 million after advertising agency commissions, and perhaps to $39 million after production costs.


Ashland Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Multibank Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Public Relations Executive Changes
Two large public relations agencies yesterday announced reorganizations of their management structures involving the departures of top executives.
Mary R. Trudel, who is 47, resigned her positions at the Rowland Company, where she had been president and chief executive of the New York office and chief operating officer for the Americas of Rowland Worldwide.


Jones Laterals to Johnson, Who Laterals to Jones
The current Dallas Cowboys are about oil and money, about plans first hatched in Jerry Jones's University of Arkansas dormitory room.
They are about Coach Jimmy Johnson's platinum hair and his supposedly superior 162 I.Q.
They are about young, unflappable players who see the Super Bowl as just another television game of the week.
"Experience? How much experience do you need to play in a Super Bowl?" asked Dallas running back Emmitt Smith tonight.
"I've been running the ball my whole life. What more experience do I need?"


Quirot Gives Birth
The Olympic runner ANA FIDELIA QUIROT, who is hospitalized with severe burns, has given birth to a baby girl, doctors said yesterday.
The birth, which was artificially induced, took place Sunday.
The baby was in perfect health, and the birth did not affect the health of Quirot, 29, who remained in critical but stable condition in a Havana hospital.


Foundation Health reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Investor Nears Agreement On Sale of New York Post
After days in the shadow of death, The New York Post gained a new but relatively short lease on life yesterday when a wealthy businessman agreed to buy the newspaper and to cover any losses it might incur over the next four weeks while he tries to put together a deal to save it.
Concluding another hectic day of meetings and negotiations with lawyers and bankers, Peter S. Kalikow, The Post's owner, said last night that he and the prospective buyer, Steven Hoffenberg, had hammered out a complex plan that would transfer ownership of the debt-ridden, 191-year-old tabloid, if financing and other arrangements can be completed.
The legal documents were signed late last night.


Holman's Run at Mile
STEVE HOLMAN, the latest in a long line of potentially great American milers, has studied JIM RYUN, MARTY LIQUOURI and others who have turned his 22-year-old life into a bundle of expectations.
"I'm still trying to find out about the mile mystique," Holman said at a track writers' luncheon yesterday.
"It's just three laps and a kick. It seems fairly straightforward to me."


Gerber Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


River Life Through U.S. Broadly Degraded
TWO decades of Federal controls have sharply reduced the vast outflows of sewage and industrial chemicals into America's rivers and streams, yet the life they contain may be in deeper trouble than ever.
The main threat now comes not from pollution but from humans' physical and ecological transformation of rivers and the land through which they flow.
The result, scientists say, is that the nation's running waters are getting biologically poorer all the time and that entire riverine ecosystems have become highly imperiled.


Compromise Likely to Take Macedonia Into U.N.
A yearlong international controversy over the name under which a former Yugoslav republic should be admitted to the United Nations appears close to resolution on the basis of an awkward-looking compromise.
Foreign Minister Michalis Papaconstantinou of Greece said today that his Government was ready in principle to accept a plan drawn up by France, Britain and Spain, the three European Community members of the Security Council, under which the Council would offer Macedonia membership in the United Nations as the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.


Network Computing Devices reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
SEXUALITY AND THE MENTALLY RETARDED
Issues of relationships and sexuality are difficult for any parent.
For parents of the mentally and emotionally disabled, those issues sometimes seem impossible.
The confusion is made worse by the fact that the expert thinking on the subject keeps changing.
For decades, doctors, therapists and families did not even speak of sexuality and the mentally retarded.
Then, in recent years, sexual expression has come to be seen as a right.
A1.
More testimony in Glen Ridge assault case.
B4.
NEW YORK CITY POST'S RESCUER'S FINANCIAL DEALINGS
Steven Hoffenberg, who suddenly emerged as the possible buyer of The New York Post, built a small credit business into a nearly $700 million financial services company and along the way set off frequent lawsuits and battles with Federal and state securities regulators.
A1.
TRANSFERRING OWNERSHIP OF THE POST
The New York Post has gained a new but relatively short lease on life as a wealthy businessman has agreed to buy the newspaper and to cover any losses it might incur over the next four weeks while he tries to put a deal together to save it.
Peter S. Kalikow, The Post's owner, said that he and the prospective buyer, Steven Hoffenberg, had hammered out a complex plan to transfer ownership of the debt-ridden, 191-year-old tabloid.
B3.
HOSPITAL PLANS ADDITION
The New York Hospital will construct a 776-bed building on a platform above the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive, between 68th and 70th Streets, under a proposal approved by the City Planning Commission.
The hospital plans to start construction in April and complete the 12-story, $908 million building in 1998.
B3.
REGION SENTENCING IN KIDNAPPING
Irene J. Seale was sentenced to 20 years in prison for her part in the fatal kidnapping last year of a top Exxon executive, Sidney J. Reso.
The court rejected her argument that she was a battered wife who was forced into the crime by her husband, Arthur, but recognized her quick and full cooperation with law-enforcement officials after her capture.
B5.
PAYMENT FOR BACK TAXES
Christine Todd Whitman will pay back taxes totaling about $25,000 for two illegal aliens she employed to care for her children for about four years, according to a supporter involved in the process of settling the matter.
After making the payment, she is expected to formally announce her candidacy for the Republican nomination for Governor of New Jersey.
B5.
RETIREMENT PACKAGE IS CHALLENGED
Calling a $963,000 retirement package for a Long Island school superintendent illegal and excessive, State Attorney General Robert Abrams has filed suit to void the contract and recoup most of the money.
The award to Dr.
Edward J. Murphy, a public employee for 42 years who retired as superintendent of the Board of Cooperative Educational Services in Suffolk County in October, was among the largest in state history and created an immediate political uproar.B5.
Our Towns by Andrew H. Malcolm B5 Chronicle B4 Neediest Cases B4


Tandycrafts Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Abrams Sues to Void Retirement Deal for School Official
Calling a $963,000 retirement package for a Long Island school superintendent illegal and excessive, State Attorney General Robert Abrams filed suit today to void the contract and recoup most of the money.
The retirement award to Dr.
Edward J. Murphy, a public employee for 42 years who retired as superintendent of the Board of Cooperative Educational Services (Boces) in Suffolk County in October, was among the largest in state history and created an immediate political uproar.


Rebels Lose Liberian Airport
West African peace enforcers have captured Liberia's main airport from rebels, soldiers from the multinational intervention force said today.
There was no immediate confirmation from the headquarters of the six-nation West African army in Monrovia, the capital.
But the rebel radio controlled by Charles Taylor, the guerrilla leader, also reported that the multinational force had seized Roberts Field International Airport, 28 miles outside Monrovia, on Saturday.


U.S. Attacks Rebels in Somalia; Marine Is Slain Later
United States-led forces today attacked rebel troops who were said to be advancing toward the southern city of Kismayu, the first use of military intervention to enforce a cease-fire in this shattered country, American officials said.
In Mogadishu tonight, an American marine was shot and killed while on patrol, the Pentagon said.
During the attack against the rebels, four Cobra helicopters of the United States 10th Mountain Division fired anti-tank rockets, cannons and machine guns at the forces of Gen.
Mohammed Siad Hersi Morgan, a former Defense Minister and son-in-law of the ousted dictator, Mohammed Siad Barre, said Col.
Fred Peck of the Marines.


Ohio Casualty reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Independence Bancorp reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Patterns
New Products Under the Sun
Despite warnings from dermatologists that exposure to the sun damages skin, many people still spend hours on the beach in search of the perfect tan.
For the beauty industry, that results in more than $500 million a year in sales of sun-care products.


An Academic Perch Gives Shape to the City


Oshkosh Truck reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gay Couples Also Need Economic Benefits; Clinton Should Proceed
To the Editor:
In "Gays in the Military: Cancel Reagan's Ban" (Op-Ed, Jan. 14), James T. Bush appears to draw a distinction between declaring one's homosexuality and engaging in homosexual acts.
Such a distinction promotes a double standard between heterosexuality and homosexuality.


Company Briefs
ARCHER-DANIELS-MIDLAND CO., Des Moines, an agricultural products company, will pay a $1 million fine to settle a lawsuit over air and water pollution violations.
ASHLAND OIL INC., Ashland, Ky., said its Ashland Petroleum unit had signed a definitive agreement to sell the assets of its TPT inland barge operations for $24.4 million to Dixie Carriers Inc., a subsidiary of Houston-based Kirby Corp.
BETHLEHEM STEEL CORP., Bethlehem, Pa., said it would increase prices on its hot- and cold-rolled sheet steel by $20 a ton on April 4.
The increase follows price rises announced last week by the steel units of LTV and USX.
MINORCO S.A., Luxembourg, backed Charter Consolidated P.L.C.'s plan to sell its 38.4 percent stake in Johnson Metthey P.L.C.
Minorco holds a 36 percent stake in Charter Consolidated.
NATIONAL SEMICONDUCTOR CORP., Santa Clara, Calif., is entering the wireless communications market with a new family of chips for use in products like portable and cellular telephones and pocket communicators.


Chesapeake Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CATERPILLAR INC. (N)
Pressure on sales in overseas markets, particularly in Europe and Brazil, was the primary problem in the fourth quarter for Caterpillar Inc.
The company, which had a five-month strike in 1992, reported a loss for all of 1992 of $2.43 billion.
But the largest part of the deficit -- $2.24 billion -- came from three new accounting standards that were effective Jan. 1, which complicated the earnings picture.
Excluding the effects of the new accounting standards, the company lost $190 million in 1992.
Revenues for the year were flat, at $10.19 billion.
About half of the year's loss was attributable to the company's Brazilian operations, the company said.


Unocal Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Armor All Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


It's Meadowlands North, as Parcells Hires Perkins
While Dan Reeves was apparently getting ready yesterday to sign on as the new Giants coach, two former Giants coaches were agreeing on a reunion in New England.
The reunion took effect when Bill Parcells, a former coach of the Giants and the newly named coach of the Patriots, hired Ray Perkins as his new offensive coordinator and quarterbacks coach.


Sports of The Times; Silver Fox In the Shark Tank
ROLLIE MASSIMINO leaned back in one of the plastic seats in Thomas and Mack Arena and reflected on his new lease on life at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas.
It was Sunday afternoon and, a day earlier, Massimino's 11-1 Rebels had built leads of up to 35 points against visiting Georgetown before settling for a 16-point victory in front of 18,078 fans -- the Rebels' largest crowd since February 1991.
The game was U.N.L.V.'s first nationally televised contest since March 1991 and the audience received an eyeful as U.N.L.V. swept Georgetown away with breakaway dunks and full-court pressure.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Pistons Lose Another Charles Barkley and Kevin Johnson each scored 24 points last night as the Phoenix Suns beat Detroit, 121-119, at Auburn Hills, Mich., handing the Pistons their sixth straight loss.
The Pistons nearly overcame a 16-point Phoenix lead in the final seven minutes, but Terry Mills's 3-pointer spun out as the final buzzer sounded.
Detroit is now 0-10 in games in which Dennis Rodman didn't play.
He missed last night's game with a strained calf muscle.
The Suns led by 109-93 with 6 minutes 45 seconds left, but had to fight off a furious Piston rally to hang on for the victory.
The Pistons went on a 23-10 run, and Gerald Glass's tip-in with 35 seconds to play pulled them within 119-116.
Kevin Johnson made one of two free throws with 14.8 seconds left, but Joe Dumars hit a 3-pointer with 7 seconds left to make it a 1-point game.
Johnson was fouled again, and again made one free throw, giving Detroit a chance to go for the victory, but Mills's shot just missed. (AP) Hawks 117, Kings 106: Dominique Wilkins scored 38 points and Kevin Willis had 30 points and 17 rebounds as the Hawks rallied in the third period to beat Sacramento at Atlanta.
Wilkins, scoring at least 30 points for the fourth time in five games, hit a fallaway jump shot with 4:07 to play in the third to give Atlanta a 73-72 lead it never relinquished.
The victory was the 100th for Bob Weiss as coach of the Hawks and was Atlanta's seventh in its last 10 games. (AP) N.H.L.
Canadiens Beat Bruins Rookie Ed Ronan scored 14 seconds into overtime, beating Boston goaltender John Blue to give the Canadiens a 3-2 victory over the Bruins at Montreal last night.
Boston's Adam Oates forced overtime with his 30th goal of the season by beating Patrick Roy on a rebound with 42 seconds remaining in the third period after Blue had been pulled for an extra skater.
Ronan, a native of Boston, drove toward the Bruins' net on the decisive play, putting the puck behind Blue for only his fourth goal in 37 games this season.
The game featured a missed penalty shot by Montreal's Denis Savard, 2 minutes 34 seconds into the second period. (AP)


Trident Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pact Is Set to Remain Until the Ball Drops
The collective bargaining agreement between major league club owners and players is scheduled to expire on Dec. 31, and Donald Fehr, the players' chief negotiator, indicated yesterday that the date will not change.
Richard Ravitch, the owners' chief labor executive, proposed at the first bargaining session, held on Jan. 13, that the expiration date be advanced to Nov. 1.
Fehr said the matter was discussed "to a limited extent" at the second session yesterday.


Everyone Wants to Meet the New Girl


Atlanfed Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lyondell Petrochemical reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Variety Is The Spice Of Success For Bills
When Ted Marchibroda resigned as the Bills' offensive coordinator to become the Indianapolis Colts' head coach, everyone thought Buffalo's potent offense, characterized by the no-huddle scheme and prolific point production, would languish.
And after Bills Coach Marv Levy promoted the offensive line coach, Tom Bresnahan, to offensive coordinator to replace Marchibroda, whose background was working with quarterbacks, it looked as if the Buffalo offense would definitely take a turn to the right.
Everyone expected Bresnahan to hold to the conservative credo of most offensive line coaches -- run the ball,


Boulevard Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SUPER BOWL XVVII: TV Sports; The Networks Leave Room for Dessert
For NBC, the Super Bowl is like a luscious creme brulee after a long, dyspeptic dinner.
Having lost about $100 million (including $40 million this season) on its National Football League contract, NBC heads to Pasadena for its first Super Bowl since 1989 in the hope of saving a smidgen of financial face.
NBC paid $752 million in 1990 for four years of N.F.L. games, the lowest outlay of the three networks (ABC paid $900 million and CBS paid $1.06 billion).
According to network insiders, NBC has valued the Super Bowl at $40 million.
There is no N.F.L.-specified Super Bowl rights fee, and a network can allocate its Super Bowl fee in any way it wishes.


Hillary Clinton To Head Panel On Health Care
President Clinton today appointed his wife, Hillary, to head a committee to prepare legislation for overhauling the nation's health-care system.
It is the most powerful official post ever assigned to a First Lady.
Introducing his health panel, the President said its task would be to have a proposal for Congress within 100 days of his inauguration last Wednesday, and he quickly added that "this task force will be chaired by the First Lady, Hillary Rodham Clinton."


Bridge
One of New York's leading bridge citizens will be departing tomorrow for a two-week tour of China, where he will play in Beijing and Shanghai.
Jim Cayne will oppose some members of the Chinese political hierarchy in Beijing, and in his capacity as president of the brokerage house of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company he will open an office in Shanghai.
Earlier this month, in a money game in Manhattan, he played skilfully on the diagramed deal to bring home a four-spade contract after East had opened with a weak two-bid in diamonds.


Q&amp;A
Fasting Penguins
Q.  Male emperor penguins sit on the eggs for months without food. How do they survive?
A.
They build up big fat reserves and slowly burn them off, said Todd Culver, an ornithologist at the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology in Ithaca, N.Y.


E. W. Kenworthy, 83, a Reporter Who Covered Capital With Flair
E.
W.
Kenworthy, a Washington correspondent for The New York Times who wrote about government and politics with flair and erudition for 20 years, died today at his home here.
He was 83.
He died of complications from prostate cancer, his family said.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about the relocation of the May Department Stores Company's merchandising unit misidentified the chief executive of May Merchandising, who has since retired.
He was Kenneth Kolker.


Duke Power Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


After Cold War, World's Space Plans Seek a More Down-to-Earth Basis
THE exploration of space, one of the triumphs of the 20th century, is undergoing a global retrenchment and restructuring that will leave it less showy, more substantive and more dependent on international cooperation and teamwork, experts say.
One trend is to replace manned spectaculars with more serious efforts, rejecting high drama for a down-to-earth calculus of financial and scientific gain.


NS Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pittston Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Diamond Shamrock reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Catellus Development Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Surprise for Market By American Express
The American Express Company's protracted search for new leadership ended in stunning fashion yesterday when its board announced that James D. Robinson 3d would remain chairman of the company, even after the stock had steadily declined under his stewardship.
The board also expanded Mr.
Robinson's responsibilities, making him chairman and chief executive of its troubled brokerage subsidiary, Shearson Lehman Brothers.
At the same time, the board abandoned its search for an outsider to succeed Mr.
Robinson as the American Express chief executive by electing the candidate Mr.
Robinson had recommended last year, Harvey Golub, the company's president since 1991.
With Mr.
Golub in control, the 57-year-old Mr.
Robinson had envisioned a more muted role for himself, serving as a consultant for two or three years at the company before retiring.


A Powerful Voice, Still Heard
"He is a man who sees the world exactly as it is and pushes on to make it what it can become." That is what Justice Sandra Day O'Connor said recently of Thurgood Marshall.
She found herself still expecting to see him at their conferences, "hoping to hear, just once more, another story that would, by and by, perhaps change the way I see the world."
Thurgood Marshall, the great lawyer and Justice who died Sunday, earned that gracious tribute.
Endowed with a gift for advocacy and a rich appreciation of human nature, he spent a quarter-century as an attorney forcing the Supreme Court to see the real world clearly.
Then for another quarter-century on the high court himself, Justice Marshall persisted in the same vein from within.


Tokyo Journal; Sumo Bows and Opens Sacred Door to U.S. Star
Legend has it that 3,000 years ago, two gods took their fight for control of the Japanese islands to the sumo ring.
With such a heritage, it is no wonder that sumo wrestling has remained the quintessential Japanese sport.
Until now.
Today, a towering 23-year-old American shattered an almost sacred barrier in a sport that is as much ritual as wrestling.
Chad Rowan, known professionally as Akebono, was recommended for elevation to the sumo's exalted rank of yokozuna, or grand champion.


Regis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Musicians On Strike: The Causes And Effects
When the negotiating committee from Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians ended a tense 10-hour meeting by announcing its decision to strike, just before midnight on Friday, Joseph Rosenthal was aghast.
Mr.
Rosenthal, the lawyer representing the nine orchestras that are bargaining as a consortium with the freelance musicians who fill their ranks, told his adversaries, "In 25 years of labor negotiations, I have never before seen a strike called after only four meetings and before the parties had really defined their positions or reached an impasse." But union spokesmen said that both sides had presented their positions and that an impasse had clearly been reached.
The strike was sudden.
When the musicians' contract expired on Sept. 8, the two sides had not exchanged proposals; they agreed on an extension through last Friday.
It was not until late October that proposals were exchanged, and the first formal meeting took place only last month.
This is the second strike by freelance musicians since 1986, when a walkout halted performances for a month.
The first freelance contract was signed in 1983.


G.M. Talks on E.D.S. Move Are Called an Open Secret
While the General Motors Corporation refuses to confirm reports that it is in talks to sell a large portion of its class E shares or a stake in its Electronic Data Systems Corporation to British Telecommunications P.L.C., bankers and financial analysts close to the companies said today that the discussions were an open secret.
They said such a sale would have benefits for G.M. because it could allow the auto maker to spend more aggressively on new-vehicle development and to replenish its eroded financial resources.


The Basement Sacked Talley
Either Darryl Talley is a great storyteller, or he is incredibly accident-prone.
Talley, a linebacker for Buffalo, showed up for practice last Tuesday with 15 stiches in his tongue and the inside of his mouth.
Talley's story is so ridiculous, it almost has to be true:


Amplicon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


By Design; Beating Up on the Hat
The hat is a hit here.
The Basque beret that so many women (as well as men) were wearing last fall must have whetted an appetite for the real thing.
Now, one sees young women everywhere with some sort of brimmed hat plunked firmly on their heads.
Most hats are variations of a small brimmed mannish fedora.
Velvet is the favorite fabric, and black, of course, the preferred color.
But the most important thing is that the hat look a bit beat up -- as if one had sat on it by mistake.
Such mistreatment gives it the properly degage look.
At the two popular Marie Mercier hat boutiques, one on the Left Bank and the other on the Right, an already-mashed black velvet hat is a best seller for about $190.
The ex-mannequin and now boutique owner Ines de la Fressange has already sold out the red velvet version she wears all over town.


U.S. Robotics reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Detroit to Seek Punitive Damages On Car Imports
In a clear test of the Clinton Administration's attitude on trade policies, the Big Three auto makers have told Federal trade officials that they intend to seek punitive duties on all imported cars, four people involved in the cases said today.
The auto makers -- reflecting a more combative approach than they have taken in recent months -- will charge that Japanese and European auto makers are violating Federal law by selling cars for less in the United States than they charge for the same cars in their home markets, said a Federal official, who insisted on anonymity.
The auto makers hope to file their complaints at the Commerce Department within two or three weeks, the official said.


Bystander Is Killed In Domestic Dispute
A bystander was shot to death during an apparent domestic dispute in Brooklyn's Borough Park last night when a man fired a shotgun at his girlfriend and hit someone else, the police said.
Police Officer Andrew McInnis, a department spokesman, said the shooting occurred in front of the J &amp; S Video World at 5402 New Utrecht Avenue near the corner of 13th Street about 7:30 P.M.


Weyerhaeuser Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


The Neediest Helps a Mother Handle Stress
As punishment for misbehaving in school, Neyda Morales told her 6-year-old daughter she would get no presents for Christmas.
In retaliation, as Ms.
Morales tells the story, her daughter, who is also named Neyda, bit herself on the arm several times, then told her teacher that her mother had done the biting, and that she had also pulled her hair and tried to drown her in the bathtub.


Crane Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Century Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Support Group for Support Users?
A FRIEND was having problems with his Gateway computer.
He called the company's technical support telephone number, which was busy.
He called again, and again and again, and the number was always busy.
It took dozens of calls over many days before he was able to speak to a human, he said.
Happily, once a technician was on the line, he diagnosed and fixed the problem quickly.
A veteran consultant who recommends powerful computers for the banking and financial industries tried calling a toll-free technical support number for the RS/6000 workstation division of the International Business Machines Corporation.
The line was busy.
It was busy all day, it was busy on Sundays, and it was busy at 3 A.M., he said.


No Headline
"She's better at organizing and leading people from a complex beginning to a certain end than anybody I've ever worked with in my life." -- PRESIDENT CLINTON on Hillary Rodham Clinton, whom he named to head a health-care task force.  [ A1:5. ]


Sears Eliminating Its Catalogues and 50,000 Jobs
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company announced yesterday that it was pulling the plug on its "big book" catalogues, the tomes that have staked a place beside the family Bible in rural American homes for 97 years, as part of an extensive revamping that will close 113 of its stores and carve 50,000 jobs from its payroll.
The huge overhaul effort, the most extensive of Sears's many attempts to halt the decade-long decline of its retail business, is a big step toward making Sears nimble enough to compete in today's lean retail environment, where stores like Wal-Mart, Toys "R" Us and Home Depot brag about their low cost structures rather than their sales.


Books of The Times; Groping for the Future as the Modern Age Ends
The End of the 20th Century
And the End of the Modern Age
By John Lukacs
291 pages. Ticknor &amp; Fields. $21.95.
The year 1989, when the Berlin Wall came tumbling down and Eastern Europe emerged from the shadow of the Soviet Union, not only marked the end of the 20th century but also the waning of a great historical epoch, the passing of the Modern Age, which witnessed the rise of liberalism, humanism and bourgeois culture throughout the Western world.
So argues the historian John Lukacs in his provocative new book.


Mexico Fights to Stop U.S. Execution
In the decade since Ramon Montoya was convicted of murdering a Dallas policeman, most of his relatives have stopped visiting, his name has faded from the newspapers, and opponents of capital punishment have moved on to other cases.
But if the 39-year-old illegal immigrant is executed as scheduled early Wednesday morning in a Huntsville, Tex., prison, it will be in spite of legal aid that the Mexican Government has helped pay for, pleas for clemency that it has made to Texas officials and a modicum of public support that it has helped generate both in Mexico and the United States.


Loctite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Market Place
GENERAL MOTORS needs cash, and its Electronic Data Systems unit looks like it is salable.
So should investors who expect a takeover of the unit rush out and buy G.M.'s class E shares, which are tied to the performance of E.D.S.?
Maybe not.
G.M., in its financial innovations of the 1980's, created one of the more bizarre financial structures in American business, one that is not well understood by many holders.
While class E shares pay dividends based on the earnings of E.D.S., the computer company started by Ross Perot, they do not represent ownership of it.
They really represent a stake in G.M. itself.


Reginald Lewis, Financier, Is Honored at Service
Speakers from the many walks of life touched by Reginald Francis Lewis, who died last Tuesday at 50, gathered yesterday to honor the Wall Street lawyer and financier.
Mr.
Lewis, a resident of New York City and Paris, died of a cerebral hemorrhage related to cancer.
A service was held at the Riverside Church on Riverside Drive in Manhattan in an atmosphere of warmth, interspersed with touches of gentle humor.
Those addressing the audience of several hundred included members of Mr.
Lewis's immediate family and notables whose paths had crossed with his, including Mayor David N. Dinkins; James W. Kinnear, the president of Texaco as a fellow chief executive officer; Percy E. Sutton, the Harlem entrepreneur and former Manhattan borough president; Robert C. Clark, the dean of Harvard Law School, and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson.


Bosnia's Brutal Camps
President Clinton inherited many problems but none more brutal than this: the 70,000 Bosnians who languish in 135 Serb-run concentration camps.
Serbian officials promised five months ago to close the camps and release the detainees.
They haven't.
Prisoners have been murdered; others suffer bitter winter winds, short rations and torture.
Only recently did the Bush Administration turn over the full list of known and suspected sites to international organizations responsible for closing the camps and securing the detainees' release.
The delay cost lives.


Ancient Desert Rats Leave Clues To Kaleidoscope of Climate Change
THOUGH hardly as glamorous as dinosaur skeletons or fossil-bearing amber, crystallized rat urine has found a place as a window through which scientists are glimpsing fresh details of the earth's environmental history.
At the Desert Research Institute here, a branch of the University of Nevada, scientists are analyzing glossy black clumps of solidified rat urine, some of it up to 40,000 years old, for indications of changes in ancient climates, bombardments of the earth by cosmic rays, shifts in the earth's magnetic field, and the tribulations of the region's creatures over many millennia.


Piccadilly Cafeterias Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Assembly Approves Adirondacks Measure
For the second year in a row, the Democratic-controlled New York State Assembly passed a bill today that would put new restrictions on land use in the Adirondack Park and expand the powers of the Adirondack Park Agency, which enforces regulations in the park.
The vote in the Assembly was 106 to 38.
But Republicans in the State Senate said its chances of passage in their chamber -- at least in the bill's current form -- were slim at best.
And while they said they would be willing to discuss some form of Adirondacks legislation, the Republicans made it clear that they were disturbed at the Assembly's decision to pass the bill without consulting them first.


Carbon Monoxide Gas Is Used by Brain Cells As a Neurotransmitter
THE simple gas carbon monoxide is used by nerve cells to signal each other, researchers have found in a discovery that could open the way to a new understanding of how the brain operates.
The discovery follows a finding that another simple gas, nitric oxide, can also signal nerve cells.
Together the two gases break all the old rules on how neurotransmitters work.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday with an article about Saudi Arabia and the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries mislabeled the prices of Arab light crude oil.
They were shown in dollars per barrel, not per gallon.


South Africa Digging for Possible Victims of Police
The South African authorities deployed arc lights and earthmovers tonight to excavate a farm where a former policeman said anti-apartheid campaigners had been beaten to death and buried by the police.
The former constable, Johnny Mokaleng, told The Sowetan newspaper that he was present when four detainees were beaten, tortured with electric prods and buried in October 1988 on the farm near Rustenburg, 80 miles northwest of Johannesburg.


Classical Music in Review
'Carmen'
New York City Opera  National Company  Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts
On the eve of a 50-city North American tour, the New York City Opera National Company presented its trimmed-down, enthusiastic production of "Carmen" at Brooklyn College on Saturday night.
As a vehicle for delivering opera to the heartland, this production should do fine; the company's young singers sometimes made some disagreeable sounds, but they will undoubtedly become more secure in their roles as the tour goes on.
They may also profit from audiences more attentive than the garrulous, distracted group that showed up on Saturday.


The Seeking of Enlightenment
READERS of this column occasionally know less, but often know more, than its writer.
More than one correspondent took me to task for a Jan. 5 reference to the "autoconfig.bat" file, an impossible name in DOS, when "autoexec.bat" was meant.
Here are a few of the tips, insights and pleas from readers collected in the last year or more.
If you know more than I do about any of these matters, feel free to write.
Wood Burner
I am a writer.
In 1987, two or three knowledgeable friends recommended the Kaypro to me for my first computer.
A store conveniently nearby carried only that make and urged Wordstar with it.


Clashes Persist on Yugoslav Coast; Croats Report Pushing Back Serbs
In a fourth day of clashes near Zadar, on the Croatian coast, the Croatian Army recaptured a military and civilian airport today, forcing out Serbian militiamen who had held the site for more than 16 months, local news reports said.
Heavy combat was reported in villages east of the airport, at Zemunik, as Serbian forces struggled to halt a Croatian advance near the borders of areas under the protection of United Nations peacekeeping forces, the reports said.


Broad Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


DQE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Going Undercover in the Computer Underworld
He patrols the back alleys of cyberspace at the edge of the electronic frontier.
Traveling on beams of electrons, he is invisible, formless -- the ultimate undercover agent.
He's "Phrakr Trakr" of the Hi-Tech Crime Network.
But don't look for him in comic books or the video store.
He's real.


Accounts
*
Pofolks Inc., Nashville, to Meridian Communications, Lexington, Ky., to handle the family-style restaurant chain's advertising, marketing and public relations account, previously handled in-house.
Billings were estimated at $3.5 million to $4 million. *
Riser Foods Inc., Cleveland, to Excel Media Services, Cleveland, to handle the Stop-n-Shop supermarket chain's media services, previously at Vitt Media International Inc., New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


Disney (Walt) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accord Made For Savings In Trash Jobs
The Dinkins administration reached an agreement yesterday with the sanitation workers union to give workers at least one-third of any money saved through longer trash-pickup routes and other measures to increase productivity.
The accord marked the first time that Mayor David N. Dinkins, who has said for three years that he would like to make city workers more efficient by promising them a share of savings, has been able to find a common ground with a municipal union on such a plan.
But City Hall and the union must still agree on exactly how work rules will be changed to achieve the savings, which city officials hope will amount to more than $20 million a year.


Who's in Charge of the Military?
The Clinton Administration's erratic approach toward ending the ban on homosexuals in the military could leave one wondering just who's in charge of the armed forces: the generals or their civilian Commander in Chief?
President Clinton, in the heat of the campaign, pledged unequivocally to lift the ban against gay men and women through an executive order.
It was a long-overdue gesture of fairness to thousands of homosexuals in uniform who serve bravely and honorably while living in constant fear of discovery and expulsion.


Residents of 3 Areas Given Exemptions From Toll Increases
Residents of Staten Island will be exempted from a toll increase scheduled to take effect Sunday on the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge under legislation passed tonight by the Assembly and Senate.
The legislation, which has the support of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, will also exempt residents of the Rockaway Peninsula and Broad Channel in Queens from toll increases on the Cross Bay Veterans Memorial Bridge and Marine Parkway Bridge.


Out of Money, Chen Closes His Company
Five years after forming a risky venture with the support of I.B.M. to build the world's fastest computer, the supercomputer designer Steve S. Chen said today that he was abandoning the project and closing his company.
At the same time, Mr.
Chen, who carried out his research under extraordinary secrecy, claimed a Pyrrhic victory of sorts.
At a meeting this morning, he told the 320 employees of his company, Supercomputer Systems Inc., that the company had achieved one of its goals of building the world's fastest single-processor computer before shutting the computer down.


Classical Music in Review
Don Hulbert
Flutist  Weill Recital Hall
In his impressive New York recital debut on Sunday night, Don Hulbert perused flute music of the 18th century and then skipped to the 20th.
While the latter half had a bit more enthusiasm and conviction, Mr.
Hulbert's playing was at a high level throughout; his closing rendition of Copland's Duo for Flute and Piano provoked a full standing ovation, by no means an everyday occurrence in Weill Hall.


Gay Couples Also Need Economic Benefits
To the Editor:
We appreciate your coverage of Mayor David N. Dinkins's announcement of executive orders to allow domestic partners in New York City to register their relationship with the city clerk, which confers certain noneconomic benefits (news article, Jan. 8).
Yet we are dismayed that you omit mention of the suit filed the same day by a group of city employees demanding precisely what the executive orders lack.


Quixote Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Grumman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On My Mind; General Powell and The Gays
The President knows he will catch big trouble for it, but makes up his mind.
He orders the armed forces to treat certain people exactly like all other Americans -- full duties in combat, full rights at all times.
The top commanders, and almost everybody under them, object passionately.
These people will create problems by their very presence in the barracks, they say.


Lies to Police Admitted By Witness In Sex Trial
The brother of one of the four defendants in the Glen Ridge sexual assault trial admitted on the witness stand today that he lied to the police early in their investigation of the case to protect himself and his friends.
And, as the prosecution continued to attack his credibility, the witness, Paul Archer, appeared to retreat from his testimony last week that the mildly retarded young woman at the heart of the case initiated the sexual episode and acted alone when she engaged in sex acts involving a fungo baseball bat and broom handle.


Chess
Nigel Short bounced back into the lead in the final world championship candidates' match by winning Games 9 and 10 from Jan Timman Saturday and yesterday in San Lorenzo de El Escorial, Spain.
The 28-year-old English grandmaster had earlier drawn Game 8 and now has 6 points to his 41-year-old Dutch opponent's 4.
Seven and a half points in the 14-game series is required to win the prize of $124,000 and the right to challenge Gary Kasparov of Russia in the title match in August.
But the real payoff is bound to exceed a million dollars, the minimum that a title contender, even an unsuccessful one, can expect.
In the current contest, the loser gets $76,000.


Gregorian Chant and 60's Rock In a Dance That Spans Centuries
The audience pushes back into the theater.
There are the usual rustling of programs and hurried attempts at finishing intermission conversations.
Then the lights go down, and there is that vividly anticipatory silence before the dance begins.
But what is this?
From two speakers in the back of the house come the strains of women's high voices singing 9th- and 10th-century Gregorian chants.
Nearly a minute later, a sustained organ chord begins to resonate through speakers at the center of the theater.
The curtain goes up, and more music pushes out with the dancers to the center of the stage, this time raucous 1960's rock songs by Syd Barrett, formerly of Pink Floyd.
Ralph Lemon's new piece, "Their Eyes Rolled Back in Ecstasy," has begun.


Pact for Polonia
Outfielder LUIS POLONIA and the California Angels split the $850,000 difference between the figures they submitted to an arbitrator.
Polonia, who earned $1.65 million last season, agreed with the team on a $2,475,000 contract yesterday.


Mercantile Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ear Shot May Equal 10 Days of Oral Drug
A SINGLE injection of a drug often used to treat pneumonia and meningitis also cures childhood ear infections and is as effective as 10 days of an oral medication, a new study says.
The study, published in the journal Pediatrics, found that either one shot of the drug ceftriaxone or 10 days of the oral antibiotic amoxicillin relieved children's fever and pain in the first two days.


John Corbin Eddison, Development Expert, 73
John Corbin Eddison, an expert on economic development who was a former director of Near East Affairs for the United States Agency for International Development, died Friday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 73 years old and lived in Lexington, Mass.
He died of lung disease, said his wife, the former Elizabeth Owsley Bole.


Wilmington Trust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chicago Radio Group to Buy WYNY-FM for $50 Million
Westwood One said yesterday that it had agreed to sell WYNY-FM, the New York country music station whose frequency is 103.5 FM, to Broadcasting Partners Inc., a Chicago-based radio operator, for $50 million in cash.
Westwood One had owned the station since 1988 when it bought it from the Emmis Broadcasting Corporation for $43 million.
The station, which is the only FM country station in the New York market, is ranked 10th in the key demographic audience of listeners 25 years old to 54 years old.


RABIN DOESN'T LIKE FORMAT OF TALKS
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin today criticized the basic format of the Middle East peace talks as "not a successful one" but said it would be "a waste of time" for Israel to try changing it.
Israel has never reached agreements "when it negotiated with more than one Arab party," Mr.
Rabin told senior Government officials at a meeting in the Negev.


Public Service Co. of Colorado reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Metrobank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Basement Sacked Talley
Either Darryl Talley is a great storyteller, or he is incredibly accident-prone.
Talley, a linebacker for Buffalo, showed up for practice last Tuesday with 15 stiches in his tongue and the inside of his mouth.
Talley's story is so ridiculous, it almost has to be true:


Gay Couples Also Need Economic Benefits; Undermining Marriage
To the Editor:
Time will tell whether or not Stanford University and the University of Chicago have yielded unwisely to the political correctness ideology in giving gay partners the same benefits as married couples.


Companies Accused of Overcharging For Drugs Developed With U.S. Aid
There is growing evidence that patients are being charged unreasonably high prices for drugs that were developed largely at taxpayer expense, some experts charged today at a Congressional hearing.
Programs that give pharmaceutical companies access to extensive Government-sponsored research in exchange for developing and marketing drugs are making new therapies available but often at very high prices, said the chairman of the House subcommittee that held the hearing.


A Chairman Stays Put
The search by American Express for new leadership ended yesterday when it announced that its chairman would remain and that he would also head the troubled Shearson Lehman Brothers brokerage subsidiary, even though the company's stock has declined under his stewardship.
Business Day, page D1.


Newhall Land &amp; Farming Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Olympia &amp; York Liquidation Plan Advances
The unsecured creditors of bankrupt Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd. today overwhelmingly approved an orderly liquidation of the Canadian operations of what was once the world's biggest property development company.
Out of the disintegrating empire will emerge a new property-management concern worth a tiny fraction of the $20 billion that the Reichmann family of Toronto had built over three decades in commercial real estate in Canada, the United States and Britain.


Grossman Given Less to Do
Jerry Grossman, in his first season as president of the Islanders, has been abruptly re-classified as "vice chairman" by the team's managing committee.
He will have less power and fewer duties while the three other members of the new management group will assume more.
"It doesn't mean a heck of a lot," Grossman said yesterday about the change in title.


U.S. Trade Group Finds Sectors in Japan Closed
In a report that encourages the Clinton Administration to adopt a more aggressive trade policy toward Japan, the American Chamber of Commerce in Japan today listed dozens of business sectors that it said remained partly closed to foreign companies, despite years of arduous negotiations.
The report also said the Japanese still used numerous practices that hobbled foreign concerns trying to crack this market.


SHIFT OF SPENDING SEEN AS A BENEFIT
The Federal Government could generate more than 12,000 jobs by shifting $3 billion from military industries to state and local jurisdictions, according to a Government study released today.
Such a move, while eliminating 11,500 jobs in military industries, would create 23,600 new jobs, the study by the Congressional Research Service of the Library of Congress found.


Yeltsin Critical of U.S. Role in Balkans and Iraq
President Boris N. Yeltsin accused the United States today of a tendency to "dictate terms" in places like Iraq and the former Yugoslavia, but he added that President Clinton seemed more inclined to seek dialogue.
The comments were Mr.
Yeltsin's first explicit expression of dissatisfaction over the latest round of American-led bombings of Iraq, or over Washington's stance on the Balkan conflict.


Stanford Telecommunications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
2.86
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.93
2.95
3.84
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.05
3.93
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.06
6.16
6.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.20
7.29
7.72
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.36
8.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.31
6.33
6.68
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


American Freightways reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clashes Persist on Yugoslav Coast; Croats Report Pushing Back Serbs; Map Is Becoming Clearer
Negotiators seeking to end the war in Bosnia reported today that they had made some headway on dividing the republic into 10 largely self-governing but ethnically mixed provinces.
The borders of the proposed map are the last major stumbling block to agreement on a political settlement.
The leaders of Bosnia's Muslims, Serbs and Croats have all publicly accepted the nine underlying principles on which a peace settlement would be based.


Countdown to a Coach: Reeves May Sign Today
Dan Reeves cut short his golfing vacation in California last night, returned to Denver and was said to be heading for Newark Airport this morning.
It seemed likely that he would become the Giants' new head coach later today.
"He has to be in New York by noon tomorrow  [ Tuesday ] ," Carol Saeman said late last night.
Saeman and her husband, John, played host to Reeves and his wife, Pam, at their Indian Wells, Calif., condominium for the past six days.
"He'll spend the night in Denver, change his bag and head on to New York," Saeman said.


Amerada Hess reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Kissinger Averted a Distortion of History
To the Editor:
"Authoritative Answers on M.I.A.'s," your Jan. 14 editorial on the Senate committee report on the fate of Americans missing since the Vietnam War, states that allowing Henry Kissinger's lawyer to review and comment on an early draft of the report "will damage the report's credibility." To the contrary, the decision of the committee chairman, Senator John Kerry, to allow me to review and comment on the portion of the draft describing Dr.
Kissinger's negotiation of the 1973 Paris Peace Accords resulted in a substantially more accurate and balanced final report and increased its credibility.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
THOUGH yellow power ties, "Don't Worry, Be Happy" and hostile takeovers are unlikely to return anytime soon, one aspect of the 1980's is making a comeback: a Super Bowl that marketers are clamoring to sponsor.
On Sunday, when the Dallas Cowboys face the Buffalo Bills in Super Bowl XXVII, the commercial time on NBC will have been sold out for close to three weeks, even at record rates of $850,000 to $900,000 for each of the 56 half-minute spots.


A Vision That Goes Beyond 100 Yards
Solomon Wilcots offered the most memorable line about the riots in the Overtown section of Miami that jolted the National Football League and its annual January bash, this one Super Bowl XXIII in 1989 that featured the San Francisco 49ers and the Cincinnati Bengals.
Wilcots, now a Pittsburgh Steelers safety but then with the Bengals, said: "We went to the movies to see 'Mississippi Burning.' We came out and we saw Miami burning."
The riots began after a Cuban-American police officer was charged with fatally shooting a black motorcyclist in a predominantly black section of Miami a few days before the game.
The N.F.L. spun on its heels in the days that followed, bombarded with questions.


Executive Changes
ADT SECURITY SYSTEMS INC., Parsippany, N.J., a unit of ADT Ltd., named Karl E. Guerra senior vice president for marketing and technology.
ANDOVER TOGS INC., New York, a manufacturer of children's and women's apparel, named Bruce Katz president of its Sasson girls' apparel division.


Putnam Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


KLLM Transport Service reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


Seacoast Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Variety Is The Spice Of Success For Bills
When Ted Marchibroda resigned as the Bills' offensive coordinator to become the Indianapolis Colts' head coach, everyone thought Buffalo's potent offense, characterized by the no-huddle scheme and prolific point production, would languish.
And after Bills Coach Marv Levy promoted the offensive line coach, Tom Bresnahan, to offensive coordinator to replace Marchibroda, whose background was working with quarterbacks, it looked as if the Buffalo offense would definitely take a turn to the right.
Everyone expected Bresnahan to hold to the conservative credo of most offensive line coaches -- run the ball,


Webb (Del) Corp. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Political Memo; Re-examining the Fine Print On Clinton's Tax Promises
At a time when the public has repeatedly shown its distaste for the maneuvers and machinations of politics, President Clinton's White House is banking on a five-word loophole to save it from voter outrage should Mr.
Clinton propose a broad-based energy tax.
During the campaign, Mr.
Clinton promised tax cuts for the middle class.
Now Mr.
Clinton and his chief economic advisers are backing away from the tax cut and strongly hinting that an energy tax will hit the middle class the hardest.


No Mutant Tomatoes For Campbell Soup
To the Editor:
In "Tomato Gene Is Submitted for Approval" (Business Day, Jan 6), which reports that Calgene Inc. is seeking Food and Drug Administration approval for its "FlavrSavr" tomato, you erroneously state that the tomato will be marketed "by the Campbell Soup Company in processed forms."


Weapons Shipment Intercepted On Way to Bosnia
In a move that highlights the debate over the embargo on arms shipments to the parties in the Balkan war, Western naval forces have intercepted a large shipment of weapons bound for the Bosnian Government, American officials said today.
They said the ship, called the Dolphin One, was en route to Rijeka, Croatia, when it was intercepted by Italian warships.
From Croatia, the cargo would have been carried overland to Bosnia.


Panel Approves New York Hospital Proposal for New Building Over F.D.R. Drive
The New York Hospital will construct a 776-bed building on a platform above the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive, between 68th and 70th Streets, under a proposal approved unanimously yesterday by the City Planning Commission.
The hospital plans to start construction in April and complete the 12-story, $908 million building in 1998.


2 More U.N. Inspection Teams Arrive in Baghdad
United Nations inspectors of nuclear and ballistic weapons arrived here today in the latest test of whether Baghdad is willing to comply fully with the gulf war cease-fire.
The start of their mission, which follows a standoff with Baghdad over United Nations flights, comes as the Government has made it clear that it wants improved relations with Washington.
The Revolutionary Command Council announced a cease-fire on Jan. 19 as a gesture of good will toward the new United States Administration.


SFFed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Safeco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Equifax Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
Behind the premiere of a new concerto by NED ROREM next week is the tale of a half-century-old friendship between the composer and GARY GRAFFMAN, the pianist.
Well, maybe not quite 50 years.
Though they met when they were both students at the Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia, they were barely nodding acquaintances at first.
Mr.
Rorem, who at 69 is the elder of the two by five years, said yesterday: "There is a big intellectual difference between a 19-year-old and a 14-year-old, even if the 14-year-old is precocious as all students at Curtis are. So we didn't really get to know each other socially until a few years later through my pianistic mafia, our mutual friends, Eugene Istomin and Julius Katchen. But we've been friends since, both in Paris and here."


Jones Laterals to Johnson, Who Laterals to Jones
The current Dallas Cowboys are about oil and money, about plans first hatched in Jerry Jones's University of Arkansas dormitory room.
They are about Coach Jimmy Johnson's platinum hair and his supposedly superior 162 I.Q.
They are about young, unflappable players who see the Super Bowl as just another television game of the week.
"Experience? How much experience do you need to play in a Super Bowl?" asked Dallas running back Emmitt Smith tonight.
"I've been running the ball my whole life. What more experience do I need?"


North Side Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ARCO reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


United Illuminating reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cordis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Alza Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cedar Fair reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Christopher Vowing Change In Selection of Ambassadors
Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher made his debut before State Department employees today, pledging that the Clinton Administration would not appoint ambassadors solely because of their political connections and assuring them that he would bring career Foreign Service officers back into the State Department's decision-making.
"Recommendations for ambassadorships will be based upon qualifications that extend beyond campaign participation and will require some real expertise with respect to the appointment," he said, to the applause of a standing-room-only audience.


Domestic Vehicle Sales Rise 15% in Midmonth
Sales of domestically built cars and light trucks rose 15 percent in mid-January compared with the period a year earlier, the nation's auto makers reported today.
But the increase remained short of the robust gains the industry had been anticipating.
Accordingly, Ward's Automotive Reports, a trade newspaper, reported today that automotive production in January in the United States and Canada would fall short of planned volume by nearly 6 percent, to 785,000 cars and light trucks.


Virginia First Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Atalanta-Sosnoff reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rollins Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Concert Royal  Florence Gould Hall
Concert Royal continued its survey of the French Baroque on Friday with an evening of contrasts.
The period strings led by Mary Springfels's viola da gamba, James Richman's harpsichord and Sandra Miller's Baroque flute underlined the soft, rounded quality of an era's instrumental sound.
Christine Brandes's bright, forward, well-managed soprano advertised the extravagance and show of which the late 17th and early 18th centuries were also fond.


In New Climate of Freedom, Few Russian Newspapers Thrive
At a time when subscriptions to the Russian press are down by 50 percent and most major newspapers are engaged in an unseemly scramble for government handouts, the advertising department at Moskovsky Komsomolets is furiously busy.
Advertisers who want to appear in the paper's daily four-page spread have to wait for more than a month, while the line to place classifieds spills out of the cramped third-floor offices and into the stairwell.
The reason for the flood of advertising is the popularity of Moskovsky Komsomolets, the only major Moscow-based daily to have discovered how to survive in a rough-and-tumble marketplace without government subsidies or outside investors, and with new ideas like advertising, profit and the need to define a paper's relationship to power.


Great Lakes Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Crompton &amp; Knowles reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Electromagnetism Is Effective for Fractures
To the Editor:
"U.S. Opens the Door Just a Crack to Alternative Forms of Medicine" (front page, Jan. 10) raises a serious question about National Institutes of Health criteria for inclusion in the alternative medicine category.
I do not take issue with the need to seek new and less costly methods for treating disease.


Howard University Journal; Where Marshall Blazed, Students Take Up Torch
Most of today's students at the Howard University Law School had not even been born when Thurgood Marshall was making history.
So there was no outpouring of grief by his bronze bust today.
It stood alone in a windowed corridor of his alma mater.
The fights of the black civil rights lawyer were not their fights; they knew little about segregation or separate entrances or places where they could not go because of their color.
His was a name in the history books, part of the lore of their school.
Yet the students felt a kinship with the man, the top of the 1933 Howard Law class and the first black Justice of the Supreme Court, who died Sunday.


CHRONICLE
The music will be of a different sort at a fashion show today: writers, editors, buyers and browsers who turn up to see NICK HILTON'S fall '93 men's wear collection at Nell's on West 14th Street will hear songs by Nick Hilton.
Instead of remaining backstage and emerging to take plaudits only at the conclusion of the show, Mr.
Hilton, who designs under his own label, will sing at least five rhythm-and-blues numbers as models wearing his clothes parade down the runway.


Once Orderly Sanctuaries of Justice, Courts Now Tremble With Violence
For two centuries American courthouses were sanctuaries, relying more on calming ritual than on guards to suppress violent outbursts.
But the spell snapped in the 1980's, criminologists say, when unlicensed guns proliferated and the courts were flooded with emotionally charged cases involving wife and child abuse.
These experts say that family and civil courts have become tinderboxes, ready to explode with the sort of violence that occurred last week in a Dallas courthouse where a man killed his estranged wife and wounded a bystander before killing himself.
The woman had been seeking an order to protect herself from her husband.


Investigation of Blazers
Allegations of "possible sexual misconduct" involving one or more members of the Portland Trail Blazers are being investigated by the Salt Lake City police, according to a department spokesman.
"The Salt Lake City Police Department is currently investigating allegations of possible sexual misconduct allegedly committed by as yet unnamed members of the Portland Trail Blazers basketball team," Lieut.
MARTY VUYK said in a statement released yesterday.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Continental Bank N.A., Chicago, is offering $100 million of 7.875 percent subordinated bank notes due in 2003 at 99.868 to yield 7.894 percent through Lehman Brothers.
Noncallable, the notes are rated Ba-2 by Moody's Investors Service, B- by Standard &amp; Poor's and Bbb by Duff &amp; Phelps.
*
Genesco Inc., Nashville, is offering $75 million of senior notes due in 2003 at 100 to yield 10.375 percent through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
Callable in five years, the notes are rated Ba-3 by Moody's and Bb- by S.&amp; P.


Major Oil Concerns Post Strong Profits in Quarter
Wall Street rediscovered oil today, as investors rushed to acquire stocks of major oil companies.
Several major companies, including Exxon, Chevron, Amoco and ARCO, reported strong profits for the fourth quarter and oil prices soared by the largest one-day total in eight months.


Independent Bank (Mich.) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Heritage Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Excerpts From the Justices' Decision on State Prisoners Facing Execution
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision today in Herrera v.
Collins, holding that a state prisoner facing execution for a murder he claims not to have committed is not ordinarily entitled to have that claim reviewed in Federal court.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist wrote the 6-to-3 majority opinion, which was joined by Justices Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony M. Kennedy, Antonin Scalia, and Clarence Thomas; Justice Byron R. White did not sign the opinion but concurred in the result.
Justice Harry A. Blackmun wrote a dissenting opinion that was joined by Justices John Paul Stevens and David H. Souter.
FROM THE OPINION By Chief Justice Rehnquist
Petitioner Leonel Torres Herrera was convicted of capital murder and sentenced to death in January 1982.
He unsuccessfully challenged the conviction on direct appeal and state collateral proceedings in the Texas state courts, and in a Federal habeas petition.
In February 1992, 10 years after his conviction he urged in a second Federal habeas petition that he was "actually innocent" of the murder for which he was sentenced to death, and that the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment and the 14th Amendment's guarantee of due process of law therefore forbid his execution.
He supported this claim with affidavits tending to show that his now-dead brother, rather than he, had been the perpetrator of the crime.
Petitioner urges us to hold that this showing of innocence entitles him to relief in this Federal habeas proceeding.
We hold that it does not.
. . .


Biosphere Gets Pure Oxygen to Combat Health Woes
EAGER to avoid a medical emergency, leaders of Biosphere 2 in Arizona have begun pumping tons of pure oxygen into the miniature glass-enclosed world inhabited by eight humans.
Oxygen levels have risen from 14.5 percent to 17.5 percent and at the operation's end will stand at about 19 percent, still shy of the 21 percent found at sea level.
Before the oxygen was added, the four men and four women in the 3.15 acres of glass domes north of Tucson were breathing rarefied air similar to that found at an altitude of about 13,400 feet.
The thin air left crew members fatigued, achy and at times gasping for breath.


Magazine Forms Separate Sales Team
Sports Illustrated magazine is forming a separate advertising sales team to handle Sports Illustrated for Kids, its monthly title for younger readers.
It is the second time this month that Time Inc. has expanded ad sales functions, following a decision to re-create a separate ad sales staff for Life magazine, which had shared staff with People magazine.


Sports of The Times; Silver Fox In the Shark Tank
ROLLIE MASSIMINO leaned back in one of the plastic seats in Thomas and Mack Arena and reflected on his new lease on life at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas.
It was Sunday afternoon and, a day earlier, Massimino's 11-1 Rebels had built leads of up to 35 points against visiting Georgetown before settling for a 16-point victory in front of 18,078 fans -- the Rebels' largest crowd since February 1991.
The game was U.N.L.V.'s first nationally televised contest since March 1991 and the audience received an eyeful as U.N.L.V. swept Georgetown away with breakaway dunks and full-court pressure.


Corrections
A dance review in Weekend on Friday about the Zorongo Flamenco Dance Theater at the Joyce Theater misidentified one of the company's home bases.
Besides Madrid, it is based in Minneapolis, not Milwaukee.


Hutchinson Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 27


Philadelphia Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Laclede Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


INSIDE
Gunman Shoots 5 Men Outside C.I.A. Complex
A man fired repeatedly into cars waiting to enter the grounds of the Central Intelligence Agency outside Washington, killing two employees and injuring three others as commuters, including a United States senator, watched.
The gunman escaped, and police officials said they knew of no motive and had no leads.
Page A14.
U.S.
Units in Somalia Attack
United States-led forces attacked rebel troops in Somalia in the first intervention to enforce the cease-fire, American officials said.
Page A3.
The Plight of Russia's Press
The old giants of the Soviet press and the leading lights of glasnost are confronting the realities of a competitive market.
Page A6.


Novacare Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Japanese Stocks Rally
Stocks moved higher today on hopes of Government assistance for the sluggish economy.
The 225-share Nikkei index gained 205.18 points, or 1.26 percent, to 16,492.63.
On Monday, the Nikkei lost 49.36 points.


SERBIA IS DENYING IT HOLDS BOSNIANS
The Serbian and Yugoslav Governments denied today that prisoners of war from Bosnia and Herzegovina were being held in detention camps on Yugoslav territory.
The assertion that Bosnian prisoners may be detained in Serbia came in a document prepared by United States Government intelligence agencies.
The document said that as many as 135 prison camps were being operated by Serbs in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Serbia itself, and that these camps held the vast majority of the total number of prisoners held by the Serbian, Muslim and Croatian factions in the Bosnian war.


New England Business Service Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Corning Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 3


Sports of The Times; Silver Fox In the Shark Tank
ROLLIE MASSIMINO leaned back in one of the plastic seats in Thomas and Mack Arena and reflected on his new lease on life at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas.
It was Sunday afternoon and, a day earlier, Massimino's 11-1 Rebels had built leads of up to 35 points against visiting Georgetown before settling for a 16-point victory in front of 18,078 fans -- the Rebels' largest crowd since February 1991.
The game was U.N.L.V.'s first nationally televised contest since March 1991 and the audience received an eyeful as U.N.L.V. swept Georgetown away with breakaway dunks and full-court pressure.


Advanced Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Chicago Radio Group to Buy WYNY-FM for $50 Million
Westwood One said yesterday that it had agreed to sell WYNY-FM, the New York country music station whose frequency is 103.5 FM, to Broadcasting Partners Inc., a Chicago-based radio operator, for $50 million in cash.
Westwood One had owned the station since 1988 when it bought it from the Emmis Broadcasting Corporation for $43 million.
The station, which is the only FM country station in the New York market, is ranked 10th in the key demographic audience of listeners 25 years old to 54 years old.


Holik Breaks Thumb
The Devils announced yesterday that forward BOBBY HOLIK would be out six to eight weeks because of a broken left thumb.
Holik, 22, played with a swollen thumb Saturday night in Boston as the Devils lost to the Bruins.
His thumb was apparently broken Friday night in the victory at home over Montreal.


Gunman Kills 2 Near C.I.A. Entrance
Two employees of the Central Intelligence Agency were killed and three others were wounded at rush hour this morning when a man with a rifle fired one time after another and with deliberate aim into two lines of cars waiting to enter the agency's grounds.
The gunman, described by witnesses as a white man in his 20's, then escaped in a car he had parked nearby, the police said.
The authorities said they had established no motive for the shootings and had no leads.


Clinton Says He Has Made No Decision on Energy Tax
As lawmakers and industry officials responded unenthusiastically to suggestions of a new energy tax, President Clinton said today that he had not yet decided whether to support the idea.
Mr.
Clinton said that he had not selected any of several proposals to reduce the Federal budget deficit.
"We have a lot of options under consideration, but no decision has been made," he said as he signed an order establishing a National Economic Council.


Company Reports; BANKERS TRUST NY (N)
At first glance, it looks like Bankers Trust is moving back into the loan business, but it's not true.
Reversing a decade-long trend, the proportion of money that Bankers Trust earned from interest rose last year, when compared with other sources of income.
Net interest revenue rose $410 million, to $1.15 billion, in 1992, while noninterest revenue fell by $191 million, to $2.33 billion, mostly from a drop in trading revenue.
In recent years, Bankers Trust has sharply scaled back the amount of money it makes from loans to focus mostly on trading for its own account and concocting derivative instruments, generally over-the-counter options on currencies, equity and interest rates.


Observer; In Tribal Solitude
Diversity:
I am a European-American.
I am a male European-American.
I am a Depression-generation, male European-American.
I am a hearing-impaired, Depression-generation, male European-American.
I am a college-educated, hearing-impaired, Depression-generation, male European-American.
Because I have not lost significant amounts of hair I am not a bald, college-educated, hearing-impaired, Depression-generation, male European-American.
Instead, I am a comb-carrying, college-educated, hearing-impaired, Depression-generation, male European-American.
I am a heterosexual, comb-carrying, college-educated, hearing-impaired, Depression-generation, male European-American.
Because I am married I am not a single, heterosexual, comb-carrying, college-educated, hearing-impaired, Depression-generation, male European-American, and therefore I do not go to singles bars.
Instead, I am a married, heterosexual, comb-carrying, college-educated, hearing-impaired, Depression-generation, male European-American, and go to doubles bars in which homosexual, bald, educationally disadvantaged, hearing-advantaged, pre- as well as post-Depression-generation, male European-Americans, Asian-Americans, African-Americans, Antarctic-Americans, Native Americans, Australian-Americans and Pacific-Island Americans, though not unwelcome, are made to feel peculiar.
Being unable to understand the vocalists who sing rock music, I shun it like a bog.
Therefore, I am a square, married, heterosexual, comb-carrying, college-educated, hearing-impaired, Depression-generation, male European-American.
Though I am not resident below the official Government poverty line, when pondering David Letterman's $14 million salary and the $1 million salary of the average journeyman baseball player, I realize that neither am I doing so well in the money department.
In short, I am a comparatively financially disadvantaged, square, married, heterosexual, comb-carrying, college-educated, hearing-impaired, Depression-generation, male European-American.
Politically, I am not kind and generous enough to be a liberal nor heartless and tight-fisted enough to be a conservative nor dull enough -- I insist! -- to be a moderate.
Therefore, the only doubles bars I frequent are those for politically unpredictable, comparatively financially disadvantaged, square, married, heterosexual, comb-carrying, college-educated, hearing-impaired, Depression-generation, male European-Americans.
I am married to a Celtic-American.
She is a Celtic-American of the female gender.
Don't try telling Celt jokes around me.
I am a Celt-sensitive, politically unpredictable, comparatively financially disadvantaged, square, married, heterosexual, comb-carrying, college-educated, hearing- impaired, Depression-generation, male European-American.
I no longer twit this Celtic-American helpmeet about being of the female gender, as I did in the old days when I was a gender-twitting, though already Celt-sensitive, politically unpredictable, comparatively financially disadvantaged, square, married, heterosexual, comb-carrying, college-educated, hearing-impaired, Depression-generation, male European-American.
When once too often I said, twittingly of course, that I yearned for the era when females had sex instead of gender, a number of representatives of that splendid gender urged me to give up my swinish male-gender chauvinism and free my mind of outmoded male-female stereotypes.
This was sound advice.
I am now a genderly enlightened, Celt-sensitive, politically unpredictable, comparatively financially disadvantaged, square, married, heterosexual, comb- carrying, college-educated, hearing-impaired, Depression-generation, male European-American.
In short, a gender-twitter no more.
The Celtic-American of female gender to which I am married is a high school dropout and, therefore, not unwelcome, but made to feel peculiar in doubles bars for genderly enlightened, Celt-sensitive, politically unpredictable, comparatively financially disadvantaged, square, married, heterosexual, comb-carrying, college-educated, hearing-impaired, Depression-generation, male European-Americans.
In short, we stay home a lot.


Top Awards Announced For 1993 Children's Books
Emily Arnold McCully has been named the winner of the 1993 Randolph Caldecott Medal for the most distinguished American picture book for children for "Mirette on the High Wire" (G. P. Putnam's), and Cynthia Rylant was named as the winner of the John Newbery Medal for the most distinguished contribution to American literature for children for "Missing May" (Orchard Books).
The two awards, the country's most prestigious for children's literature, were announced yesterday by the Library Service to Children, a division of the American Library Association.


It's Goodbye Hirsch, and Hello Richter
The Rangers' convoluted goaltending plot, which thickened into a three-way drama recently when rookie Corey Hirsch was promoted from Binghamton and incumbent Mike Richter was demoted, thinned yesterday.
The 20-year-old Hirsch was returned to the minors, where his 19-2-3 record leads the league, after an encouraging 1-0-1 road debut with the Rangers.


Capriati Shows Spirit, But Graf Shows Spunk
Jennifer Capriati took the court in her now-customary headgear: white hat emblazoned with American flag, the same sort of hat she wore during her gold-medal fortnight in Barcelona, Spain.
But no matter how hard Capriati slugged her groundstrokes or how much of the Rebound Ace surface she covered, she could not conjure up the same sort of magic that carried her to victory against Steffi Graf in the Olympic final.


U.S. Seeks To Reopen Japan Deal
The Clinton Administration is looking for ways to undo a secret last-minute decision by the Bush Administration to approve a Japanese corporation's purchase of an American company that makes computer equipment, Federal officials said today.
The case, involving a unit of the Applied Magnetics Corporation of Goleta, Calif., is the first foreign investment issue to face the Clinton Administration, and is a top priority of the White House's new National Economic Council, according to Congressional and executive branch officials.
President Clinton today formally created the council, which is meant to complement the National Security Council and will review questions of national economic security.
The Bush Legacy
The Bush Administration encouraged foreign investment in the United States and approved almost all of the applications submitted to it by foreign businesses seeking to buy American high-technology companies.
A notable exception came last summer, when the Administration barred the LTV Corporation from selling its missile division to Thomson-CSF of France.


Florida Progress Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Good Guys Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Antibody Produces Molecule Without Unwanted Mirror Image
MANY carbon-based compounds, like gloves, exist as mirror-image pairs, in which one molecular partner may have useful properties while its mirror-image mate may be useless or dangerous.
A group of chemists has engineered an antibody that breaks through nature's barrier blocking a "disfavored" chemical reaction, and forces the reaction to yield a single mirror-image chemical.


Logicon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chronicle
Did Oona O'Neill Chaplin sign a document that guaranteed a loan of $500,000 to Dr.
CHRIST L. ZOIS, a New York psychiatrist?
Or was the signature of Mrs.
Chaplin -- widow of Charlie Chaplin and daughter of Eugene O'Neill -- forged?
Lawyers for the estate of Mrs.
Chaplin, who died of pancreatic cancer on Sept. 27, 1991, contend that on June 14, 1989, when she is said to have signed the papers, she was in a hospital in Geneva recovering from a cerebral hemorrhage.


Personal Health
THE story is one that is echoed daily in hospitals and nursing homes throughout the country.
As Nancy Neveloff Dubler, a bioethicist at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx, tells it, the patient was an 83-year-old former piano teacher with diabetes who had lost one leg, was blind in one eye and nearly blind in the other and had such severe arthritis that he could no longer play the piano.
He was confined to his home in a wheelchair, aided by a 24-hour home attendant and visiting nurses.
One day he developed difficulty breathing.
He was hospitalized in intensive care and placed on a ventilator and kidney machine to counter "multiple organ failure." The attending physician gave him less than a 1 percent chance of recovering enough to leave the hospital.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
COUCH potatoes might have closed their eyes to a surprising development: the programs they watch are becoming somewhat less cluttered with commercials.
That's because advertisers and their agencies are cooling to 15-second spots, once the fastest-growing phenomenon on television since Roseanne Arnold.
According to an annual analysis by the Network Television Association, 15-second commercials accounted for just 31.8 percent of all spots that ran during the 1991-92 season on programming broadcast by its members.
That marked a sharp decline from a peak achieved as recently as the 1988-89 season, when 37.7 percent of all commercials on ABC, CBS and NBC were 15 seconds long.


Drug Giants Show Gains In Earnings
Two large drug companies, Merck and Warner-Lambert, announced double-digit earnings growth yesterday, but investors seemed preoccupied with national trends that may limit future pharmaceutical profits.
Drug stock prices have been declining on reports that the Clinton Administration expects to produce a national health-care program by May.
Trying to stave off price controls, Merck and eight other drug companies -- not including Warner-Lambert -- have promised to limit their increases to the general inflation rate.
Industry executives told the Clinton transition team that drugs should be included in a standard health package for American families.
But some companies remain wary of proposals that might involve deep discounts for elderly Medicare patients, who buy 40 percent of prescription drugs.


Alltel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Enron Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


UNITED TECHNOLOGIES CORP. (N)
Accounting changes and special charges reflecting the costs of reducing employment and closing factories produced losses in both the fourth quarter and the year for the United Technologies Corporation.
The diversified aircraft, building components and automotive parts producer reported yesterday that special charges totaling $701 million in the fourth quarter resulted in a loss of $333 million.
For the year, the company reported a loss of $287 million, including a one-time accounting charge of $482 million for post-retirement benefits.


Armstrong World Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ENRON CORP. (N)
Higher prices fattened profits for the natural gas industry in the fourth quarter, and provided a feast for the industry's biggest diversified company, the Enron Corporation.
The Houston-based company traced a portrait of broad-based improvement in its business units.
Profits in the company's gas marketing unit, which includes the Houston Pipe Line and a gas brokerage business, more than doubled for the year, to $122 million before interest and taxes.
December sales at times exceeded 7 billion cubic feet a day, with the average for the quarter 5.5 billion cubic feet, compared with 4.1 billion a year earlier.


McDonald &amp; Co. Invest.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Federal Signal reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Robert Harrington, 50, Astronomer in Capital
Dr.
Robert S. Harrington, an astronomer with the United States Naval Observatory in Washington, died Saturday at George Washington University Hospital.
He was 50 and lived in McLean, Va.
The observatory said he had died of cancer.


Two-Year Pact for Maddux
The Mets eliminated the possibility of their most problematic arbitration case of the off season yesterday when they came to an agreement with reliever Mike Maddux on a two-year contract.
Maddux will earn $900,000 for the 1993 season, as well as a $225,000 signing bonus.
The 31-year-old right-hander will be paid $1.25 million in 1994.
He earned $510,000 last season and had filed an arbitration figure of $1.35 million; the Mets had countered with $910,000.


Lebanese Army Raids Offices of a Militia
Keeping up pressure on anti-Israeli militias, the Lebanese Army said today that it had confiscated big caches of arms overnight in raids on the offices and warehouses of a dominant group in the port of Sidon.
A military communique said rocket launchers, land mines and mortar guns were among the weapons seized from hideouts of the Popular Nasserite Organization, which virtually ran this mainly Sunni Muslim city before all militias were formally disbanded at the end of the civil war more than two years ago.


Dead Sea Scrolls To Be Displayed At 2 Libraries
Some of the best-preserved and least-viewed fragments of the Dead Sea Scrolls, which have been objects of religious veneration and of venomous scholarly debate, will go on display at the Library of Congress in April, the first major American exhibition of the Scrolls in a generation.
The exhibition, which will come to the New York Public Library in October, was proposed by a representative of the Israeli Antiquity Authority in December 1991 when a furor over access to the documents was near its height.
The exhibition will include at least 11 major scroll fragments, including the earliest known texts of parts of the Old Testament books of Psalms, Leviticus and Hosea, as well as the King Saul's prayer for his dead son Jonathan.


Ex-Vermont Governor for Education Post
Madeleine M. Kunin, who emphasized education when she was Governor of Vermont, has become the latest former Governor chosen to help lead the United States Department of Education.
Nominated as Deputy Secretary, Ms.
Kunin would, if confirmed by the Senate, be the second-ranking official in the department after Secretary Richard W. Riley, a former Governor of South Carolina.
Both Mr.
Riley and Ms.
Kunin built strong records on education in their respective states, as did President Clinton when he was Governor of Arkansas.


Review/Ballet; A Swan and a Firebird, And Their Princes
"Swan Lake" mania has obviously overtaken the New York City Ballet.
Never have so many superb, and mainly new, leading casts been seen in the company's production in one season.
Wendy Whelan and Nilas Martins were the latest to make their debuts as Odette and Siegfried, and they did so splendidly on Sunday afternoon at the New York State Theater.
The trick is to recall that George Balanchine's one-act version is a gloss upon the standard full-evening "Swan Lake," not the real thing.
Miss Whelan and Mr.
Martins hit just the right note by abstracting the drama rather than playing it out.
They avoiding emoting but not emotion, which was expressed in their clarity of movement.
Still young performers in their 20's, they knew, through their rapport and purity of execution, how to turn in an entirely coherent performance rather than a string of set pieces.


Israel Rejects U.N. Chief's Proposals on Deportees
Israel, edging closer to a confrontation with the United Nations, today angrily rejected Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali's recommendation for Security Council measures to force the return of roughly 400 Palestinians deported to Lebanon six weeks ago.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, responding to Mr.
Boutros-Ghali's move, accused the Secretary General of employing a double standard by "completely ignoring extremist Islamic terrorism" that he said had made the deportations necessary.


International Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Congress to Tell Greenspan To Keep Interest Rates Low
With economic growth finally picking up and short-term interest rates at their lowest level in three decades, Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, might expect to be hugged when he testifies before Congress on Wednesday and Thursday.
He would be wiser to expect to be mugged.


Baird Stands in Part for All Working Mothers; Paperwork Nightmare
To the Editor:
Many dual-career and single-parent families face the difficult child-care situation in which Zoe Baird and her husband found themselves (front page, Jan. 14).
With complicated work schedules, they seek live-in child-care providers who can give children love and attention and also work flexible hours.


HBO &amp; Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Paccar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Belo (A.H.) Corp.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Theater; A Maestro of Mischief, Updated Malevolently
In "Scapin," the servant is a maestro of mischief, unable to restrain himself from meddling in the affairs of others.
Moliere, who certainly recognized a good part when he wrote it, chose to play the title role in the original production in 1671.
Since then, "Scapin" has come to be accepted as a most durable farce and one that can be subjected to open interpretation, as in "Scapino," the mirthful Jim Dale-Frank Dunlop Italianate variation.
At the Classic Stage Company through Feb. 21, Andrei Belgrader gives the play a freewheeling workout, updating it with contemporary references and underscoring it with a harsher line.
As always, "Scapin" needs an agile scamp, in this case, Stanley Tucci, a quick-change clown with a sly deadpan and a gift for mimicry.
With more malevolence than is customary in the role, he puts the intricate plot in motion and then casually sidesteps into improvisation.
Interrupting the play, he converses with theatergoers, scrambles through the seats and then settles back waiting for the comedy to continue.
But without him onstage, the show takes a long pause.


Reports Show How the Books Are Kept
In contrast to the image of the Towers Financial Corporation that is sketched by Steven Hoffenberg and his supporters, the fine print in the company's annual reports shows a concern whose explosive growth has been accompanied by some unusual accounting arrangements and an uneven compliance with its legal obligations to its investors.
But for an important bookkeeping change, the company's profits in its most recent fiscal year would have vanished.
The accounting change added roughly $8.5 million to the company's ledgers for the fiscal year that ended on June 30, 1992, enabling the company to report annual profits of $5.4 million.
Without the change, the company would have ended the year about $500,000 in the red, after belatedly writing off $3.8 million in losses from an insurance operation in Illinois that closed.


Strawberry Swings a Bat For First Time in 5 Months
DARRYL STRAWBERRY , returning from back surgery, swung a bat for the first time since September and said he felt fine.
"After I had surgery, I couldn't walk and I figured this was it," the Los Angeles Dodgers' slugger said Monday after joining the team for a winter workout at Dodger Stadium.


GRC International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


What's a Roast? For Many Chefs It's Fish or Garlic or Bananas or . . .
ROASTING wafts through the senses.
In culinary terms it is freighted with mouthwatering aroma, comforting warmth, a crisping sizzle and anticipated succulence.
And lately it is more appreciated than ever.
Dry-heat cooking in an oven has traditionally been associated with meat, poultry and game.
Indeed, large cuts of meat and whole poultry are often called roasts.
But increasingly, chefs are roasting other foods like fish, vegetables and fruit, finding that the technique seals in and intensifies flavors, imparts an attractive burnish and often uses less fat than some other cooking methods.


Fund American reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Pop Life
Watching Germany
The German singer and songwriter J. has a rallying cry for everyone in his country who is horrified by violence against foreigners and the rise of right-wing extremists but who feels powerless to fight back: "We Are the Majority." It is the title of his debut album, released in the United States this week by A&amp;M Records.
"I'm addressing all these minority people who think they don't have a voice, who don't vote because they think they can't change anything," said J., who was given the name Jens Mueller at his birth 22 years ago in what was then East Germany.
He now lives in Paris.
"If you take all these minorities and put them together, we are the majority and can change everything. But we have to use the voice we have. We have to say that we want justice."


Richfood Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 9


Consolidated Edison Co. of New York Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ruble at More than 500 to Dollar As Plunge Spurs Fear of Inflation
The value of the Russian ruble plunged today by more than 13 percent in trading at the Moscow currency exchange, breaking a 500-ruble-to-the-dollar barrier, an event widely seen as a signal of looming hyperinflation.
With the ruble now valued at less than one-fifth of a cent, its record low value is sure to do further damage to an economy already crippled by huge internal debt, rising inflation and a sharp drop in production.


Bids to Build Public Toilets Facing Limits
The Dinkins administration and the City Council plan to put conditions on a proposed city franchise for building public toilets that in effect would eliminate from competition a major European company that has tested its toilets successfully in New York.
Responding to pressure from advocates for the disabled, the administration and the Council leadership have said they will design the request for proposals to give preference to a company that can provide a single public toilet for both handicapped and nonhandicapped people.


USX-Marathon Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


USX-U.S. Steel Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Enduring Symbols of the Confederacy Divide the South Anew
At the same time that the election of Bill Clinton and Al Gore has come to symbolize a new face of the South, white and black Southerners from Louisiana to Virginia are battling like never before over the symbols that once defined the South and now divide it.
In Georgia, a bitter fight has erupted over Gov.
Zell Miller's proposal to rid the state flag of its Confederate symbol, which was added in 1956 during the height of white resistance to integration.


City Opera Announces 3 World Premieres
The New York City Opera is to celebrate its 50th-anniversary season with a schedule that is weighted toward the contemporary, especially American works that have long been considered the company's greatest strengths.
The centerpiece of the season is a World Premiere Festival, in October, which includes Ezra Laderman's "Marilyn" (an opera about Marilyn Monroe); Hugo Weisgall's "Esther" (about the biblical heroine), and a new version of Lukas Foss's television opera "Griffelkin" (based on a Grimm fairy tale).
The season, which opens on July 28 at the New York State Theater, also includes the New York premiere of Sir Michael Tippett's "Midsummer Marriage" and the New York stage premiere of another work originally written for television, Rodgers and Hammerstein's "Cinderella." And although the company is listing its production of Puccini's "Madama Butterfly" among its revivals, the work is being restaged to accommodate an unusual variant of the score: Puccini's original 1904 version in its American premiere.


McDonnell Payment Report
A House subcommittee said today that a report by the Pentagon's Inspector General had found that the Air Force improperly engaged in a plan to aid the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, which faced a severe shortage of cash in late 1990.
Details of the Pentagon report, which has not been released publicly, were disclosed today in a letter to Defense Secretary Les Aspin from Representative John Conyers Jr., a Michigan Democrat who is chairman of the Legislation and National Security subcommittee.
Aides to Mr.
Conyers provided the letter to a number of news organizations.


Dr. Samuel S. Cohen, Surgeon, 79
Dr.
Samuel S. Cohen, an orthopedic surgeon for more than 50 years, died on Friday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 79 and lived in Manhattan and Southold, L.I.
He died of leukemia, his family said.


Military Cites Wide Range of Reasons for Its Gay Ban
Raised in the privacy of a two-hour White House meeting and in public debate, the military's objections to homosexuals' serving openly in the armed services are many.
They range from visceral fears of disrupting a tight-knit culture and destroying decades-old tradition to practical questions of living in cramped quarters on a six-month sea tour.
The emotional debate was crystallized on Monday in the White House session between President Clinton and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Those six top officers, whose views were formed over decades in military services that flatly banned homosexuality, are fiercely resistant to lifting the ban.


Israel Faces New U.N. Pressure Over Deportations
Accused of allowing the United Nations to adopt a double standard in its dealings with recalcitrant nations, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali called today for the Security Council to take "whatever measures are necessary" to make Israel obey the Council's demand to re-admit 400 deported Palestinians.
Mr.
Boutros-Ghali's recommendation led immediately to a call for sanctions against Israel by the Palestine Liberation Organization, which circulated a draft Security Council resolution to ban Israel from human rights meetings and to prevent foreign companies from doing business with some Israeli enterprises in the occupied territories.


More Colorful Bridges
To the Editor:
In "Please Don't Paint That Bridge Bright Red" (letter, Jan. 14), I. Donald Weston, an architect, discusses the proposal to paint the venerable Hell Gate railroad bridge red.
He states that the "basic decision is always whether the bridge should be the focus of attention for the riverscape or the background." He urges an "appropriate" color.


American Express's Third Man
The new leadership team at the American Express Company -- James D. Robinson 3d as chairman and Harvey Golub as chief executive -- emerged victorious Monday only after a search committee of five board members failed to find an alternative choice to Mr.
Golub.
But they almost did.


Super Bowl XXVII: Notebook; Thomas Is Content to Let Bygones Be Bygones
When Coach Jimmy Johnson recruited running back Thurman Thomas to attend Oklahoma State in 1984, he went to Thomas's home in Missouri City, Tex., to talk with his mother.
"My mom said, 'Are you going to be at Oklahoma State to coach Thurman for four years?' " Thomas recalled today.
"He said, 'Yes, I am.' "


AT LUNCH WITH: Nigel Hamilton; A Target for the Longbows of Camelot
THE lunchtime crowd at the "21" Club was typical: mostly male, soberly suited, well padded for the most part and, given the prices, certainly well heeled.
Joe Kennedy would have been at home there.
Indeed, for many years, he was.
Jack Kennedy, less so, perhaps, and Nigel Hamilton not at all.
Even so, there Mr.
Hamilton was.
British, bearded and tweedy, a book and a sheaf of papers at his side, looking like a fugitive from the Lotos Club, or the Strand Book Store.


Suitor Starts Mapping Strategy to Save The Post
Steven Hoffenberg, the businessman who would be owner of The New York Post, scheduled his first meeting on the future of the imperiled newspaper with the head of the one department that he values above all others: sales.
"Did Zuckerman start this way?" Mr.
Hoffenberg asked The Post's vice president for sales, Robert M. Scott, referring to Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the publisher who 19 days ago bought the rival Daily News.


Let's Tip the Balance Back From Automobiles to Pedestrians
To the Editor:
The tragic hit-and-run deaths of three members of a Russian emigre family on New York City's Queens Boulevard (news article, Jan. 3) show the absurd priorities that dominate our transportation planning.
Not only our boulevards, but our whole system of streets is laid out first to accommodate the quick and efficient movement of automobiles, through wide traffic lanes and roadways, one-way streets, large turning radii and synchronized traffic lights.
Pedestrians are expected to adapt to this speedway existence by darting across the street before the light changes, by dodging speeding cars and by watching out for errant drivers.


Time Warner Plans Cable System of Hundreds of Channels
Time Warner Inc. announced plans yesterday for a highly sophisticated cable television system that would provide hundreds of channels and a vast library of entertainment and services that subscribers could call up on demand.
The service, to be developed on the company's Orlando, Fla., cable system, will have so-called digital compression capabilities that can greatly expand the number of channels and permit video telephone service and full-motion interactive video shopping services.
In contrast, conventional pay-per-view television has a set schedule, and home shopping network viewers must wait to see merchandise as it appears on the screen.


New England Electric System reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ball Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tie Domi Has Landed In Hostile Territory
Tie Domi, former Ranger avenger, hit the ground running last night at Kennedy Airport.
The Winnipeg team had arrived, team bags were claimed, and then Domi was off with a friend to enjoy his old town.
Domi is a man in a hurry with a job to do that goes beyond revenge tonight at Madison Square Garden against his former teammates.


Correction: Nougat Semifreddo
An article in The Living Section on Jan. 6 about restaurants in Italy where women are in charge of the kitchens gave incomplete instructions for nougat semifreddo.
Here is the corrected recipe. (Adapted from Claudia Verro, La Contea restaurant, Neive, Italy)  Total time: 1 1/2 hours, plus overnight for freezing  1 pound shelled hazelnuts  8 eggs, separated  1 1/3 cups sugar  1/2 cup water  2 cups whipping cream, chilled.
1.
Preheat the oven to 350 degrees.
Toast the shelled hazelnuts until brown, about 20 minutes.
Remove and place on a clean dish towel.
Allow to cool, then rub the hazelnuts in the towel to remove the skins.
When the hazelnuts are at room temperature, grind in a food processor.
2.
In a saucepan, beat together the egg yolks, 2/3 cup of the sugar, and water.
Heat over a low flame, stirring constantly until an instant-read thermometer reads 160 degrees.
Do not allow the eggs to curdle.
Set aside.
3.
In a food mixer, whip the cream until it holds soft peaks, add 1/4 cup sugar and continue to whip until the cream holds firm peaks.
Reserve.
4.
In the mixer, whip the egg whites until they hold soft peaks, add 1/4 cup sugar and continue to whip until it holds firm peaks.
Reserve.
5.
In a big bowl, mix the custard with the nuts, then fold in the whipped cream, then the egg whites.
Place in the freezer overnight.
Take out 30 minutes before serving.
Yield: 16 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 380 calories, 30 grams fat, 145 milligrams cholesterol, 45 milligrams sodium, 7 grams protein, 20 grams carbohydrate.


U.N. Arms Experts Begin New Search in Iraq
United Nations nuclear and ballistic weapons inspectors completed their first day of work here today with the cooperation of the Iraqi authorities.
The teams arrived here Monday after a standoff with Baghdad over United Nations flights.
Their mission comes at a time when President Saddam Hussein is seeking a dialogue with Washington.


The Gloom Deepens As Layoffs Increase; More Job Losses at Pratt &amp; Whitney
Pratt &amp; Whitney's decision to shrink its Connecticut work force by one-third during the next two years promises to ricochet through an economy already battered by deep cuts in military spending and layoffs in the insurance industry.
It will also mow down, at least for now, the hope for recovery from one of the worst local recessions in the nation, economists said.
But what has dampened spirits even more is that Pratt &amp; Whitney, the state's largest private employer, had been seen as a leader among military contractors in reducing its dependence on Government contracts.
Away From the Military
As military orders for jet engines declined with the end of the cold war, falling from a high of 800 a year in the early 1980's to 80 this year, Pratt &amp; Whitney had sought to insulate itself by relying more heavily on sales to airlines.
Dependence on the Pentagon fell from 50 percent of all sales through the last few decades to only 30 percent last year.


Chronicle
On Monday afternoon, a group of women from an organization called Lesbian Agenda entered the Madison Avenue office of ALEXANDRA PENNEY, editor in chief of Self magazine, to protest the magazine's plans for an event in Aspen, Colo., next week.
Many groups are boycotting Colorado because of a proposal there to bar laws that protect the rights of gay men and lesbians.
On Jan. 15, a state judge in Denver temporarily blocked Colorado from enforcing the anti-gay rights measure.
The magazine's event, a promotion for advertisers that was to begin on Monday and end with a fund-raising party for a charity next Wednesday, was canceled yesterday, though not in response to the women's demonstration, Ms.
Penney said.


Books of The Times; The Inside Tales of a Media Empire
Murdoch
By William Shawcross
Illustrated. 492 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $27.50.
As he demonstrated a dozen years ago in "Sideshow: Kissinger, Nixon and the Destruction of Cambodia," William Shawcross is an outstanding British journalist: a probing researcher, a dramatic storyteller and a writer with a sense of justice.
These characteristics are also evident much of the time in "Murdoch," his biography of Rupert Murdoch, the communications magnate who owns newspapers, magazines, a television network, a satellite television service, a book publishing house and a Hollywood movie studio.
These international companies make Mr.
Murdoch one of the most important figures delivering words and pictures to the global village.
Considering Mr.
Shawcross's deserved professional reputation, it's surprising to read this admission at the beginning of what he calls an unauthorized biography of his cooperative subject: "Because he had been most helpful and never sought to impose any conditions on me, I sent him the draft so that he could point out what he saw as factual errors. (On the same basis, I showed parts or all of the manuscript to others involved.) He then decided to make no comment."


Review/Film; Film Noir Still Has Life in the 90's, With Guns and a Snake Handler
That there's life for film noir in the 1990's is stunningly apparent in "Guncrazy," the very accomplished, cruelly entertaining new movie opening today at the Film Forum.
As its murderous young lovers it stars James Le Gros ("My New Gun") and Drew Barrymore, who gives the kind of performance that can transform a sweetly competent actress into a major screen personality.
"Guncrazy," directed by Tamra Davis in her feature debut and written by Matthew Bright, is as vulgar and contemporary as a late-breaking Long Island sex scandal, though its roots reach back into cinema history.
In its chilly seriocomic way, "Guncrazy" pays homage to its predecessors while also sending them up.


FMC Gold reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Havel Is Elected President of New Czech Republic by Its Parliament
Vaclav Havel, the playwright who led Czechoslovakia during its transition from Communism to democracy and campaigned in vain against the country's breakup, was elected to a five-year term today as President of the new Czech Republic.
The Czech Republic and Slovakia split in two on Jan. 1 after their parliamentary leaders failed in negotiations last year to resolve differences on the pace of economic reform.


Phelps Dodge Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Baird Stands in Part for All Working Mothers
To the Editor:
"The Sins of Zoe Baird," Anna Quindlen's excellent Jan. 20 column, doesn't go far enough.
The blame placing in which the Senate indulged over Ms.
Baird's child-care arrangements demonstrates a fundamental paradox.
No one says she was right to ignore the law.
But the issue is more profound than Ms.
Baird's failure to pay the appropriate taxes.


Tokyo Stocks Up a Bit
Stocks were slightly higher here today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed up 17.05 points, or 0.1 percent, at 16,509.68.
On Tuesday, the Nikkei gained 205.18 points.


Scott Paper Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Nelson Shields 3d, 69, Gun-Control Advocate
Nelson T. Shields 3d, a founder of the advocacy group Handgun Control, died Monday at his home in Greenville, Del.
He was 69.
Mr.
Shields, who was called Pete, died of cancer, said Susan Whitmore, a spokeswoman for the organization.


Giants Came to Praise Reeves, but Will They Play for Him?
Although Lawrence Taylor and Phil Simms can take the escape route and reunite with Bill Parcells in New England, both said today their preference is to remain with the Giants.
The catch is Taylor and Simms -- unrestricted free agents -- must first be placated by the new coach, Dan Reeves.


FMC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bank Rates Slide a Bit Across U.S.
Yields offered on bank money market accounts and certificates of deposit for the week beginning today dipped slightly, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, a Florida-based newsletter.
In the New York metropolitan region, commercial banks adjusted yields on short-term C.D.'s while savings banks lowered money market account yields.
Elsewhere in the nation, the declines were most evident in money market accounts.


Witness in Assault Trial Says Acts Were Immoral
A defense witness, Paul Archer, finished testifying in the Glen Ridge sexual assault trial today by calling the sexual activities between his brother and three friends and their mildly retarded schoolmate immoral but not illegal.
Before he ended four days of testimony, Mr.
Archer again blamed the young woman, who has an I.Q. of 64, for the entire incident, and he offered a new reason for lying to the police about the encounter.
But he agreed with a prosecutor, Glenn D. Goldberg, that it was "morally wrong."


Job-Stimulus Plan Begins to Take Shape
Aides to President Clinton said that he would probably propose $15 billion to $20 billion in new Federal spending this year to stimulate employment.
The likelihood of such a proposal was confirmed by Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich, who acknowledged that the figure was a modest one, given the context of a $6 trillion economy.


Exar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Forget the Theories, Japan Puts Chaos to Work
In research laboratories around the world, chaos theory, a young scientific field that seeks to find order amid seemingly random behavior, is providing fundamental insights into the behavior of the weather, the inner workings of the human body and the ebb and flow of wildlife populations.
In Japan, chaos theory is also being used to make a kerosene heater.
While new technology in the United States has often been developed for military or space efforts, Japan does not have a strong military program and so relies on consumer products to lead the way.


Augat Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Signs of life in Paris: C14.


Britain Cuts Key Rate; Pound Falls
Britain dropped its benchmark lending rate today to its lowest level since 1977, causing the pound to fall against the German mark and the dollar and sending stocks up sharply in London.
The Bank of England said it had dropped its base rate by one percentage point, to 6 percent.
It was the fourth rate reduction since September, when Britain abandoned its policy of maintaining the pound's value against other European currencies by keeping interest rates high.


In Case an Unwelcome Visitor Blows In


Apple South reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


I.B.M. TO REPLACE ITS TOP EXECUTIVE
I.B.M. announced yesterday that it was starting a search to replace its chief executive, John F. Akers, within three months.
The company also cut its dividend payments to shareholders for the first time in its 79-year history, reducing the quarterly payout to 54 cents from $1.21.
The moves, coming just a week after the International Business Machines Corporation reported the largest yearly loss in corporate history, are a recognition of the deep troubles at the world's largest computer company and its need for new leadership.


Confusion and Error Are Rife In Hospital Billing Practices
AFTER Frederick Ruof had hip replacement surgery last summer, he received a $27,000 bill that divided the total into broad categories like nursing, radiology and laboratory fees.
But Mr.
Ruof, who works in Baltimore, wanted to know exactly what his insurer was paying for and requested an itemized bill.
He received eight pages of tiny type, containing mysterious entries like "hip-uni 2 die," "auto whole bl," and "PT-PTT" -- a long list of codes, technical terms and abbreviations that was virtually indecipherable.


First Lady and Top Official Visit, Both Named Hillary Clinton
On her first day in her new job shaping her husband's health-care plan, Hillary Rodham Clinton yesterday mixed private discussions on health policy with a public appearance scripted along the traditional lines of First Ladyhood: a visit to a public school in New York to chat with children in front of cameras.
Mrs.
Clinton's approach mixes two Hillaries: one a Presidential partner who is daily setting precedents of perquisite and power, and the other a political wife performing a function a hundred years in the circumscribing.


Hillary Rodham Clinton's Job
It's official.
Hillary Rodham Clinton will not bake cookies, keep to the East Wing or stand quietly by her man.
No, she will stand
with
her man, or maybe ahead of him, in formulating health care policy.
It's a genuine job and an unusual arrangement, but it is who the Clintons are.
In that regard, it is also more honest than the charade they went through before her independence became a campaign liability and Mrs.
Clinton helped get her husband elected by pretending to be what she was not.


Getting Ready for A Calmer Pose Now
Dan Reeves today wore his game-day outfit: a suit, tie, shirt, tassled shoes.
The way he sees it, the outfit stops him from screaming on the sidelines.
It also symbolizes how far he has come as a coach and person, and some of the qualities he brings to his new job as head coach of the Giants.


Shaky Knicks Manage 4th in Row
Listening to Pat Riley's post-game comments, it sounded like the Knicks had lost.
And certainly, the Knicks played poorly enough to lose, committing 20 turnovers and shooting 42.9 percent from the field.
So while New York escaped last night with a 98-90 victory over the Philadelphia 76ers, the lackluster performance at Madison Square Garden did not inspire New York's coach or its players.
The Knicks (25-14) have won four consecutive games, but that winning streak will not survive many more performances like this one.


Super Bowl XXVII; . . . While the Bills' Smith Is the Calm Rather Than the Storm
Bruce Smith behaved himself.
He said "thank you." He said "you're welcome." To reporters.
To photographers.
To people who stuck tape recorders into his face and tried to get him angry, tried to get him to explode.
Smith didn't bite.
No trash-talking.
No whining.
No complaining.
He didn't call a single question "stupid" or tell a single person to shut up.
His first two Super Bowls, Smith couldn't keep himself out of trouble -- not that he tried.
Today, at media day for Super Bowl XXVII, he couldn't keep people interested in what he had to say.


Islanders Making a Play for Playoffs by Playing .500
The New York subdivision of the Patrick Division is a tightly knit neighborhood too close for anyone's comfort.
There ought to be a zoning law against so many pretty good teams being so near and yet so near.
These teams -- the Islanders, the Devils and the Rangers -- are within 2 points of each other as they scramble for the bottom two playoff berths in the bracket.
The Islanders, in fifth place, are 2 points behind their local rivals after their 8-2 thumping of the depleted Devils tonight before 9,675 at the Coliseum.


Micronics Computers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Baxter International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Treasury Bond Prices in Retreat
Treasury bond prices yesterday gave back two-thirds of the gains made on Monday, as investors took profits.
Corporate bonds also eased.
The price of the 30-year Treasury bond fell 25/32 , to 10416/32 , with its yield rising to 7.25 percent, up from 7.20 percent on Monday.


Curtice-Burns Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Before We Step Into a Bosnian Quagmire
To the Editor:
Re "Criticized as Appeaser, Vance Defends His Role in the Balkans" (front page, Jan. 19): Just as the Clinton State Department, heir in some ways to the Carter State Department, takes over foreign policy, Cyrus Vance, architect of the Carter philosophy, is under attack for doing what he does best: stalling for time while trying to limit damage from a mess most of the world has neither the patience nor wish to understand.


Bridge
If one wants to find the country with the highest percentage of top-class bridge players relative to the size of the population, one should look in the North Atlantic.
Iceland's long winter nights, combined with a cold climate, make indoor games very popular.
In 1991 one Icelandic team won the world teams title in Yokohama, Japan, and six months ago a completely different Icelandic squad won the Nordic Teams in Umea, Sweden, in a field that included world-class squads from Sweden and Denmark.
Two of the winners, Karl Sigurhjartarson and Saevar Thorbjornsson, sat East and West on the diagramed deal and won an award for the best playing performance.
Their Danish opponents climbed to four spades and West, who had contributed a weak jump in hearts, led his singleton club.


Wenzhou Journal; Backed by China, Go-Getters Get Rich
If Mao Zedong were to come back to life and inspect this flourishing city of Dickensian capitalism, where privately owned factories hire migrant laborers to work 12 hours a day, seven days a week, he might be goaded intostarting a Communist revolution.
For more than 20 years, Wenzhou has been perhaps the boldest city in China, adept at chanting Communist mantras while building a private economy.
That led hard-liners to denounce Wenzhou periodically in the past, but these days "the Wenzhou model" is sanctified by Beijing as a symbol of the "socialist market economy" that the party is trying to build.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Monday about the replacement of Brinker International Inc.'s chairman and chief executive, Norman E. Brinker, misstated the market value of his holdings in the company.
They are worth approximately $56 million, or 4 percent of the company's total market value of $1.4 billion.
The article also misidentified the club where Mr.
Brinker was rendered unconscious in an accident.
It was the Palm Beach Polo and Country Club.


Fernandez Modifies Parts of Curriculum About Gay Parents
New York City Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez has moved to end a long, bitter dispute over teaching first graders to be tolerant of families headed by gay and lesbian couples, softening controversial passages of his Rainbow Curriculum.
While Mr.
Fernandez portrayed the changes as minor, some school officials saw the conciliatory move as the latest in a series of signals that he is prepared to stay on the job when his contract expires in June.


Books of The Times; The Inside Tales of a Media Empire
Murdoch By William Shawcross Illustrated. 492 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $27.50.


Feinstein Makes Bid For Judge's Removal In Corruption Case
Barry Feinstein, one of New York's most powerful union leaders, said yesterday that the administrative judge hearing civil corruption charges against him had dictated the terms of a plea-bargaining settlement and then abruptly rejected the agreement.
Mr.
Feinstein, in a court motion, called for the removal of the judge, Frederick M. Lacey.
He contended that Mr.
Lacey was biased against him and had compelled him to undergo two days of hearings last month after a settlement had been reached.


Brooklyn Philharmonic Reaches Pact
The Brooklyn Philharmonic, one of the nine orchestras affected by the strike of freelance musicians, which began on Saturday, reached a separate tentative agreement yesterday with Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians, the union representing the players.
The orchestra's musicians are meeting today to vote on the new three-year contract.
The orchestra's management, anticipating ratification, announced that it would perform its concerts on Friday and Saturday evening at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.


Market Place; Chrysler stock is on the rise despite threat of dilution.
THE Chrysler Corporation's rebound has been nowhere more evident than in the vitality of its common stock.
The shares rose steadily in the last week despite the auto maker's decision to try to raise perhaps as much as $1.5 billion by offering 40 million new shares.
Although the new common stock would cause a 12 percent dilution for current holders of Chrysler stock, and after an initial drop in price following the announcement, the shares closed yesterday at $40 each, up 12.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.
That compares with $36 before the announcement on Jan.11.


Books of The Times; The Inside Tales of a Media Empire
Murdoch By William Shawcross Illustrated. 492 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $27.50.


Lawmakers Convene Committee on Change
A joint Senate-House committee that was created last year to recommend ways of reorganizing Congress convened for the first time today, and the ideas offered by Democratic leaders who testified before the panel were in sharp conflict with those of their Republican counterparts.
The panel, the Joint Committee on the Organization of Congress, made up of 14 Democrats and 14 Republicans, was created in response to a public outcry over scandals, lawmakers' perquisites and legislative inaction on Capitol Hill.
Its recommendations are not expected before autumn.


Wallace Fund Grants to Help Popularize Museums
The Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund is to announce tomorrow a series of grants totaling $50 million over the next five years that are intended to help art museums attract more diverse audiences.
The grants are said to represent the largest national effort to date to help art museums shed their images as elitist institutions and reach out to traditionally underserved segments of the population.


Consumer Confidence Shows Slight Decline
Consumer confidence slipped a bit this month, after rising in December, the Conference Board said yesterday.
In its report, based on a sample of 5,000 households nationwide, the Conference Board's index of consumer confidence fell to 77.0 in January from a revised 78.1 in December.
Most Wall Street economists had forecast another upward move in the index.


Issues Beyond X's and O's
Problems Reeves Faced in Denver  Control: It was his way, every step of the way.
He has acted as his own general manager for football operations, and has run the college draft as well.
But the issue flared after the 1991 season when he fired Mike Shanahan, his offensive coordinator, in a disagreement over how the offense should be run.
Even though Reeves had hired Shanahan and given him the title, he didn't want him to have control.
The owner: Pat Bowlen was angered by the Shanahan move and insisted Shanahan stay.
But Reeves, whose title was vice president/head coach, pointed to his contract.
Bowlen had to back down and announced, "By virtue of his contract, Dan has the right to hire and fire coaches." It was apparent to many people then that Bowlen was not going to allow either Reeves or that contract to remain in force.
Dealing with the superstar: In Denver, there has been only one: John Elway.
His relationship with Reeves, although rocky, was successful: Elway, the nervous, impatient star, and Reeves, the organized, no-nonsense pedagogue.
Elway has denied, as did Bowlen, that he was responsible for Reeves's departure.
A few weeks before Reeves was dismissed, Elway suggested publicly that the coach should delegate authority, that he had taken too much on himself.
And Elway was known to object to Reeves's firing of Shanahan.
Possible Problems Reeves Will Face in New York  Dealing with George Young and the owners: The owners won't interfere.
Reeves can do all the talking he wants as far as the college draft and picking free agents.
But he won't have the final say.
That is George Young's call.
Tom Boisture, the player personnel director, oversees the draft and will listen to Reeves.
Reeves has told Young that he doesn't expect the sort of control he exercised in Denver.
Still, how will he handle it if he doesn't get his way?
The media: On a typical Wednesday, Reeves will be faced by more print and electronic media types than he saw before any game in Denver, except for the conference championship.
His Southern hospitality will be taxed, but he seems to be able to handle crowds now.
After all, he has been to the Super Bowl.
Dealing with veterans: There are no prima donas on the Giants' offense, no one who is as dominant as Elway in Denver.
Reeves will control the offense and its players.
If he chooses Jeff Hostetler as his quarterback, which seems likely, he will find a performer who tends to whine if things don't go his way.
But Hoss, with the mechanical skills to run a Reeves-type varied offense, will do his bidding.
Lawrence Taylor?
The most famous Giant on defense, if he decides to return, is unlikely to play the defining role he enjoyed throughout his career.
Still, Reeves probably will incorporate Taylor's style into the new defensive schemes.
It is hard to imagine Reeves losing control of the defense the way Ray Handley did.
Motivation: By becoming the coach, Reeves immediately brings more authority to the role than Handley.
The Giants still like to think of themselves as the Super Bowl team, and in Reeves they have a coach who wears more Super Bowl rings than anyone else -- eight (two as the Cowboys' option halfback, three as a Cowboys' assistant, three as the Broncos' head coach).
Dan Reeves's Coaching Record Regular Season 110 Wins 73 Loses 601 Precentage Post-Season 7 Wins 6 Loses 538 Precentage Totals 117 Wins 79 Loses 597 Precentage DAN REEVES'S MILESTONES  1965 -- Made Dallas Cowboys roster as free agent runing back out of University of South Carolina.  1967 -- Became first Cowboy to score 4 touchdowns in one game when he did it against Atlanta, Nov. 5.
1970 -- Hired by Tom Landry as a player-coach.
Held the dual role for two years before assuming full-time coaching duties in 1972.  1977 -- Named Cowboys offensive coordinator.  1981 -- Became ninth head coach in Denver Broncos history on Feb. 28.
Guided Broncos to 10-4 season and at the time was the youngest coach in the NFL, at age 37.  1986, '87 and '89 -- Guided Broncos into the Super Bowl, becoming the first coach since Miami's Don Shula to lead a team to three Super Bowls in four years.
December 1992 -- Fired by the Broncos after 11 years as head coach, during which time Denver won five A.F.C.
Western Division titles.
Jan. 26 1993 -- Named head coach of the Giants.


Regan Assails Jobs Program For Prisoners
The New York State Comptroller charged today that a state program that provides jobs and vocational training for prison inmates is oversubscribed and undersupervised, resulting in too many inmate escapes and re-arrests.
Basing his findings on an audit of the program from 1990 to 1991, Comptroller Edward V. Regan said that the program had grown so quickly that the state unable to manage it.


Help Wanted: Computer Skills a Must
The world's largest computer maker has begun thinking the unthinkable.
Few institutions in America have cherished the tradition of grooming one of their own to become chief executive more than the International Business Machines Corporation.


Rockies Dismiss 2 Owners
The Colorado Rockies yesterday dismissed JOHN ANTONUCCI and STEVE EHRHART , two of the team's three original owners who lost much of their authority in a restructuring last fall.
Antonucci, chairman and chief executive officer of the Rockies, had responsibility for all day-to-day operations of the team.
Ehrhart, president of Rockies Stadium Development Corporation, was in charge of overseeing construction of Coors Field, the Rockies new stadium. (AP)


Hazing's Forbidden Rites Are Moving 'Underground'
For generations, fraternities and sororities have been seen as organizations that help students develop a sense of belonging on college campuses.
That was the reason Derone Walker pledged the Phi Beta Sigma fraternity last year at Southern University in Baton Rouge, La.
Now he wishes he had not.


Torcolato Wine, Italy's Sweet Secret
IN this town north of Venice near Vicenza, in an area known for the clean lines and classic proportions of its Palladian villas, the wine of note is a decidedly baroque confection.
Torcolato, which means twisted, is a wine made from grapes left to dry on giant, corkscrew strands hung from attic ceilings.
The result is a sweet wine that, until recently, amounted to a local curiosity.
That was until Fausto Maculan, 42, took over his father's winery and set his sights beyond the rolling foothills of the Dolomites to the cosmopolitan markets of Europe and America.
The Torcolato made by Mr.
Maculan, a wine with the richness and balance of a fine Sauternes, is the only one sold outside the region.


Sports of The Times; Welcome To the N.F.C. Beast
NOW that Dan Reeves is finally the Giants' coach, he is either being diplomatic or he has made his first mistake.
Asked at his Giants Stadium inaugural yesterday to assess the burden of competing now in the National Conference East instead of in the American Conference West as he did with the Denver Broncos for 12 seasons, he dismissed the geographical significance.


Nets Cruise and Daly Picks Up No. 500
If Chuck Daly could have had his 500th coaching victory in the N.B.A as tailor-made as one of his designer suits, he would probably have it drawn up this way: Nets win, 1-0, in overtime.
Daly likes defense.
Preaches it.
Eats it three times a day.
He is using it as the foundation with which to make the Nets serious contenders.


Public &amp; Private; Welcome to the Club
The children watching the inauguration being replayed on tape grew silent as Maya Angelou began to recite her poem.
Then midway through they began to cheer, not for her words but for themselves, as though she were calling the roll:
So say the Asian, the Hispanic, the Jew  The African, the Native American, the Sioux,


Mylan Labs reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Baush &amp; Lomb reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


EUROPE PLANNING CURBS ON TANKERS
The European Community has decided to draw up strict new safety rules for oil tankers to reduce the risk of large oil spills like those off Spain and Britain in the last two months.
The new controls are expected to impose specific itineraries and even detours for ships carrying oil and other dangerous cargo to keep them away from areas important for wildlife, fishing or tourism.


3 Aircraft Companies Announce Big Job Cutbacks as Orders Fall
Squeezed by fewer orders for military aircraft and commercial jet airliners, three major aerospace companies announced cutbacks yesterday that will result in layoffs of thousands of workers in coming months, with Connecticut and Washington State losing most of the jobs.
Pratt &amp; Whitney, the jet engine manufacturer with headquarters in Hartford, said that 6,700 jobs at its Connecticut plants would be eliminated during the next 24 months, including 1,800 this week.


Food Notes
Julia Child's 80th
Julia Child's 80th birthday has come and gone.
But as far as celebrating this milestone of last Aug. 15 is concerned, the page was never torn from the calendar.
The latest celebration, the 29th, was held on Sunday at the Rainbow Room.
New York's party, sponsored by the local chapter of the American Institute of Wine and Food, of which Mrs.
Child is a founder, was attended by a capacity crowd of 300 fans.
Had it been left to the guest of honor, the menu might have been omelets.
In one of the priceless, artfully spliced clips unearthed from her television series and shown on an oversize screen, she demonstrated that as long as there were five chefs working, there was nothing to whipping up 300 omelets in 20 minutes, assuming no omelets fell on the floor or were tossed in the trash.


Historical Society Puts Up Artworks As Loan Collateral
The financially beleaguered New-York Historical Society has put up $3 million worth of artworks from its collection as collateral to secure a $1.5 million commercial loan it says it needs to survive.
The loan is from Sotheby's, the world's largest art auction house.
The society would not identify the specific artworks it put up as security, but it said it had been planning to sell them anyway.
"We're not selling the farm," said Norman Pearlstine, the chairman of the historical society.
"This is an extraordinary good-will gesture to a troubled institution that has been getting very little support from the traditional sources."


Corrections
An obituary headline in some editions on Monday and in some yesterday, about John Corbin Eddison, an expert on economic development, misstated his age.
He was 73.


Deluxe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Crawford &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Super Bowl XXVII; Headlines, Headlines? Thomas Just Sighs
Wedged into a plastic yellow seat in the stands behind home plate at Dodger Stadium and surrounded by a mob of reporters, Bills running back Thurman Thomas had no place to run from the inevitable this afternoon.
Like a man reconciled to his fate, Thomas withstood the barrage of questions about "the helmet." It was the same question, really, but coming in every conceiveable form and from every imaginable angle.


Wine Talk
THE last vintage chart to appear in this space, on May 22, 1991, documented one of the more memorable periods in wine history.
From 1981, the first vintage covered, through 1990, which had not yet been bottled, it was a period of unrivaled prosperity and success in most of the major wine regions of the world.
Most vintage charts -- and the people who follow them -- are primarily concerned with Bordeaux, and for Bordeaux the good times began much earlier.
After the mysterious 1975 vintage, which still has not matured and, alas, probably never will, there has been an abundance of fine harvests and good wine.


Hudson Leathers, 86, Commodity Executive
L.
Hudson Leathers, whose career in the commodities business spanned more than six decades, died on Jan. 19 at Centrastate Medical Center in Freehold, N.J.
He was 86 and had moved to Freehold from Orange, N.J., after he retired as a first vice president at Shearson Lehman Brothers two years ago.
The cause of death was Lou Gehrig's disease, his family said.


Fire Destroys Trucking Terminal in Hoboken


San Diego Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hershey Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


USX-Delhi Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2 Acquitted of Rape Charge
Two former Arkansas football players were acquitted of rape charges yesterday in Fayetteville, Ark., after a jury heard the defendants deny having sex with a teen-age girl who said she consented to the acts.
The girl was 13 at the time of the incident last April, and Arkansas law defines sex with a partner under the age of 14 as rape even if the partner is willing.


Vulcan Materials reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Freeport McMoRan reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Daly Predicts Better Things    JOHN DALY said today in Scottsdale, Ariz., that he expected to be a better player after three and a half weeks of treatment for alcohol abuse, but added that he was not expecting too much out of his game right away.


Pope &amp; Talbot Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
I.B.M. is searching for a new chief executive and it cut its dividend for the first time.
The moves, just a week after I.B.M. reported the largest yearly loss in history, were more signs of trouble at the world's largest computer company.  [ Page A1. ]  If it turns outside the company, I.B.M. will break a cherished tradition of chief executives' rising through the ranks.  [ D1. ]
Boeing, Pratt &amp; Whitney and McDonnell Douglas announced cutbacks that are expected to lead to layoffs of thousands of workers in coming months.  [ A1. ]  Pratt &amp; Whitney's decision to shrink its Connecticut work force by a third will ricochet through a battered state economy.  [ B1. ]


Corrections
An article on Monday about Transitchek, a program in the New York area that subsidizes the commuting costs of a company's employees, misstated the processing fee charged by Transit Center, the agency that runs the program.
It is 4 percent.


Boston College Ends St. John's Streak at 5
He didn't even make the blackboard.
It's not that St.
John's was unaware of Robert Blackwell, a highly recruited player who chose Boston College when he left Bishop Ford High School in Brooklyn.
But the learning that Blackwell has done in his freshman season had not yet translated into productive numbers.


Wallace Fund Grants to Help Popularize Museums
The Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund is to announce tomorrow a series of grants totaling $50 million over the next five years that are intended to help art museums attract more diverse audiences.
The grants are said to represent the largest national effort to date to help art museums shed their images as elitist institutions and reach out to traditionally underserved segments of the population.


COMPANY NEWS
ARCO ALASKA INC., Anchorage, said it and Phillips Petroleum led the bidding for oil and gas leases in Cook Inlet.
Working as 60-40 partners, they bid up to $17 million for tracts.
EQUITABLE COS., New York, will merge its money-management unit, Equitable Capital Management, with Alliance Capital Management L.P, a publicly traded company in which the Equitable Companies owns a 55 percent stake.


Roadway Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Washington-Area Students Take Lead in Annual Science Awards
High school students from outside the New York metropolitan area, particularly those in the Washington area, overtook New Yorkers this year in the 52d annual Westinghouse Science Talent Search, whose 40 finalists were named Monday.
New York State produced 7 finalists, 13 fewer than last year.
Four are from New York City schools, which had 11 in 1992.
There were nine finalists from the Washington area -- four from Virginia and five from Maryland.
Connecticut had one finalist and New Jersey none.
Minnesota was the only other state to have more than two finalists.


Review/Television; A Real Live Health-Care Drama
Many a lawyer must be an actor manque.
But Prof.
Arthur Miller of the Harvard Law School is demonstrably not to the manque born.
His thespiantic talents have been displayed in many upscale television discussions, and now, in "Who Shall Be Healed?," he has the hit of his performing career.
As the moderator and provocateur of tonight's "Fred Friendly Seminar," Mr.
Miller takes the role of Homer Smith, a computer manager for a company in what he calls "the wonderful community of Appleville," somewhere in the middle of the United States.
As the hour progresses, Smith's troubles accumulate.
First, he can't accept a better job because the new company, a small one, does not provide health benefits.
Then he comes down with severe headaches and his group-health doctor discourages him from being examined by magnetic resonance imaging because of the cost.
And then his wife has trouble getting the best oncologist in town to treat her breast cancer.





Baird Stands in Part for All Working Mothers; Old Double Standard
To the Editor:
Zoe Baird's confirmation proceedings once again spotlight the inconsistent standards by which the Government and the public evaluate those nominated to public office.


Campus Journal; Georgetown Is Basking In Clinton's New Glow
The trees are bare, the weather wintry, but Georgetown University is experiencing an early spring because of President Clinton, class of 1968.
With the installation of the university's most famous alumnus at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, Georgetown undergraduates' steps seem bouncier, the faculty's collective chests more expansive.


Varian Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Hi-Lo Automotive reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Butler Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Canada Seeks an Exemption As U.S. Prepares Steel Duties
As the Commerce Department put the finishing touches on preliminary new steel import tariffs, Canadian officials said today that they were attempting to win an exemption for Canadian steel from the Clinton Administration.
Michael Wilson, Canada's Trade Minister, has called Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown and Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, to discuss ways to strike a separate deal, the Canadian officials said.
The United States is expected to announce tariffs on up to 20 countries, including Canada, on Wednesday.


Review/Opera; 'Il Trovatore': A Dark and Gloomy Night in Aragon
The Metropolitan Opera's five-year-old production of "Il Trovatore" is in trouble before a single player has set foot on stage.
In his companion piece to "Rigoletto," Verdi let loose a torrent of abrasive energy.
Written consecutively, the two operas share a relentless cruelty, thwarted revenge and a fascination for the physically grotesque.
The cool economies of this Met staging, on the other hand, summon a kind of enameled gloom; the flow has been diffused, the temperatures lowered.
Fabrizio Melano's production, with sets by Ezio Frigerio, returned to the house on Monday night.
Huge columns coated in glossy black swing back and forth over an equally dark set of steps.
Close together, they hint at interiors.
For the garden scene they sprout leafy branches at their top.
The columns retreat to make way for the Gypsy encampment and its projected backgrounds of fat clouds and cold mountain faces.


Trident Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Caterpillar Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dinkins Tells Legislators Of Burdens
With more assertiveness than in past visits to Albany, Mayor David N. Dinkins today charged the state with shifting its financial problems onto the city in recent years, and pleaded for "a change of posture in Albany."
The Mayor, who plans to unveil his proposal for filling a $2.1 billion budget gap on Friday, said the city had absorbed "an astonishing $1.1 billion in shifted costs since 1990."


Russian Sensitivities; As Choices Become Harder, Moscow Grows Skeptical About U.S. Policies
For Russia the conflicts in Iraq and Yugoslavia have posed an increasingly wrenching choice between traditional allies and a longing for a new partnership with Washington and the West.
It is a predicament that has stoked a bitter political struggle at home.
Abroad it has made Moscow increasingly sensitive to Washington's intentions and methods abroad and has set the stage for an open dispute over any increase of force against President Saddam Hussein of Iraq or the Serbs in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


John A. Lafore Jr., 87, Kennel Club President
John A. Lafore Jr., a former president of the American Kennel Club and a former Congressman from Pennsylvania, died Sunday at Lankeanau Hospital in Montgomery County, Pa.
He was 87 and lived in Villanova, Pa.
Mr. Lafore died of a stroke, said the kennel club, which reported his death.


James River Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


No. 2 Bank To Spin Off Bad Assets
The BankAmerica Corporation appears to be finally digesting last year's acquisition of the Security Pacific Corporation, which had far more troubled assets than was expected.
BankAmerica, the nation's second- largest banking company, said yesterday that it earned $473 million for the fourth quarter and $1.492 billion for the year, which was in line with analysts' expectations.
In 1991, the bank earned $285 million in the fourth quarter and $1.124 billion for the year, but the results are not directly comparable because of the merger, which took effect in April 1992.


College Hockey Report
Sprint to Playoffs Just about every coach is telling his charges that the next five weeks will be crucial, that they can gain the home-ice advantage in the playoffs if they pull up their socks, tighten their belts and renew their dedication and commitment.
In the four leagues of Division I, the coaches for the most part are correct.
Each league has one first-place team well out in front followed by a close-packed group looking ahead to the March tournaments.
Any modest February winning streak will set up a team for playoff matches at home.


INSIDE
The Icons of Dixie
White and black Southerners are battling as never before over the symbols that once defined their region and now divide it.
Page A16.
Career Envoy Sent to Russia
President Clinton has chosen Thomas R. Pickering, a top career diplomat, as the next United States Ambassador to Moscow.
Page A2.
U.S.
Seeks Balkans Tribunal
The State Department has taken the first step toward organizing an international tribunal to prosecute war crimes in the Balkans.
Page A3.
Dredging Halted in Newark
A Federal agency has suspended a permit for dredging container-ship berths in Newark Bay because of concerns over dioxin.
Page B1.
Quagmire in Hospital Billing
Confusing or inaccurate hospital bills often make it impossible for patients to sort out charges.
Health, page C16.


More Change Likely at Shearson
With James D. Robinson 3d at the helm, Shearson Lehman Brothers faces yet another round of changes that could result in the firm being owned by public shareholders, if it survives an almost certain battle of egos, Wall Street executives said yesterday.
As Shearson's new chairman and chief executive, Mr.
Robinson now must gain control of a firm whose investment bankers and traders only recently began to enjoy the tastes of power in senior jobs.
And he finally must deal with many of the problems from the 1980's, such as bad real estate holdings, that developed on his watch as chairman and chief executive of the American Express Company, Shearson's parent.


Toyota Dealers Plan Comedy Festivals
Laughter is not usually associated with buying a car.
Toyota dealer associations in metropolitan New York and Philadelphia hope to change that by sponsoring comedy festivals in May and June.
Through their agency, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York, the associations will spend close to $1 million to sponsor the Toyota Comedy Festivals, presented by Festival Productions Inc. in association with Alan King Productions.
Mr.
King will be featured in commercials promoting the festivals, which are being patterned after the jazz and other music festivals put on by Festival Productions.


Ferro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tranquil Campus of C.I.A. Is Shaken by Killings of Two
The employees at the Central Intelligence Agency know the world is a dangerous place.
Many spend their working hours analyzing the threats that make it that way, while others travel to dangerous places abroad to collect information.
But as one senior C.I.A. officer put it, no one expects to find menace in the prosperous Virginia suburb of McLean, where the agency has its headquarters.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.93
3.06
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.95
2.93
3.81
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.09
3.05
3.89
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.12
6.06
6.76
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.25
7.20
7.66
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.35
8.77
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.32
6.31
6.67
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Super Bowl XXVII; Cowboy Irvin Makes Himself a Center of Attention . . .
Michael Irvin's initial move this week was to pilfer his interview-room nameplate.
"Hey, man, I'm sorry, but I'm keeping my first Super Bowl name tag," he said, sliding it into his silk shirt pocket.
He then removed his designer sunglasses -- which cost more than most car payments -- and waved the swarm of microphones toward him.
"Someone told me I talk as well as I play," he said. "Nice compliment."


Fiserv Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Book Notes
Republicans' Memoirs
Robert Barnett seems to have become the fashionable literary agent for alumni of the departed Bush Administration.
In December, Mr.
Barnett, a partner in the Washington law firm Williams &amp; Connolly, began peddling the memoirs of James A. Baker 3d to New York publishers.
At about the same time, Mr.
Barnett started representing Mary Matalin, the deputy manager of the Bush Presidential campaign, and her Democratic archrival and paramour, James Carville, a chief strategist for the Clinton campaign, as they shop around a "he said, she said" literary look back at the 1992 campaign.


Landmark Graphics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Music; Focus Festival Concert Hammers at Boundaries
If there was any inference to be had from the first concert of Juilliard's Focus festival of contemporary music on Monday night, it was that Western Europe may no longer be the dominant center of art-music culture.
In fact there may be as much confusion, disarray and experimentation in Europe as here in the United States, as many attempts to break down boundaries between pop, folk, jazz and art-music traditions as there are here, as little interest in subtle intellectual constructions, and about the same proportions of meretricious, banal and intriguing works.
Who knows: we may be in the midst of discovering a new intercontinental style -- which is the absence of style.


EX-CHIEF DENIES REPORT HE PLANS TO QUIT G.M. BOARD
Roger B. Smith, the former chairman and chief executive of the General Motors Corporation, is denying a report that he has agreed to resign from the auto maker's board.
The Washington Post, in today's issue, said Mr.
Smith will retire from the board when his term ends in May.
"That's news to me," Mr.
Smith said in a telephone interview late last night.
He added that he had told members of G.M.'s nominating committee several times that he will serve "until they no longer want me."


Doctors Report Signs of Progress In Patient Who Got Baboon Liver
The baboon liver that was transplanted into a 62-year-old man in Pittsburgh 16 days ago is growing to near human size and its functioning is improving, his doctors said yesterday.
But the world's second recipient of a baboon liver has still not awakened from the 13-hour, 20-minute operation performed Jan. 10.
The man remains in critical but stable condition at Presbyterian Hospital at the University of Pittsburgh.
Hospital officials have not disclosed the patient's name, saying he requested confidentiality.


'Chutzpah Therapy' for New Yorkers
AS Joyce Barrie sees it, people in New York are not nearly as outrageous as they ought to be.
From her perspective being outrageous or even ridiculous can be a very good thing.
In this view she is not alone.
In fact, she is surrounded by six people who have each paid her $495 for a course -- she calls it a playshop -- on how to be less serious.
After almost three days of play, body-movement exercises, charades, improvisation, coloring with crayons, it is now graduation night.
In front of about a dozen invited guests the newly emboldened are striving for outrageousness, showing off in costumes and skits of their own design.


Penske Adds Tracy as No. 2
As expected, Penske Racing yesterday announced that the Canadian driver PAUL TRACY will replace the retired RICK MEARS as its second Indy-car driver.
Tracy, 24, is known for a flat-out driving style that is exciting to watch but hard on equipment.
Tracy, who substituted for the injured Mears last year, will be the teammate of a Brazilian, EMERSON FITTIPALDI.


Raychem Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.N. Says, 'Stop Shooting!' But Croats Shoot Anyway
Defying a United Nations Security Council resolution calling for them to withdraw, Croatian forces pressed ahead today in their offensive against Serbian militiamen near the Adriatic port city of Zadar, United Nations officials said today.
Five days of heavy fighting near Zadar that began with a Croatian attack on Friday have shattered a year-old cease-fire and threaten to unhinge the peacekeeping plan for Croatia negotiated by the United Nations special envoy, Cyrus R. Vance, in late 1991.


Webb (Del) Corp. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Steaming, Fragrant Gratin to Chase Away Midwinter's Chill
COLD weather is gratin season for me.
There is something about a hot gratin emerging from the oven and perfuming the entire house that warms my senses as well as my stomach.
Often, as with this recipe for onion gratin, those gratins are served as a first course, although they are also ideal, served with a salad, as a light lunch.
The onion gratin is followed with a picnic ham braised with brussels sprouts, and for dessert, we indulge ourselves with a creme au chocolat.


Public Relations Merger Seems Near
Robinson, Lake, Lerer &amp; Montgomery and the Sawyer/Miller Group, among the county's best-known public relations agencies, are close to an agreement to merge, industry executives said yesterday, confirming a report in The Washington Post.
The executives, who insisted on anonymity, said that Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon &amp; Eckhardt in New York, the parent of Robinson, Lake, was likely to acquire Sawyer/Miller and merge it into Robinson, Lake.


U.S. Suspends Dredging Permit for Newark Bay
A permit allowing port officials to begin dredging container-ship berths in Newark Bay, a project vital to the survival of waterfront commerce in New York Harbor, was abruptly suspended this month by one Federal agency, only a week after it had been approved by another.
The issue is dioxin contamination in dredged sediment: how much is too much and how can it be disposed of?
Until the agencies resolve their differences, officials of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, who have been poised to begin dredging for almost three years, remain mired in frustration.
So are many others -- fishermen, environmentalists and officials at other ports -- who see Newark Bay as a test case that could determine how dioxin, a cancer-causing industrial byproduct easily absorbed by fish and wildlife, can be safely dredged and disposed of.


U.S. Moves Ahead on War-Crimes Tribunal
The State Department has taken the first step toward organizing an international tribunal to prosecute war crimes in the Balkans, senior Administration officials said today.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher asked senior advisers to prepare a study on how best to create the mechanisms needed to proceed with trials of Serbian, Bosnian and Croatian officials accused of committing atrocities, the officials said.


Clinton Names First Envoy, An Ambassador to Moscow
President Clinton has chosen Thomas R. Pickering, a top career diplomat, as his Ambassador to Russia, the White House announced today.
The White House director of communications, George Stephanopoulos, said Mr.
Pickering "has distinguished himself and his nation in a number of challenging assignments." It was the first ambassadorial announcement by the Clinton Administration.


Dow Holds On to Finish Ahead 6.75 in Heavy Trading
The bond market took back its recent gifts to stock investors yesterday afternoon, as the credit market's selloff abruptly ended a rally in stocks, leaving them narrowly ahead.
After building their best day this year on the strength of bonds on Monday, stocks continued to surge for much of yesterday.
Investors had the additional inspiration of a sharp, 2.3 percent advance in London stocks and, more important, an announcement before the market opened that John F. Akers, I.B.M.'s struggling chairman, would step down.
Led by I.B.M., the Dow Jones industrial average was up more than 27 points by about 2:30 P.M.


Tainted Hamburger Raises Doubts on Meat Safety
At Children's Hospital here, a 9-year-old girl is hanging on to life by a thread after eating tainted hamburger.
A 2-year-old boy has already died, and 16 other children are being treated for severe illness brought on by the same contaminated meat.
Federal officials say the cries of these children are raising alarms across the nation about how meat, particularly hamburger, is processed, inspected and cooked.
In the last two weeks, more than 200 people in the Pacific Northwest and a handful of people in other Western states have been stricken with E. coli 0157:H7, a bacterium that has killed 16 people nationwide since it was first identified 10 years ago.


Recalling a Friend, No Matter His Name
With a blanket of flowers and his weather-beaten hat atop the coffin, Travis -- the homeless man who lived in and around the Central Park boathouse for more than a decade and became friend, protector and resident philosopher for scores of park regulars -- was buried yesterday in a wooded cemetery in East Hanover, N.J.
Though his next of kin had not been found and his real name was not Travis, the burly 61-year-old man -- who planted the daffodils, paved the patio, shielded the elderly from bike riders and once even plucked a drowning dog from the frozen pond -- inspired a family of more than 50 friends to attend the half-hour service yesterday morning at the Frank E. Campbell Funeral Home on Madison Avenue and 81st Street.


Continental Medical Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reeves Arrives as Giants Finally Get Their Man
Dan Reeves became the Giants' head coach today after a month of torment for the team that so recently ruled professional football.
The announcement came at a news conference at Giants Stadium before an overflow crowd of reporters and television crews.
It came four weeks after the Denver Broncos dismised Reeves, four weeks after the Giants dismissed Ray Handley, three weeks after Tom Coughlin spurned the Giants to remain as head coach at Boston College and two weeks after Dave Wannstedt spurned them to become the head coach of the Chicago Bears.


Cynthia Wood Is Dead; Patron of Arts Was 55
Cynthia Wood, a horse breeder and patron of the arts, died on Saturday at her ranch in Santa Barbara.
She was 55.
She died of cancer, said Merrillee Ford, a friend of the family.


Uncovered Short Sales Increase by About 2% on Nasdaq
The number of Nasdaq shares sold short and not yet covered rose slightly from mid-December to mid-January, the National Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday.
Short interest in all Nasdaq securities totaled 465.2 million shares in the period, up a little more than 2 percent from the previous month's level of 455.8 million.
But the number of companies whose stock was sold short fell slightly, to 3,708 from 3,728.


Aaron Kellner Memorial
A memorial service for Dr.
Aaron Kellner, founder and former president of the New York Blood Center and its Lindley F. Kimball Research Institute, who died on Dec. 12, will be held at 1 P.M.
Friday in the center's auditorium at 310 East 67th Street in Manhattan.


LAWMAKERS REVOLT ON LIFTING GAY BAN IN MILITARY SERVICE
Congressional resistance to President Clinton's promise to let homosexuals serve in the military broke into open revolt today, threatening to derail Democratic plans for quick passage of family-leave and health legislation.
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the minority leader, said Republicans would offer an amendment to affirm the existing ban on homosexuals in the armed forces, which has always been a matter of Pentagon directive rather than statute.
He said the amendment would be added to the first bill the Democrats brought up.


Editorial Notebook; The President's Other Running Mate
According to the columnist William Safire, the phrase "first Lady in the Land" was popularized during the Civil War in an 1863 book by William Howard Russell, war correspondent of The Times of London.
It instantly took wing, and Hillary Clinton is now 42d in a line that began with Martha Washington (two Presidents remarried in office, Jefferson was a widower, Buchanan a bachelor).
From the outset, First Ladies served as hostesses and role models.
After the comparatively staid Martha and Abigail Adams came the first real leader of fashion, Dolley Madison.
But she was more than a party-giver.


Amtrak to Test New Tilt Train
Amtrak said today that it would soon begin a three-month test of a "tilt technology" passenger train capable of speeds up to 155 miles an hour on its Northeast express corridor.
The train, which is being leased from the Swedish rail system, will begin regular passenger service between Washington and New York City next week, according to Sue Martin, an Amtrak spokeswoman.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-8  U.N. CHIEF THREATENS ISRAEL


60-Minute Gourmet
DARK-FLESHED fish, like salmon, tuna and bluefish, can be enhanced by countless quick sauces, whether spicy, sweet or acidic.
These fish have relatively high fat content that foils assertive sauces and garnishes, yielding a harmonious taste sensation.
The Japanese demonstrate this quality most vividly with their fiery wasabi, which is used like horseradish and combined with soy to make a dipping sauce for sushi and sashimi.
I have always loved the combination of rich tuna sashimi and a piquant dipping sauce.
One of my favorite sweet salmon dishes combines sauteed fillets with a sauce made of shallots, orange juice, butter and a little tomato.
Many tropical fruits and melons can be incorporated into salmon sauces, as long as you do not go overboard with sweetness.


Sabatini's Comeback Foils Pierce's Bid
Mary Pierce will not be playing in her first Grand Slam semifinal this week.
Gabriela Sabatini just barely wrested that precious opportunity away in the wee hours this morning with perhaps the most memorable of her many comebacks.
But when the 2-hour-52-minute match finally ended at 1:44 A.M.
Melbourne time, even the victorious Sabatini had no trouble admitting the obvious: Pierce has what it takes to be a major force in the women's game.


Coach Portrayed: A Brainy Battler
Good guy or bad guy? Uptight or relaxed? Players' dream or players' nightmare?
People who have been close to Dan Reeves agree he is tough but fair, highly respected, skilled in one-on-one dealings.
He is so organized, said Wade Phillips, his defensive coordinator with the Denver Broncos and now his successor as head coach there, "We would meet on when we'll have a meeting."


Bert Andrews, 63, Dies; Chronicled Black Theater
Bert Andrews, a performing-arts photographer whose pioneering work chronicled the history of the black theater since the 1950's, died on Monday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 63.
He died of stomach cancer, said Ida Lewis, a friend.


The Urgency of Aiding Russia
President Clinton has appointed a fresh team to handle the nation's most important foreign challenge: to help a disintegrating Russia move to democracy and markets without threatening the safety of its neighbors.
Now the team needs to inject new urgency into an economic aid program that languished under his predecessor.
Russia is on the brink of disaster.
The Yeltsin Government has lost control of the central bank, which has poured billions of excess rubles into dead factories.
The result is inflation near 50 percent
a month
-- hyperinflation -- which if allowed to persist will virtually guarantee economic chaos and political breakdown.
It was, after all, hyperinflation that helped bring forth Hitler.


U.N. Chief Threatens to Pull Troops Out of Angola
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali recommended today that the Security Council set a deadline of April 30 for the warring parties in Angola to make peace, and said the Council should withdraw the United Nations peacekeepers if the deadline is not met.
He also wants the Council to reduce the 550-member force currently in Angola to about 60 observers, and to concentrate them in the capital, Luanda.


Oil Is In Again
Oil stocks, recently out of fashion, became the latest rage after some Saudi trend-setters talked about limiting oil output.
Exxon, off more than 5 percent this year through last week, recovered with the added impetus of a healthy earnings report.
As a group, the oil stocks have now caught up to the S.&amp;P. 500's 1 percent gain this year.


Baird Stands in Part for All Working Mothers; Who Is Without Sin?
To the Editor:
Re "Needed: Answers From Ms. Baird" (editorial, Jan. 15): The forced withdrawal of Zoe Baird because of legal violations that she admitted and for which she tried to make recompense raises the question of whether or not we demand of our public servants a degree of sinlessness that would disqualify substantially all of them, were we willing to search with sufficient rigor.


Northern Telecom's Earnings Increase 23%
Partly by taking business away from A.T.&amp; T. and other telecommunications rivals, Northern Telecom of Canada was able to report a 23 percent gain in fourth-quarter earnings, to $255.6 million, or $1.02 a share.
Quarterly revenue rose 10 percent, to $2.54 billion, from $2.306 billion a year ago.
All figures are in United States dollars.
"We've been gaining market share from many of our competitors," Paul G. Stern, Northern Telecom's chairman and chief executive, said .


Eating Well
FOR many Americans there is an urgent reason to drink water from a bottle: lead.
The February issue of Consumer Reports says that for many, the greatest source of lead is the water that flows through their own faucets.
According to the Environmental Protection Agency, 20 percent of lead intake in this country comes from drinking water.
This is not because the municipal water supply has lead but because the pipes that carry the water from the reservoirs to the faucets contain lead.


Clinton Choice for Latin Post Stirs Feud Between 2 Groups
Early indications that the Clinton Administration was moving to select a Cuban-American lawyer for the State Department's senior Latin America post have provoked a bitter fight between two constituencies the Clinton Administration had hoped to please with the nomination: Cuban-Americans and blacks.
For the last week, the formal nomination of Mario L. Baeza, a Wall Street lawyer who has specialized in privatization in Latin America, has been held up by the protests of conservative Miami-based Cuban-American groups, backed by influential Democratic lawmakers, who say they suspect Mr.
Baeza of softness toward the Government of Fidel Castro.


Officer Shot in Arm In Queens Robbery
An off-duty police officer was shot in the arm while investigating an apparent robbery attempt in Queens Village yesterday, the police said.
The officer, Paul Voss, 25, of Queens, was driving to work about 4 P.M. when he saw what he believed was a motorist being held up by two men at the corner of Springfield Boulevard and Stronghurst Avenue, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann.


Olin Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


At P.S. 115, Urban Reality Is Only Pushed Aside
Hillary Rodham Clinton thrilled Public School 115 with her lightning visit yesterday, but minutes after her departure, students were back in mourning for a teacher who may have been murdered, and the principal was worrying that more school ceilings will collapse.
Though it appeared that the First Lady wanted to make an upbeat point about volunteer action -- she chose P.S. 115 to honor an innovative tutoring program there -- her one-hour tour of the crowded Washington Heights school became a surprise brush with urban violence and decay.


A Sweet Sauce for Chicken
CHICKEN takes kindly to almost any flavoring because it has so little taste of its own.
This sweet orange-apricot marinade can be used with all chicken parts.
Bulgur comes several ways: coarse, medium fine and fine.
With this meal, you have enough time to cook the coarse grains, which have more texture, but you can use whatever form of bulgur you can find.


Data Show Region's Slump Among the Worst in the U.S.
With their economies battered by some of the worst construction slumps in the nation and the loss of thousands of armaments jobs, Connecticut, New Jersey and New York have been among the slowest states to recover from the recession, according to figures released today by the Commerce Department.
The statistics for total personal income showed Connecticut making the poorest showing in the region, with 3.2 percent growth over the 18 months that the nation was pulling out of the recession.


Asking 'What Can I Do?' And Giving to Neediest
New Yorkers sometimes feel that to survive in their city, they must steel themselves to the poverty that spills onto the sidewalks.
Perhaps they force themselves to tune out pleas for spare change or to ignore a haggard woman sleeping in a box near their apartments.
But every so often an experience may pierce that armor.
At that point, when they no longer can turn away, they might ask: "What can I do?" For some, the answer is to contribute to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, which rescues thousands of people every year who might otherwise spend their days suffering and devoid of hope.


Two Hillary Clintons: One Trailblazing, One Traditional


Man Is Found Slain On Midtown N Train
An unidentified man was found stabbed to death on a southbound N train last night in the station at 34th Street and Sixth Avenue, the transit police reported.
Al O'Leary, the departmental spokesman, said the body was discovered about 10:30 P.M. after the train, which was bound for Coney Island, stopped in the station, one of the most heavily used in the system.


Florio Signs Bill Expanding Death Penalty for Drug Kingpins


Betz Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
I was on my way to work, heading uptown on Avenue of the Americas.
At 52d Street, I stepped off the curb to cross just as a truck was making a sharp turn in front of me.
I stopped to let the truck pass but did not step back on the curb.
Suddenly from behind me, I heard someone shout, "Hey, look out! Watch it!" I jumped back on the sidewalk and turned around to see who my protector was.


Review/Fashion; At Chanel, Couture Has a New Feeling
Karl Lagerfeld added plastic to the haute couture fabrics he used for his Chanel collection because he thought it was fun.
Emanuel Ungaro invented a never-never land for his fairy-tale clothes, and Philippe Venet pursued his simple classics in a low key.
Each interpreted the couture concept in an individual manner as the spring and summer fashion shows continued today.
How does plastic fit in with the couture's chiffons, beads and satins?
In Mr.
Lagerfeld's hands, it works just fine.
First he has the material beaded by Lesage, the world's most prestigious embroiderer.
Sometimes, he confines it to the midriff, where it suggests bare skin.
At other times, he puffs it and gathers it as if it were silk.
Certainly, it shakes things up.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Chase Manhattan Corp., New York, is offering $200 million of subordinated notes due in 2003 at 100 to yield 7.5 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable notes are rated Baa-3 by Moody's Investors Service and Bbb by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
Florida Power Corp., a unit of Florida Progress Corp., St.
Petersburg, filed a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $225 million of first-mortgage bonds.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 22
Jan. 15
Jan. 24
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.3
6.9
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.9
2.8
Gasoline stocks
229.7
226.5
228.9
Distillate stocks
138.8
141.7
133.6
Crude imports, daily
6.5
6.4
5.7
Product imports, daily
2.1
1.7
1.1
Crude stocks
327.0
328.1
338.8
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
85.8
84.8
81.1
Source: American Petroleum Institute


WNYC Sues to Keep Spot on Cable Dial
Several cable television channels in Manhattan are to be switched on Monday, but WNYC, the public television station operated by the New York City government, has filed a lawsuit to hold up the realignment.
WNYC asserts that Time Warner is violating a new Federal law by moving the station from Channel 3 to Channel 31 on two subsidiaries that serve the borough, Manhattan Cable and Paragon Cable.


Compaq Computer's Profit Jumped 34% in 4th Quarter
The sales and profit resurgence for the Compaq Computer Corporation continued in the fourth quarter.
The Houston-based maker of personal computers said today that profit for the period rose 34 percent, to $89 million, or $1.11 a share, from $67 million, or 77 cents a share.
Sales rose 63 percent, to $1.42 billion from $873 million.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CHANCELLOR SOFTENS RAINBOW CURRICULUM
The Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, moved to end a long, bitter dispute over teaching tolerance for families headed by gay and lesbian couples in the first grade by softening controversial passages of his Rainbow Curriculum, including replacing most references to "lesbian/ gay families" with the phrase "same gender couples." A1.
MEETINGS AND GREETINGS AT THE POST
Steven Hoffenberg, the businessman who would be owner of The New York Post, scheduled his first meeting on the future of the imperiled newspaper with the head of the one department that he values above all others: sales.
B2.
Annual reports of Mr.
Hoffenberg's company show explosive growth, unusual accounting and uneven compliance with legal obligations.
B2.


Man Is Allowed to Let Daughter Die
The Missouri Supreme Court moved yesterday to end a two-year legal battle and allow a father to remove the feeding tube keeping his 23-year-old daughter alive.
State officials had blocked Pete Busalacchi from moving his daughter, Christine, to another state for the removal of the feeding tube.
But the state's new Attorney General asked the Supreme Court to dismiss the case.


No Headline
I was my mother's third choice, too.
I don't feel any less loved than the rest of them.
It doesn't make a difference with me.
The main thing is that I'm their last choice.
DAN REEVES, the Giants' new coach, who was the team's third choice for the job. [ B7:5. ]


John R. Brown, 83, Federal Judge Who Ordered Integration in South
John R. Brown, a Federal judge who played a major role in desegregation cases that transformed the South, died Friday at a hospital in Houston.
He was 83 and lived in Houston.
Judge Brown died of cancer, his family said.


United Illuminating reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column yesterday about a group of women who entered the offices of Self magazine to protest its plans to hold an event in Colorado misidentified their organization.
It is the Lesbian Avengers.


Met Opera To Explore Little-Used Byways
Known for its adherence to the mainstream, the Metropolitan Opera will take an unusual number of side trips next season.
No more world premieres on the order of "The Voyage" or "The Ghosts of Versailles"; the newest piece among next year's new productions is Britten's "Death in Venice," written in 1973.
It had its American premiere at the Met a year later and thereafter vanished from its stage.
Rather, the house will be exploring older and less frequently performed music.
One example will be Dvorak's gentle and discursive operatic folk tale "Rusalka." Scheduled to open on Nov. 11, "Rusalka" is a Vienna State Opera production originally created by Otto Schenk and Gunther Schneider-Siemssen.
The cast features Gabriela Benackova, Janis Martin, Dolora Zajick, Neil Rosenshein and Sergei Koptchak.
The promising young Met conductor John Fiore will preside.


Condoms Reduce, but Don't Eliminate, the Risk of AIDS
To the Editor:
Re "Ethics of Giving AIDS Advice Trouble Catholic Hospitals" (news article, Jan. 3): As a Roman Catholic and an infectious disease specialist who treats many patients with AIDS I find no conflicts between Catholic teaching on sexual ethics and good medical practice.


Patients Rushing To Alternatives
Americans turn to unconventional medical therapies with surprising frequency and invest huge amounts of money in them, a national survey has found.
The study also shows that most Americans who use unconventional therapies seek orthodox medical care at the same time but that the patients rarely tell their doctors of their extracurricular medical ventures.
The new survey, appearing today in The New England Journal of Medicine, underscores the vast interest that many Americans have in alternative treatments like chiropractic manipulations of the spine, relaxation techniques like biofeedback, spiritual healing, herbal medicine and homeopathy.


Fed Chairman Says He'll Back Spending
Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, gave his blessing to the Administration's economic program, telling Congress he agreed with the "general thrust" of policies to speed growth with modest short-term stimulus.
He said he did not believe the policies would overstimulate the economy.  [ Page D1. ]


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  IN CROATIA, U.N. DESPAIR
Fighting between Croatian and Serbian forces intensified, with United Nations peacekeeping troops caught in the middle.
The fighting raised the possibility that the United Nations might withdraw from Croatia.
A1  The U.N. chief warned that the Balkan fighting could spread.
A6


Greenspan Backs Plan Of Clinton
Giving his long-awaited blessing to the new Administration's program, Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, told Congress today that he agreed with the "general thrust" of President Clinton's policies to speed growth with a modest short-term stimulus plan.
In his first public comments on the new Administration's plans, Mr.
Greenspan said he did not believe the President's policies would overstimulate the economy, a move that could reignite inflation and push the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates to stop the economy from overheating.


Leonard Lerner, 64, Manhattan Lawyer Who Aided Renters
Leonard Lerner, a Manhattan lawyer and advocate of tenant rights, died Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 64.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Review/Theater; At Large: The Sins of the Nazi Fathers
The biblical admonition delivered by Moses to the children of Israel on the flight from Egypt warned that the sins of the fathers would be visited upon the children even to the third and fourth generations.
As Ari Roth's powerful play "Born Guilty" attests, retribution for the evils of the Third Reich has reached the grandchildren of those whose acquiescence made it possible.
Mr.
Roth has adapted his play, which is being presented at the American Jewish Theater, from a 1988 book of the same name by Peter Sichrovsky, an Austrian Jew who wrote for Der Spiegel and who reluctantly undertook an assignment that at first sounds like another study of yet another dysfunctional-family support group: interviews with the now-adult children of Nazis.


Council Modifies Toilet Plan, Allowing French to Join Bids
The New York City Council, further clarifying its position on the conditions on a proposed city franchise for public toilets, said yesterday that it would not require bidders to design a single public toilet for both handicapped and nonhandicapped users.
As a result, the French company that tested a design in the city last summer said it could still compete in the bidding.
Council officials said that although they would not require bidders to come up with one toilet design for all users, they intended to give preference to such a design.


Home Video
Custom Renting
To video dealers, the term "video on demand" conjures images of thousands of titles fed into homes over cable and fiber-optic systems.
Whether that spells the extinction of the video store is debatable, but the lure of providing video on demand has Blockbuster, the nation's largest chain, testing ways to offer electronic delivery itself.
Blockbuster is developing a system that it says could turn its stores into electronic ordering stations.
First, customers would choose titles from a computer screen.
The videos they wanted, as well as audio disks and cassettes, would then be produced on the premises.
Videos, in effect, would exist as information in data banks and not as tapes or disks until ordered by the customer.
The advantage of such a system would be that stores could offer any title, however obscure, without having to stock it.


Wave of Violence Threatens Election in Cambodia
A wave of politically motivated violence ascribed to the Vietnamese-installed Government of Cambodia is threatening to undermine plans for internationally supervised elections in this war-shattered nation.
United Nations investigators say at least 20 people have been killed since early November in dozens of politically inspired attacks, most of them directed against the opposition party founded by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the country's former ruler.


Commonwealth Edison reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Revived Hoyas Put Pressure on Pirates
There were questions tonight about how a young Georgetown team would respond to Saturday's humiliating loss to the University of Nevada-Las Vegas.
But there was little doubt, especially among Seton Hall fans, that the highly ranked Pirates, fresh from a close loss to North Carolina on Sunday, would be ready for tonight's clash with Georgetown.


Advanta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Brooklyn Union Gas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


COMPANY NEWS: Hello? Guten Tag? Moshi-Moshi?; A Translating Phone For Overseas Calls
A telephone system that translates from one language to another has long been a dream of researchers because it would make it far easier for people in different countries to communicate.
Now the dream is taking a step toward reality.
What are being described as the first international calls using automatic interpreting telephony systems will be made on Thursday, linking research centers in Japan, the United States and Germany.
Researchers at the ATR Interpreting Telephone Research Laboratories in Kyoto, Japan, will telephone scientists at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh.
The Kyoto scientists will speak in Japanese and what they say will emerge as English at the other end of the line in Pittsburgh.
When the Carnegie Mellon engineers reply in English, their answers will be heard in Japanese in Japan.


Executive Changes
BAUSCH &amp; LOMB, Rochester, named Ronald L. Zarrella president and chief operating officer.
CYBERNETICS PRODUCTS INC., Carlstadt, N.J., named Joseph P. Drier chief executive and president.


Money Market Fund Yields Were Mixed in Latest Week
Yields on money-market funds were mixed in the latest week, reflecting a steady Federal monetary policy and the normal year-end effect on yields.
The average yield on tax-exempt funds rose, while the yield on taxable funds was unchanged.


Foreign Affairs; Avoiding Carter's Mistakes
Bill Clinton may not know it -- and certainly won't like to hear it -- but much of what he has said about foreign policy echoes Jimmy Carter's campaign themes and policies.
This coincidence merits the new President's attention -- for voters booted Mr.
Carter after four years, in good part because of his troubles abroad.
The rhetorical similarities are startling.
Both Democrats courted the liberal vote by stressing a new agenda in world affairs: promoting human rights and democracy, curbing the spread of nuclear and conventional arms, emphasizing centrality of international economics, promising cuts in military spending, etc.


Avnet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


INSIDE
Vast Overhaul at Pentagon
New posts on human rights, arms proliferation and industrial conversion are aimed at widening the Pentagon's policy-making role.
Page A17.
Where Is Winnie Mandela?
In forsaken places like Phola Park squatter camp, Winnie Mandela is more than ever South Africa's first lady of liberation.
Page A3.
Subway in, Yes, Los Angeles
Trains will begin to roll under Los Angeles on Saturday in a subway so different that passengers will pay fares on the honor system.
Page A12.
Amsterdam Shuns the Car
Deploring wall-to-wall traffic, Amsterdam wants to be the first major European city that virtually banishes the car from its heart.
Page A10.


Rebuilding After the Fire This Time
In late October 1991, a two-day firestorm destroyed 3,300 homes in the hills of Oakland and Berkeley, Calif.
"After the fire, some people were giddy, some were in tears," said Dan Friedlander, owner of Limn, a home furnishings store in San Francisco.
"Some thought they had the chance to start all over. Some people could barely get two words together."


Break the Billion-Dollar Congress
The members of Congress elected in November join the first national legislature that private interests have paid more than $1 billion to put in place.
So long as they need private financing for future campaigns, these elected officials are not likely to slap the wrists of the hands that delivered the money, much less get into a bare-knuckled fight with their political action committees.
If President Clinton and the Democratic Congress are serious about ending gridlock, the first law to pass is not an economic package or national health plan.
It is legislation to provide public financing and set limits on spending in Congressional races.


Prices Steady, With Supply Heavy
Bond prices were steady yesterday as the market continued to absorb a growing abundance of new issues.
But traders said the market's ability to digest more securities was beginning to show signs of weakening after weeks of heavy supply.
"While spreads have not changed, there is an oversupply situation developoing," one trader said.
"And as long as the heavy flow of new corporate offerings is met by good demand, the impact on Treasuries is expected to be limited."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Craig Handy
Bradley's
The young tenor saxophonist Craig Handy's show at Bradley's on Sunday night was all about austerity.
Mr.
Handy plays with a blunt tone, and when he improvises, he can be overpowering.
He has a big sound and a slow gait that if it weren't for his modern harmonies, would link him to a lumbering saxophonist like Dexter Gordon.


Burr-Brown Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nasdaq Fall Is Sharpest in 7 Months
The seemingly cloudless Nasdaq market suffered a storm of selling yesterday, resulting in its steepest decline in more than seven months.
With the large biotechnology and computer issues especially unpopular, the Nasdaq composite index fell 9.26 points, or 1.3 percent, to 697.90.
Traders seeking reasons for the retreat pointed to the 22 percent run-up in Nasdaq stocks since the beginning of October rather than to any change in business conditions.


AMP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Military People Split Over Ban on Homosexuals: Army; Ranks Are Split, As in Society
When the subject of homosexuals in the military came up, Dwain and Nancy Graham, both young soldiers at Fort Benning here, gave each other a sly smile of recognition.
For the Grahams, who met and married after joining the Army, the subject is a controversy not just in Washington, but over their dinner table as well.


A Bridge to Romance


Dinkins Promises Full Services Regardless of Rise in AIDS Cases
The Dinkins administration said yesterday that it would maintain its broad array of services for people with AIDS, as a new Federal definition of the disease makes far more people eligible for the help.
City officials said they would allocate $38 million over the next two years to provide such services as rental assistance, nutritional assistance and child placement for people who meet the new definition.
If that is not enough, officials said, the administration will provide more.


Philip Morris Cos. (N)
The Philip Morris Companies said yesterday that profits rose nearly 56 percent in the fourth quarter last year, to nearly $1.2 billion, a performance built upon strong increases in international sales of tobacco and food products.
The comparable 1991 results included an after-tax charge for restructuring costs.
The same growth pattern was reflected in the annual results, in which net income increased 64.3 percent, to $3.01 billion.


CHRONICLE
On Sunday evening, Ms.
Cook will perform for a very different audience: the governors of the 50 states and some members of the new Cabinet, at the first official White House dinner of the Clinton Administration.
She is part of a group, including CAROL CHANNING, LAUREN BACALL, RITA MORENO, LINDA LAVIN and PHYLLIS NEWMAN, that will recreate part of the "Reunion on the Mall" show they did in Washington the Sunday before the Inauguration.


Track and Field; Lewis Gets Set to Lead A Star Event on HBO
In a break from traditional track and field competition, Carl Lewis, Mike Powell and Linford Christie of Britain are within days of agreeing to a special exhibition, the Challenge of Champions, for a live HBO telecast during the Memorial Day weekend.
The made-for-cable event will give new meaning to the term triangular meet.
On May 29, HBO Sports plans to broadcast a 100-meter match race between Lewis, who holds the world record of 9.86 seconds in the event, and Christie, the 100-meter champion at the Barcelona Olympics.


Review/Dance; Ralph Lemon's Moves, Philosophy and Worship
Two lines of fine print at the bottom of the program for the evening of new and recent dances by Ralph Lemon, which opened on Tuesday at the Joyce Theater, invite the audience "to experience this evening as a suite of dances that explore similar and dissimilar attempts at continuity." Heaven knows what the last part of that sentence means.
But Mr.
Lemon has taken four fairly discrete dances and put together a program that is of a piece and that builds, steadily yet quietly, to an extremely moving, even stunning climax.
That climax occurs with "Their Eyes Rolled Back in Ecstasy," a New York premiere performed by six dancers and set to 9th- and 10th-century Gregorian chants and music by Syd Barrett and Chris Hyams Hart.
On its own terms and as a culmination of all that has gone before, the dance has a grandeur and pervasive sense of religious awe comparable to Jose Limon's "Missa Brevis."


CHRONICLE
"Students, are you here? Start taking notes," BARBARA COOK said, taking the microphone in hand and acknowledging the audience's applause.
Seated before her, besides the usual opening-night cabaret crowd, were four students from the Juilliard School on a field trip to an unusual academic venue: the Cafe Carlyle.
Ms.
Cook, the silken-toned soprano, taught a master class at Juilliard on Friday and invited the participants to see her during her engagement this week.


Pop and Jazz in Review
David Thomas  Knitting Factory
"Is it half-empty or half-full?" David Thomas mused from the Knitting Factory stage on Saturday night, holding up a juice pitcher with a single slip of yellow paper inside.
The slip indicated the possible number of "happy songs" to be performed this evening; another pitcher overflowed with scraps representing "sad and depressing" selections.
A blue night lay ahead.


Sports of The Times; Something Bigger Than Baseball
IN this, the "They Just Don't Get It" decade, undoubtedly Marge Schott, the Cincinnati Reds' owner, didn't get it when uttering abhorrent words about various races and ethnic groups, thus proving to be an equal opportunity bore.
But Schott isn't the only one who doesn't get it.
Jesse Jackson, the civil rights leader with the best intentions but a most curious approach, and major league owners, don't get it either.


Rose Says Impressions Are Wrong
PETE ROSE says he has not resumed gambling.
He does not say he's quit, either.
But he says he is concerned with the impression people get, and he says it is unfair to give the impression that he is hanging around the tracks gambling.
"I do no illegal gambling," Rose said yesterday from his home in Boca Raton, Fla.
"I'd be lying if I told you I didn't gamble because I went to the Kentucky Derby with the Governor of Kentucky on his train last year."


Books of The Times; Studying Depression and Its Causes
Understanding Depression
A Complete Guide to Its Diagnosis and Treatment
By Donald F. Klein, M.D., and Paul H. Wender, M.D.
181 pages. Oxford University Press. $16.95.
For anyone even slightly acquainted with Freudian psychoanalytic theory, the idea of a book purporting to explain depression in less 200 pages will surely seem absurd.
Why, there must be nearly as many reasons for the condition as there are depressed people on the face of the earth!


Beijing Shuffles Military to Avert Power Struggle
The Communist Party has completed a military shuffle that may be the most comprehensive in four decades, apparently in part to avert power struggles that could erupt after the death of the 88-year-old senior leader, Deng Xiaoping.
Few institutions in China are so crucial to the future as the army, and few are so murky.
But it is clear that one major reason for the shuffle, involving hundreds of senior officers, is the aim of putting priority again on military modernization rather than ideology.


Texas Bank Sold by U.S. To Chemical
In an indication that the nation's banking industry and the Texas economy are returning to health, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation said yesterday that it had sold the 20 banks of the failed First City Bancorporation of Texas for far more than expected, mostly to the Chemical Banking Corporation.
The F.D.I.C. had estimated that the Bank Insurance Fund would lose $500 million rescuing the banks, which the Government seized on Oct. 30.
But the bids were so much higher than expected that the deal will not cost the fund anything.
Indeed, uninsured depositors and possibly First City shareholders will get more money than expected -- potentially as much as $60 million.
Terms of Transactions
Chemical's Texas Commerce Bankshares unit will pay $346.8 million for First City's banks in Houston, Dallas and three other cities, which have a total of $4.4 billion in deposits and $6.6 billion in assets.
Eleven other companies will pay $87.6 million for 15 banks in smaller Texas cities.


Roger Smith Is Leaving G.M.'s Board
Roger B. Smith, the individual most closely identified with the disastrous slide of the General Motors Corporation during the past decade, abruptly resigned from G.M.'s board this morning.
His resignation came after an article in The Washington Post quoted unidentified sources as saying he had agreed to leave the board.
In commenting on his resignation today, Mr.
Smith said he suspected that one of G.M.'s outside directors, Ann D. McLaughlin of Washington, had leaked sensitive information to The Post, a charge Ms.
McLaughlin strongly denied.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS FALTERS IN 'SAFE CITY' PLAN
The Dinkins administration's push to put more police officers on the street is off schedule because at least 620 officers are still doing work the city had said would be given to civilians, police and City Hall officials said.
The hiring of more civilians to free officers for patrol has lagged, the officials said, because about $16 million of the $40 million set aside for such hiring has instead been spent on unanticipated police costs and the city's Youth Services Department.
A1.
HUNTER COLLEGE ADOPTS NEW CURRICULUM


To Create American Design, Look All Around the World
I was sitting on a hard chair in the old auditorium of the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx last Saturday trying to figure out what made an American garden American.
The all-day symposium was, after all, entitled "Garden Design in America."
But the American garden defies definition.
Attempting such a thing is like trying to get an ebullient mutt to daintily lift its paw while simultaneously keeping its tail from wagging at the judges in the dog show.
This dog may have some fine lines, but you can't quite place their origin.


Head of Science Foundation Will Take a University Post
Dr.
Walter E. Massey, a physicist who has been director of the National Science Foundation for two years, is expected to leave that post for a senior position with the University of California, it was announced today.
The president of the University of California, Jack W. Peltason, has recommended that the institution's board of regents approve Dr.
Massey as senior vice president for academic affairs and provost, the second-ranking position in the university system.


Ralph Lemon in a New Program at the Joyce Theater


Big Business in Turmoil
When the takeover raiders finally left the stage at the end of the 1980's, things were supposed to calm down in corporate America.
But the steady stream of surprising announcements this week, from the departure of chief executives at I.B.M. and Westinghouse to the layoffs at Sears, Boeing and McDonnell Douglas, underlines the continuing turmoil in America's corporate economy.
This time, instead of high-rolling financiers, the instability is being fueled by fast-changing markets.
To be sure, there are a mix of forces at work at these name-brand corporations, including a sluggish economy, shifts in technology, new rivals, restive shareholders and suddenly uppity boards of directors.


D'Amato Backs Overturning Gay Ban in Military
Ignoring opposition by his own Republican Party and what he says are the wishes of a sizable number of his constituents, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato has taken the lead in Congress in the fight to overturn the ban on homosexuals in the armed forces.
His stance brought condemnation from old allies in the Conservative Party, along with praise from Edward I. Koch, former Mayor of New York.
"I don't think the Government should be in the business of discriminating against its citizens," Mr.
D'Amato said today.
"It's dehumanizing."


'Baby Bells' Protest A.T.&amp; T.-McCaw Deal
Rebelling against their former parent, three of the seven "Baby Bell" telephone companies charged today that A.T.&amp; T.'s proposed alliance with the nation's biggest cellular telephone company would stifle competition.
In a petition filed with the Federal Communications Commission, the Nynex Corporation, the Southwestern Bell Corporation and the Bell Atlantic Corporation said the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's $3.8 billion bid to buy one-third of McCaw Cellular CommunicationsInc. would put A.T.&amp; T. back in the local telephone business and raise fundamental concerns about competition.


New 'Micros' Disclosed
Silicon Graphics Inc., a Mountain View, Calif., work station maker, said today that it would begin selling a new line of inexpensive systems that reach supercomputing speeds, putting new pressure on the existing supercomputer makers like the Cray Research Corporation.
The new Silicon Graphics computers are based on enhanced versions of the MIPS microprocessor and are the newest evidence that "killer micros" are creating turmoil in the computer industry by radically changing price and performance compared with traditional machines.


Jeanne Suave, 70, an Ex-Speaker And Governor General in Canada
Jeanne Sauve, a former Speaker of Parliament and Governor General of Canada in the 1980's, died on Tuesday in Montreal.
She was 70.
Her death was announced by the office of the Governor General, who represents Queen Elizabeth II.
It did not give the cause of death.


CHRONICLE
On Sunday evening, Ms.
Cook will perform for a very different audience: the governors of the 50 states and some members of the new Cabinet, at the first official White House dinner of the Clinton Administration.
She is part of a group, including CAROL CHANNING, LAUREN BACALL, RITA MORENO, LINDA LAVIN and PHYLLIS NEWMAN, that will recreate part of the "Reunion on the Mall" show they did in Washington the Sunday before the Inauguration.


Super Bowl XXVII: Notebook; Bed Check! It's 11 P.M. and Johnson Knows Where All the Cowboys Are
A weary group of Cowboys are glad to have a bed-check tonight.
Coach Jimmy Johnson had lifted their curfew for the first three nights here, and the result this afternoon was what the coach called "an erratic" practice on the campus of U.C.L.A.
"We'll need to have a better practice tomorrow," Johnson said.
"Curfew starts tonight, so I'm sure that will have a positive effect on the practice tomorrow. I thought their effort was good, and we were physical, but we weren't as sharp as we need to be."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Sweet Lizard Illtet
Limelight
"Hope y'all like this groove," said E. Zef as his band, Sweet Lizard Illtet, socked out a funk vamp.
The Illtet, with members from New York and New Jersey, is a groove band, moving from James Brown funk to the slow strut of go-go to the stomp of heavy metal.
A drummer and a percussionist, sometimes abetted by a drum machine, give the Illtet an unstoppable momentum at any tempo.


Carolina Power &amp; Light reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Blanche Bernstein, 80, Official Who Criticized Welfare System
Dr.
Blanche Bernstein, a prominent welfare expert and former government official whose criticisms of the welfare system provoked stormy policy debates, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 80 and lived in Manhattan.
She died of lung cancer, said Barbara Rulnick, a niece.


Court and Nation Mourn a Justice


Counter Restoration: Wright's Final Touch
IN 1958, Frank Lloyd Wright designed a curved stainless-steel serving counter for the cafe at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in Manhattan.
But it wasn't built until last year.
Two and a half weeks ago, the gleaming 35-foot-long arc, whose base is concave, was installed as one of the final touches in the museum's total renovation.
Planning the renovation, the museum asked the Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation in Scottsdale, Ariz., to look for the original drawing, and it was found in 1990.


Topics of The Times; Au Revoir, Henri
With the closing of the Matisse retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art in New York last week, something more than a memorable exhibit came to an end.
The patient lines and polite scalpers gathering daily in front of the museum, the involved discussions about the best way to get tickets and the best time to go, and most of all, the astonishing pleasures of the show itself -- all made it a kind of shared experience for the city.
An impressive 900,000 or so visitors crowded in to see the paintings, but the last hours of closing day had a quiet intimacy.
In nearly empty galleries a viewer could linger at a favorite work, take in a whole wall of color at once and see a painting complete instead of in segments over other people's shoulders.


No Sweat, Players Say
Despite the citizenry's fears of a third consecutive Super Bowl humiliation, the Bills profess themselves untroubled by their civic burden.
Their head coach, Marv Levy, told reporters: "I have no dread about this game. I have enthusiasm. I am not worried about what will be said if we don't win and I don't say that to diminish what you might write."


Williams Reinjured On First Day Back
Nets forward Jayson Williams, who was activated on Tuesday afternoon after missing 26 games because of a sprained left ankle, hurt the same ankle late Tuesday night in what apparently was a freakish accident at his home.
As a result, Williams could miss as much as six to eight weeks.
According to General Manager Willis Reed, Williams, who could not be reached for comment tonight, hurt the ankle while lifting weights after New Jersey's 106-91 victory over the Los Angeles Lakers at the Meadowlands.
The team did not provide details of the accident.


Peekaboo Power Suits
It's hard not to pay attention to fashion trends, no matter how liberated a woman is.
My female friends and I spent a fair amount of time dissecting the fashions at the Clinton inaugural.
There were Hillary's hats and Aretha's furs, but the costume that really got to me was worn by Barbra Streisand at the gala.
It sent a disturbing signal to -- and about -- American women.
And then came the rumor that Barbra was contemplating a run for the Senate.
"Several people have approached me, and I find it very flattering," she said, only to reverse herself hours later.
Her teasing flip-flop echoed the coy mixed message of her get-up at the inaugural.


Atlantic Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Browning-Ferris Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Students Design for a Change
"WHAT is Socially Conscious Design?" is an international exhibition of 25 student designs that opens Saturday at Pratt Manhattan Gallery, and it offers a number of answers to its own question.
The designs include a leather shoe with a disposable and replaceable sole, a national monument in the form of a nuclear-waste repository and fishing piers modified for people in wheelchairs.
"The show is not a competition but a survey of what was out there," said Dr.
Stephan Klein, a professor of interior design at Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, which sponsored the show with Architects/Designers/Planners for Social Responsibility/New York, a nonprofit group devoted to forums on social issues.
In the last 24 years, he said, "Republicans eviscerated architecture from social programs." Last year, 400 schools of architecture and design around the world were invited to participate; 196 responded.


Coachmen Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Fashion; For Saint Laurent, The Crown Still Fits
Yves Saint Laurent did it.
With sophistication and authority in his collection for spring and summer, he gave validity to couture, the high end of the fashion industry.
There was no desperate groping: this is the way the most expensive clothes in the world should look, he seemed to say.
As the showings sailed into their final days, he re-established himself today as the king of couture.
Like a master, he used few strokes, keeping shapes, colors and fabrics under strong control.
Raising the waistline of skirts and pants, focusing on different shades of navy blue and adding short swingy jackets, resembling the bolero, he revitalized the spring suit.
Fashion note: Hemlines were short, stopping well above the knees.


Condoms Reduce, but Don't Eliminate, the Risk of AIDS; The Good of Abstinence
To the Editor:
From "Ethics of Giving AIDS Advice Troubles Catholic Hospitals" (news article, Jan. 3) it is obvious that medical personnel need more scientific information.
A few facts:


Tar Heels Toy With Seminoles Before Offering Reality Check
There is a pattern developing in what is quickly becoming a remarkable basketball season at the University of North Carolina.
An alarm goes off.
A challenger comes into the Smith Center with fresh memories of a victory over Duke.
And the Tar Heels send the opponent back to reality.
Tonight the Florida State Seminoles went the way of Georgia Tech and Virginia.
But it was how they were sent home, amid the madness that came from the alarm bells of a 21-point second-half Carolina deficit, that created a moment unlike any other in this Tar Heel season.


Buffalo Fears a Rendezvous With Agony
Every year the swallows return to Capistrano, the bulls run through Pamplona and the Bills lose the Super Bowl.
Or so it seems.
So as the city's heroes prepare for their third consecutive appearance in the Super Bowl, the jubilation here has been haunted by dread of becoming the quintessential loser in a country that worships winners: the only city to lose three consecutive Super Bowls.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Dr. John
The Blue Note  131 West Third Street  Greenwich Village  Through Sunday
Dr.
John first made his name as an alchemist, forging Storyville's jazz rhythms and the symbols of ritual magic into a golden concoction that hippies found a treasure.
He infused the well-worn traditions of his hometown with the smoke and chaos of psychedelic rock, producing some of the era's best expanded-consciousness jams.
In the 1980's, Dr.
John rediscovered the Fats Waller fan within himself, and became tradition's elegant suitor.


Muslims and Croats Seeing Serbs as a Common Enemy
While negotiators in Geneva discuss a peace plan for Bosnia, new fighting in the Sarajevo region and a continuation of "ethnic cleansing" operations by Serbian nationalists elsewhere in the republic appear to be further entrenching the bitter divisions between the three warring sides.
Shortly after dawn today, Sarajevo came under fresh bombardment by Serbian nationalist forces surrounding the city.
The casualty toll, at least 10 killed and 70 wounded, was one of the worst so far this year.


Topics of The Times; Divorce Fee-for-All
A report last year by New York City's Department of Consumer Affairs detailed countless ethical and financial abuses by attorneys in divorce cases.
It told of lawyers who overcharge and then abandon clients when the money runs out, who drive up prices through needless delaying tactics, who refuse to release a client's file until a bill is paid, making it nearly impossible to dispute the figure, much less retain a new attorney.
The report, based largely on the accounts of client-victims, is reinforced by the large number of grievances filed against attorneys in matrimonial cases.
Women are more often at a disadvantage because, typically, they don't control the family assets.


No Headline
"Homosexuality is morally wrong and has no place in the United States Marine Corps." -- CPL.
DANIEL BROWN.  [ A16:2. ] "As long as they do the job, I couldn't care less." -- SPECIALIST JOHN STEBBINS.  [ A16:1. ]


Assembly Bill On Gay Rights Likely to Pass
After a 23-year legislative battle, a bill that would guarantee the civil rights of homosexuals is expected to be passed by one house of the New York Legislature -- the Democratic-led Assembly -- for the first time next week.
Assembly passage of the bill next Monday would put new pressure on the Republican-controlled State Senate to address the gay-rights issue at a time when it is at the center of national political debate.


Walter Carlson Dies; Retired Executive, 64
Walter Carlson, a retired New York public-relations executive and former journalist, died on Saturday in San Antonio.
He was 64 and a resident of Manhattan.
His family said he died of cancer and had gone to Texas for therapy.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 24 about a judge's desegregation order for public colleges and universities in Louisiana referred incorrectly to the status of the Southern University Law Center in Baton Rouge.
The American Bar Association has placed the law school on probation; the school has not lost its A.B.A. accreditation.
This correction was delayed by an editing lapse.


The Modern Plans A Paid President And Seeks a 2d Site
The Museum of Modern Art, grappling with life after Matisse, is planning ambitious changes that include reorganizing its administration and hiring its first paid president.
The museum has also acknowledged what has been rumored for years: that it is actively searching for a secondary exhibition space away from its West 53d Street site.
Officials at the Modern said they had a space in mind but would not identify it or offer any specifics about its location except to say that it is not far from the museum.
"We're trying to keep the momentum up," Agnes Gund, the president of the museum, said in an interview at the museum shortly after the giant Matisse retrospective, which attracted 900,000 admissions and filled the museum's main galleries for four and a half months.
"But even though Matisse was a great success, we're no different from every other museum. We have to get back to the difficulty of raising money and producing exciting shows."


Go On Feeding Birds
To the Editor:
In "Winter Bird Feeders Fatten the Parasites" (letter, Jan. 11), Kevin Coger asserts that feeding birds in the winter will likely benefit "parasites," including cowbirds and blue jays, rather than endangered species.
This is refuted by the scientific evidence.
As reported in Bird Watcher's Digest (January-Febuary 1993, page 118), a study conducted by the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology "strongly suggests that there is no relationship between bird feeding and declining populations due to increased pressure from nest competitors."


Ranks Are Divided Over Homosexuals In Military Service
Public opinion is sharply divided on the question of homosexuals in the military, polls show.
Enlisted men and women interviewed at bases in three states show a similar split.
While many are as adamant as the Joint Chiefs in opposing homosexuals in the military, there is also a strong measure of acceptance, particularly among soldiers, many of whom say that conduct should count more than sexual preference.
Sentiment in the Marine Corps and Air Force seems more strongly opposed to homosexuals, with many people saying homosexuality is immoral.


A Street of Antiques Dealers Thrives
A FEW months ago Raymond Zazzi and Dana Hansen stopped at Wayne Mattox's antiques shop on North Main Street here and paid $900 for a Chippendale mirror.
The couple, visiting from San Francisco, stayed about half an hour, chatting with Mr.
Mattox about the town's antiques shops, and then bid their goodbyes.
About an hour later they were back.
"Wayne," Mr.
Zazzi said, "we know this sounds crazy, but we've decided we like it so much here we're going to stay."


Super Bowl XXVII; The Nortons: So Close, And Yet So Far Apart
The walls and the shelves of the father's den are decorated with dozens of boxing and family photos, but only one shows his son the linebacker.
"The others, I took 'em all down," the father said.
"The only reason this picture's here is because the other three kids are in it."


Huck Snyder, Artist, Dies at 39; Designed Stage Sets for Dancers
Huck Snyder, an artist and a designer of vivid stage settings for dancers and performance artists, died on Saturday at his parents' home in Lansdale, Pa.
He was 39.
He died of AIDS, said Elizabeth Dunn, a friend and colleague.


Thousands Bid Farewell to Marshall
The flowers they brought were few: a red rose, a white rosebud, a few ferns laid gently on the marble floor by Thurgood Marshall's portrait.
One thousand every hour, they rounded the closed coffin, glanced at the flag whose broad stripes covered the dark wood, and said farewell.
And thank you.


CHRONICLE
On Sunday evening, Ms.
Cook will perform for a very different audience: the governors of the 50 states and some members of the new Cabinet, at the first official White House dinner of the Clinton Administration.
She is part of a group, including CAROL CHANNING, LAUREN BACALL, RITA MORENO, LINDA LAVIN and PHYLLIS NEWMAN, that will recreate part of the "Reunion on the Mall" show they did in Washington the Sunday before the Inauguration.


It's Seles And Graf In Showdown
Monica Seles leaned toward the microphone and attempted to be kind.
"It was a very close match," she told the fans who had paid 50 Australian dollars apiece to watch today's women's semifinals.


Executive Brief: THE WHITE HOUSE; Young Staff's First Steps Are Right Back in Time
The staff members at the Clinton White House were still flush with victory from the campaign and recovering from a week of inaugural parties when they moved into their new digs last week.
Then they saw the typewriters.
Most of the young staff had been reared on easy-touch computer keyboards, satellite dishes, voice mail and fax machines.
They were horrified.


Super Bowl XXVII; A Happy Resident Settles in Fat City
The most cherubic Dallas Cowboy is guard Nate Newton, who has to re-hitch his uniform pants after every block.
Not only is he the team's best offensive lineman, pound for pound, but his daily chore is also losing some.
Deluged today by fat jokes, Newton told a few himself and said, "Fat is what got me in the league."
William Perry is the Refrigerator.
Newton is better known as the Kitchen.
He said today that his favorite foods are french fries, scalloped potatoes and red-skin potatoes, even though the Washington Redskins once waived him.


The Historical Society Is Criticized for Using Artworks as Collateral
Many museum professionals have expressed sharp criticism of the New-York Historical Society for using part of its collection as collateral to secure a $1.5 million loan from Sotheby's, an agreement that became known yesterday.
But a few expressed the view that the financially troubled institution should be granted some latitude, since its existence as a museum may no longer be viable.
Robert Macdonald, the director of the Museum of the City of New York -- which had offered to merge with the historical society last year -- was particularly blunt in his criticism.
"The museum has jeopardized its soul," he said.
"Losing a collection like this that relates to the city of New York would be a major tragedy."
Philippe de Montebello, the director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, spoke guardedly about the matter.
"If the Boston Museum or the Metropolitan Museum of Art did that, it would be condemned," he said.
"In the case of the historical society, however, with the likelihood of a substantial change of mission, the collections may no longer be central to its mission, and then you would have to look at this differently."


Military People Split Over Ban on Homosexuals: Marine Corps; Even the Thought Is Off-Limits
A new poster is showing up these days on walls and bulletin boards all over this Marine base in the piney flats of eastern North Carolina.
Printed on it is the word "GAYS," enclosed in one of those red circles with a diagonal, and beneath is this assertion: "Not In My Corps!"
More than any other service branch, the Marine Corps promotes machismo -- "a few good men" -- and Marine machismo is certainly what President Clinton has stirred up with his proposal to lift the ban against homosexuals serving in uniform.


Face to Face to Face: Erixon, Richter and Domi
The casualty crisis in the Rangers' defense department overshadowed a pretty good hockey game last night at Madison Square Garden.
New York beat the Winnipeg Jets by 5-2 in a game that featured two goals by an unlikely star and the return of two familiar faces who had fallen from favor.
The goals were scored by Jan Erixon, a defensive specialist, one short-handed, the other at even strength, to break a 2-2 tie in the third period.


U.S. Seeks to Bar Retaliation if Haitian Is Restored
As the Clinton Administration seeks to cobble together a political settlement in Haiti, officials say that perhaps their most important task is figuring out ways to assure not only supporters of the ousted President but also members of the current military Government that they will not be subject to harassment, intimidation or even murder.
While much of the public attention toward the political crisis in Haiti has been focused on the army's repression of Haitians, especially supporters of the exiled President, Administration officials said they felt that a peaceful restoration of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide to the presidency can occur only if members of the military can be assured they will not fall victim to violent mobs seeking retribution.


Aspin Overhauls Pentagon to Bolster Policy Role
In a sweeping overhaul of the Defense Department intended to strengthen the Pentagon's involvement in foreign and domestic policy, Secretary Les Aspin is creating posts on human rights, arms proliferation and the conversion of military industries.
Among the least traditional of Mr.
Aspin's choices for the new jobs is Morton H. Halperin, a former official in the Johnson and Nixon Administrations who fought a lengthy legal battle with Henry A. Kissinger over wiretapping and who was director of the Washington office of the American Civil Liberties Union.
Mr.
Halperin is Mr.
Aspin's choice for Assistant Defense Secretary for Democracy and Human Rights.


Texas Bank Sold by U.S. To Chemical
In an indication that the nation's banking industry and the Texas economy are returning to health, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation said yesterday that it had sold the 20 banks of the failed First City Bancorporation of Texas for far more than expected, mostly to the Chemical Banking Corporation.
The F.D.I.C. had estimated that the Bank Insurance Fund would lose $500 million rescuing the banks, which the Government seized on Oct. 30.
But the bids were so much higher than expected that the deal will not cost the fund anything.
Indeed, uninsured depositors and possibly First City shareholders will get more money than expected -- potentially as much as $60 million.
Terms of Transactions
Chemical's Texas Commerce Bankshares unit will pay $346.8 million for First City's banks in Houston, Dallas and three other cities, which have a total of $4.4 billion in deposits and $6.6 billion in assets.
Eleven other companies will pay $87.6 million for 15 banks in smaller Texas cities.


Alaskan Air reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
The evangelist ORAL ROBERTS stepped down yesterday from the presidency of the university he founded in Tulsa, Okla., 27 years ago.
His son, RICHARD ROBERTS, 44, succeeded him.
The announcement was made at a service in the Christ Chapel on the campus of Oral Roberts University.
Mr.
Roberts, who turned 75 on Sunday, cited no specific reason for his action, but his office said he had a heart attack in October and had heart surgery last month.
He will not, however, disappear from either the campus or the public eye.
He will remain as chancellor of the university and plans to continue his television program, his healing ministry and his travels.
He has acknowledged that the university has encountered financial problems in recent years.
In 1987, he caused a sensation when he announced that God would "call him home" if he did not raise $8 million in short order for a medical missionary scholarship program at the university.
Three months later, he said he had accomplished his goal.


Houses for the Homeless
In the last two months, six homeless families in Seattle have moved into the new Pardee Townhouses and the Thomas B. Foster House, which were designed and built as permanent, affordable rental housing for families.
The families have three to five children each.
Three more homeless families are expected to move in over the next two weeks.
The nine houses, in the Capitol Hill district, have three to five bedrooms and one and a half to two and a half bathrooms each.
They were developed by two nonprofit agencies, the Seattle Housing Resources Group and the Seattle Emergency Housing Service.
The families pay $200 to $300 a month for rent under the program, which is subsidized by the Federal Government.


CHRONICLE
On Sunday evening, Ms.
Cook will perform for a very different audience: the governors of the 50 states and some members of the new Cabinet, at the first official White House dinner of the Clinton Administration.
She is part of a group, including CAROL CHANNING, LAUREN BACALL, RITA MORENO, LINDA LAVIN and PHYLLIS NEWMAN, that will recreate part of the "Reunion on the Mall" show they did in Washington the Sunday before the Inauguration.


CHRONICLE
On Sunday evening, Ms.
Cook will perform for a very different audience: the governors of the 50 states and some members of the new Cabinet, at the first official White House dinner of the Clinton Administration.
She is part of a group, including CAROL CHANNING, LAUREN BACALL, RITA MORENO, LINDA LAVIN and PHYLLIS NEWMAN, that will recreate part of the "Reunion on the Mall" show they did in Washington the Sunday before the Inauguration.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
NO child likes to lose.
But there are some for whom not winning or not getting their way is a trigger for a tantrum or a pout.
They'll storm off if their friends won't let them be the captain of their fantasy pirate ship.
They'll knock over the checkerboard if they're losing a game.
A certain amount of this behavior is normal and reflects a child's stage of emotional development.
Very young children don't yet have the words to express the intense emotions they feel.
They're also experimenting with ways to handle their frustration and desire for control.


Off-Duty Probation Officer Slain in Queens
An off-duty probation officer was shot and killed Tuesday night as he was getting into his car in Queens in what may have been a robbery, the police said yesterday.
The victim, identified as Daniel Nolan, 58, who lived in Maspeth, was found shot once in the chest inside his car in front of a private house at 301 Beach 42d Street near Rockaway Beach Boulevard in Far Rockaway, the police said.


No Sweat, Players Say
Despite the citizenry's fears of a third consecutive Super Bowl humiliation, the Bills profess themselves untroubled by their civic burden.
Their head coach, Marv Levy, told reporters: "I have no dread about this game. I have enthusiasm. I am not worried about what will be said if we don't win and I don't say that to diminish what you might write."


Super Bowl XXVII; Big Moves for Large-Size Receivers
Both Super Bowl XXVII teams in recent years bucked a strong National Football League trend, choosing taller, rangier and stronger receivers instead of the Smurf-like ones who had begun to dominate pro football.
The Buffalo Bills start receivers James Lofton (6 feet 3 inches, 190 pounds) and Andre Reed (6-2, 190), who will challenge the Dallas Cowboy cornerbacks Kevin Smith (5-11, 177) and Issiac Holt (6-2, 198) on Sunday in Pasadena.
Dallas receivers Michael Irvin (6-2, 199) and Alvin Harper (6-3, 207) will be met by Bills cornerbacks Nate Odomes (5-10, 188) and J. D. Williams (5-10, 178).


Alberto-Culver Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Military People Split Over Ban on Homosexuals: Air Force; Are Homosexuals The New Enemy?
Angry voices rose above the twangy jukebox in a boot-stomping Wyoming bar, as young airmen railed against homosexuals with a fervor once reserved for Communists and other enemies of the American way.
"If homosexuals come in, I'm going out," said John Kaisner, a 22-year-old airman from nearby F.E.
Warren Air Force Base, as he slapped a fist on the table and lifted another beer.
He added darkly: "If they let gays in the military, there are going to be physical outbreaks."


Events: Walks, Talks, People in the Streets
About Manhattan Valley
Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6321.


From Points Far and Near, Looking Back to Neediest
They do not think that they can stomach a daily dose of urban snarl, so they have decided to live elsewhere.
But they do delight in periodically swooping down on New York City to sample some of its more notable attractions.
Perhaps a Broadway play.
Or a Tibetan restaurant.
Or an afternoon at Coney Island.
And then they leave.


Moving Is Just Part of the Game Plan
Kris Rivers and her husband, Doc, a point guard for the New York Knicks, are haunted by nails.
That partly explains why the walls in their new home here were barren for nearly two months after they moved in last October.
"The house we lived in in Santa Monica last year was leased, and we knew that every nail we put in the walls would come back to haunt us when we left," Mrs.
Rivers said.
She was so worried about damaging the property that she spent much of her time telling her son Jeremiah, 5, and daughter, Callie, 3, not to touch the walls.
"We put a total of nine nail holes in the walls," in the 12 months that they lived in the house, she said.


WHITE HOUSE BACKS 2-STEP PLAN TO END MILITARY'S GAY BAN
Despite a Congressional revolt and signs of a growing public outcry, President Clinton has decided to suspend enforcement of the Pentagon ban on homosexuals immediately, White House aides said today.
But the aides said he would not issue an executive order for six months to permanently eliminate the ban.
They said that by delaying the executive order the President hoped to mollify Congressional Democrats who had threatened to join a Republican attack on his plan.
Following Aspin's Advice
Senate leaders who met tonight with Mr.
Clinton said they had not yet reached an agreement on how to suspend actions in cases of homosexuals who now risk prosecution or ouster from the military for their sexual orientation.
But Mr.
Clinton's new policy will bar military officials from asking recruits if they are homosexual, White House officials said.


Guatemalan Chief Pushes for Accord With Rebels
Convinced that the remnants of a guerrilla war damage Guatemala's image abroad and slow its economic development, President Jorge Serrano has begun an intense effort to get a peace accord or a cease-fire in the next few months.
"The truth is that although the conflict affects few people, it is affecting the reputation of the country," he said in an interview in the presidential palace on Tuesday.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Paul Sorrento, first baseman, on a three-year contract.
National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Named Paul Runge manager of Idaho Falls of the Pioneer League.


Study Shows Elevated Rates Of Two Cancers in Hamlet
This wooded hamlet in northern Westchester County, its more isolated roads dotted with million-dollar houses, is the home of some of the nation's most prominent executives and their families, as well as the world headquarters of the International Business Machines Corporation.
It is a place where affluence has provided a buffer of security.
That is why the talk on Main Street this week -- about reports of elevated cancer rates -- has been so startling to residents, even though state and county health officials have emphasized that there is no reason for alarm.


Taxes on Household Employment
Although Zoe Baird ran into political trouble principally because she hired illegal aliens as household workers, her other offense -- not paying taxes on their earnings -- is an even more common practice.
Anyone who pays a household employee more than $50 in a quarter is required by law to arrange for payment of Social Security and Medicaid taxes, which are shared by the employer and the employee.
And if a household worker earns more than $1,000 in a quarter (or about $80 a week), Federal and often state unemployment taxes are due as well.
Federal income tax need not be withheld from the worker's pay, although some employers do withhold it.


Labor Secretary Says Extension Of Jobless Benefits Is on the Table
In the face of huge layoffs at companies like Sears Roebuck, Boeing and Pratt &amp; Whitney, the Clinton Administration is preparing to extend the unemployment benefits of the 1.7 million Americans now receiving them, Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich said today.
"I think that's likely," Mr.
Reich said in an interview.
"It's on the table. The President has not made a decision. But it seems to me that given the sluggish rate of job creation and persistently high unemployment numbers, it seems that emergency unemployment compensation will be extended and that the President will seek to do that."


Amsterdam Plans Wide Limit on Cars
Even for a city that relishes the social experiment, this city's plan for a new urban life style may appear unusually radical.
Amsterdam wants to be the first major European city that virtually banishes the car from its heart.
Wall-to-wall traffic, noise and fumes in the stovepipe streets and stiff gridlocks on the canal bridges have brought on the decision.
The present image of the automobile here is approximately that of a leech on the body of the community.


Out of Intensive Care, Futch Says 'I'll Be There' for Bowe Bout
Eddie Futch, still hospitalized but feeling better yesterday, said he was not concerned about his availability to work in Riddick Bowe's corner Feb. 6 against Michael Dokes.
Neither is Rock Newman.
"No question whatsoever," Futch said from his hospital bed. "I'll be there."


No Sweat, Players Say
Despite the citizenry's fears of a third consecutive Super Bowl humiliation, the Bills profess themselves untroubled by their civic burden.
Their head coach, Marv Levy, told reporters: "I have no dread about this game. I have enthusiasm. I am not worried about what will be said if we don't win and I don't say that to diminish what you might write."


No Sweat, Players Say
Despite the citizenry's fears of a third consecutive Super Bowl humiliation, the Bills profess themselves untroubled by their civic burden.
Their head coach, Marv Levy, told reporters: "I have no dread about this game. I have enthusiasm. I am not worried about what will be said if we don't win and I don't say that to diminish what you might write."


Bur Koy Journal; Somali Warlords Recruited (It's the Price of Peace)
Rebuilding the bridge here, like much of the other reconstruction being done in this country, had been the work of foreign forces.
But a Somali was needed to cut the ribbon at the dedication on Tuesday, if only for the symbolism.
And so the word went out among the elders: Send forth a leader.
The man they sent to dedicate the bridge to Sean Devereux, a British relief worker killed in Somalia early this month, was neither old nor of a particularly kindly demeanor.
He was Ahmed Haji Hussein, the local representative of Mohammed Farah Aidid, one of the many clan leaders generally held responsible for the devastation of the country.


Forte Turns Down Job as Aide on Jets
Mo Forte, whom the Jets hired two weeks ago to replace the running backs coach, Kippy Brown, has decided not to take the job, Frank Ramos, a Jets spokesman, said yesterday.
Ramos said Forte cited personal reasons for not wanting to join the Jets' coaching staff and informed the team of his decision yesterday.
Forte was Denver's running backs coach from 1988 until this season.


CHRONICLE
The evangelist ORAL ROBERTS stepped down yesterday from the presidency of the university he founded in Tulsa, Okla., 27 years ago.
His son, RICHARD ROBERTS, 44, succeeded him.
The announcement was made at a service in the Christ Chapel on the campus of Oral Roberts University.
Mr.
Roberts, who turned 75 on Sunday, cited no specific reason for his action, but his office said he had a heart attack in October and had heart surgery last month.
He will not, however, disappear from either the campus or the public eye.
He will remain as chancellor of the university and plans to continue his television program, his healing ministry and his travels.
He has acknowledged that the university has encountered financial problems in recent years.
In 1987, he caused a sensation when he announced that God would "call him home" if he did not raise $8 million in short order for a medical missionary scholarship program at the university.
Three months later, he said he had accomplished his goal.


Injured Olympian to Have Knee Surgery
The Olympic downhill silver medalist HILARY LINDH , injured in a high-speed spill last weekend in Austria, will undergo surgery tomorrow in Vail, Colo., to repair knee and ligament damage, the United States Ski Team said yesterday.
Lindh, 23, ruptured a collateral ligament in her right knee and also suffered a slight fracture of the tibial plateau and cartilage damage.
It appears certain she will miss the rest of this season. (AP)


Statistical Portrait of the Nation; Education and Income


CHRONICLE
The evangelist ORAL ROBERTS stepped down yesterday from the presidency of the university he founded in Tulsa, Okla., 27 years ago.
His son, RICHARD ROBERTS, 44, succeeded him.
The announcement was made at a service in the Christ Chapel on the campus of Oral Roberts University.
Mr.
Roberts, who turned 75 on Sunday, cited no specific reason for his action, but his office said he had a heart attack in October and had heart surgery last month.
He will not, however, disappear from either the campus or the public eye.
He will remain as chancellor of the university and plans to continue his television program, his healing ministry and his travels.
He has acknowledged that the university has encountered financial problems in recent years.
In 1987, he caused a sensation when he announced that God would "call him home" if he did not raise $8 million in short order for a medical missionary scholarship program at the university.
Three months later, he said he had accomplished his goal.


COMPANY BRIEFS
JOHNSON &amp; JOHNSON, New Brunswick, N.J., offered an early-retirement package to about 800 employees of Ethicon Inc., a subsidiary in Somerville, N.J., that has 6,000 employees and makes surgical sutures and other products.
BLUE CROSS AND BLUE SHIELD OF OHIO, Cleveland, has agreed in principle to purchase Columbus-based United Health Plan Inc.
Details of the agreement were not disclosed.


Calendar: Gardens: Crafts and Ideas
A Glorious Garden
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bronx; (212) 220-8777.
"Glories of a Manor Garden," the spring show at the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory, continues through May 16.
Narcissus, hyacinths and camellias are in bloom, and the conservatory has been decorated with a sunken garden, the facade of a Tudor-style house, statuary and a vine-covered pergola.
In March, annuals and perennials including tulips, foxglove, peonies and delphinium will be in bloom.
Garden and conservatory hours: Tuesday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Suggested grounds admission is $3; students, those 65 years old and older and children 6 to 16, $2.
Conservatory admission is $3 and $2, respectively; ; no charge on Saturdays from 10 A.M. to noon.


School Chief, Now Dead, Is Accused Of Stealing
The superintendent of a Bronx school district, who was found dead in an Albany motel room earlier this month, was portrayed by city investigators yesterday as the mastermind of a conspiracy that stole $185,000 from two anti-poverty agencies; established a dummy company to launder money, and funneled at least $10,000 in illegal contributions to politicians.
The school official, Alfredo Mathew Jr., was accused of stealing about $115,000 of poverty funds from the two agencies of which he was chairman.


Bethlehem Steel Corp. (N)
The Bethlehem Steel Corporation, in the middle of restructuring its operations, yesterday reported a fourth- quarter loss of $53.1 million, much narrower than a year earlier.
Bethlehem also said it lost $449.3 million for the entire year, but once again the loss was smaller than in 1991.
Revenues for the quarter fell 3.4 percent, while they dropped 7.2 percent for the year.
Results from the 1992 quarter included a $31 million gain at the company's ship division from the reimbursement on a contract with the Navy.
Fourth-quarter 1991 results included a $575 million restructuring charge.


10-Day Comedy Festival
Amid the gilt-and-mahogany precincts of the Milton Berle Room of the Friar's Club, the stand-up team of Dinkins and King announced yesterday what was billed as the largest comedy festival in American history.
"How many comedians will it take to bring New York City together?" asked Mayor David N. Dinkins, announcing a 10-day, five-borough comedy festival that is to begin on June 3.
He answered himself: "As many as possible, and the more the merrier."


No Sweat, Players Say
Despite the citizenry's fears of a third consecutive Super Bowl humiliation, the Bills profess themselves untroubled by their civic burden.
Their head coach, Marv Levy, told reporters: "I have no dread about this game. I have enthusiasm. I am not worried about what will be said if we don't win and I don't say that to diminish what you might write."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
2.96
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.95
3.81
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.09
3.90
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.08
6.12
6.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.24
7.25
7.74
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.35
8.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.32
6.32
6.70
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Regulation Isn't Halting Loans, U.S. Aide Says
The Government's top auditor today warned Congress and the Clinton Administration not to hastily loosen banking regulations to spur lending and stimulate the economy.
In testimony rebutting some recent arguments by banking-industry leaders that excessive regulation was crimping lending, the Comptroller General, Charles A. Bowsher, told the Senate Banking Committee that "the current system of bank regulation as a whole does not undermine the economic incentive for a bank to make sound loans."


Jars of Tuna Are Recalled
Consumers were warned yesterday by New York State officials not to eat the T.M.I.
Albacore Season brand tuna because it could cause botulism.
M.I.
Seafood Inc. of Hampton Bays, L.I., which manufactured the tuna, has ordered a recall, but about 200 jars have not been accounted for.
It was test-marketed in the New York City area.
The company is unsure in what stores the product, in Mason-type jars, was marketed, the State Department of Agriculture and Markets said.
Symptoms of botulism, including vomiting, diarrhea and headaches, usually appear within 12 to 36 hours after eating contaminated food.


A First Step Toward an 800-Seat Jet
The Boeing Company and the four leading European aerospace companies took the first step today toward jointly building a superjumbo airliner capable of carrying up to 800 passengers.
The five companies reached an agreement after several months of negotiation that calls for the European companies -- partners in the Airbus Industrie consortium, the world's No. 2 aircraft producer -- to conduct a one-year study with Boeing, the industry leader, of the demand among airlines for such a plane.


Reading Mr. Clinton's Lips
On-the-job training is a messy process, and when you're President everyone gets to watch.
Bill Clinton's early moves on the budget have been a three-ring circus of novice mistakes.
Before long -- and sooner wouldn't hurt -- he needs to show that he, not Slick Willie, is the ringmaster.
The tricks in Mr.
Clinton's budget strategy are increasingly apparent.
Day after day, Presidential surrogates hint that one or more of his campaign promises is about to be broken, or hedged in obfuscation.
And what does the nation's new leader think about any of this?
He's not telling.


Du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company (N)
E.
I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company said yesterday that it lost $230 million in the fourth quarter and $3.9 billion for all of 1992 mainly because of one-time accounting changes.
The Wilmington, Del., chemical company also saw its revenues fall 6.2 percent in the quarter and 2.3 percent for the year.
Fourth-quarter results reflected $329 million worth of one-time charges to cover restructuring costs and $69 million for the early retirement of outstanding debt.
The loss for the year included $4.83 billion in charges for required accounting changes covering retiree health-care benefits and income taxes.
The company said that year-end earnings were also affected by $463 million in one-time charges for restructuring and costs related to the recall of the Benlate DF fungicide.


Welcome All Bidders for Street Toilets
As the City Council votes today on New York's plan for street toilets, a simple principle bears repeating: Don't sacrifice useful progress for the sake of an unreachable ideal.
Last year a French company, JCDecaux, installed street toilets on New York sidewalks in a demonstration that proved the self-cleaning units, used for years in Europe, could also work here.


White House Memo; Timing Awry, Clinton Trips Into a Brawl
Acknowledging that they underestimated the opposition in Congress and the Pentagon to homosexuals in the military, White House aides say the struggle has left President Clinton in an awkward test of wills on an issue that neither he nor gay-rights organizations had made a high priority.
As a result, at a moment when he is more interested in dealing with his economic agenda, Mr.
Clinton has little choice but to expend precious political capital with Congress in pushing ahead on his campaign promise to end the military's ban on homosexuals.


Block Drug reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


AT HOME WITH -- Michael Lebron; The Adman as Artist (Or Is It Vice Versa?)
Michael A. Lebron wants to spend $100,000 of his own money to spread some of his most personal political beliefs across a 1,000-square-foot billboard at the mouth of Pennsylvania Station, in a piece of art that he has nurtured for more than two years.
But he insists -- absolutely insists -- that he doesn't much care if anybody knows that
he's
the one behind it.
"I don't like to have my work personalized," said Mr.
Lebron, 38, a freelance advertising art director, who for a decade has used the methods of Madison Avenue (and his credit cards and savings) to make political art in public spaces in New York and Washington.
"I like to think of my work as being styleless, without any stylistic identity or trademark to it," he said.


Building Flaws Tarnish Stuyvesant's Showcase; Months After Opening, Parts of Costly New High School Are Incomplete and Unusable
When Stuyvesant High School moved into a showcase new building last September, officials were so proud of the speed with which they built the school, the costliest ever in New York City, that they erected a sign outside its front door congratulating themselves for completing it on time.
But five months after classroom doors opened, and four years after groundbreaking, Stuyvesant's pool, theater and pedestrian bridge are still unfinished or unusable, and parents and staff members are voicing mounting irritation over problems like the daily shutdowns of the school's escalators, the flaws in its air circulation system and the delays in turning on a satellite-to-classroom video system.


Finding A Nanny Legally
Long before Zoe Baird lost out on a top Federal post because of her child-care arrangements, working parents were acutely aware of the burden of finding reliable, legal child care.
And for a family of ordinary means, finding someone who is not only affordable but also willing to play by the rules -- someone, that is, who is in the country legally and ready to pay taxes -- can sometimes seem almost impossible.


Bard (C.R.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Two Brokerage Firms Fined For Unauthorized Trading
Almost anyone who has ever received a telephone call from one of the nation's big brokerages has heard the "investment adviser pitch": Sure, investors spend less on commissions by trading through discount brokerage houses.
But this firm provides an investment adviser to help clients plan a financial strategy.
The pitch is intended to make potential customers feel safe that someone is watching over their accounts.
But as two settlements announced yesterday by the New York Stock Exchange show, the customers' trust can easily be abused at a firm without the investment advisers necessarily knowing.


PRIMERICA SETS STOCK SPLIT AND RAISES DIVIDEND
The Primerica Corporation declared a 3-for-2 stock split yesterday and raised its quarterly dividend by 20 percent.
The company has increased the dividend on its common stock for seven straight years, but the stock split is a first.
Additional shares will be distributed on Feb. 26 to shareholders of record on Feb. 8.
Primerica, which sells insurance, runs mutual funds, provides consumer financing and owns the brokerage firm Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, will raise its quarterly dividend to 24 cents a share, or 16 cents after the stock split, from 20 cents.
At the new rate, the New York financial powerhouse will pay about $26.7 million to holders of the common stock over the next four quarters.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Jan. 8 about the Honda Motor Company's plans to build a V-8 engine for use in race cars in the Indianapolis 500 and other races misstated the size of the engine.
It is 2.65 liters.


Cilcorp Inc.(NX) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Jersey Plans a New York Connection


Corrections
A chart on the Health page yesterday about problems with medical bills misstated the cost of a booklet on the subject available from the National Emergency Medicine Alliance.
The booklet costs $4; it is not free.


U.S. Imposes Heavy Tariffs On Steel From 19 Countries
In a victory for American steelmakers, the Commerce Department imposed steep, temporary tariffs today on steel imports from 19 countries, after determining that foreign companies were illegally selling steel in the United States for less than they did at home.
Today's rulings were the first big trade decisions under the Clinton Administration, although they were made by career civil servants following trade regulations rather than by Clinton appointees.


For Causes of Famine, Look to Overpopulation
To the Editor:
Re "The Political Causes of Famine: It's Never Fair to Just Blame the Weather" (Week in Review, Jan. 17):


P.&amp; G. discovers that a new look to an old product can be seen as betraying customers' brand loyalty.
THE Procter &amp; Gamble Company did not grow into America's largest purveyor of personal-care and household products by misjudging what consumers want.
So when P.&amp; G.'s mighty marketing machinery misfires, attention must be paid.
P.&amp; G. is now reintroducing the original green version of its venerable Prell shampoo, which it replaced in late 1991 with a reformulated blue variety.
A campaign by Leo Burnett U.S.A. trumpets: "Green is back! The original formula you've always loved."


New York A.F.L.-C.I.O. Opposes Boycott of Daily News
The leadership of the New York State A.F.L.-C.I.O. broke with the New York Newspaper Guild yesterday, opposing the guild's boycott of The New York Daily News a day after several unions proclaimed their support.
The guild called for a boycott after Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the new publisher of The Daily News, dismissed 182 guild members on Jan. 7.


In Yeltsin's Russia, Glimmers of Hope Emerge
To the Editor:
Having spent much of the last year and a half in Russia, I find the picture Peter Reddaway presents in "Russia Comes Apart" (Op-Ed, Jan. 10) unbalanced and misleading.
I would be the last to deny or minimize the difficulties facing Boris N. Yeltsin's Government, but developments in the last year must be taken into account.


Lawyer Takes the Stand In Sexual-Assault Trial
A lawyer for a defense witness in the Glen Ridge sexual-assault trial took the stand today, testifying that his mistake in wording a question prompted his client to falsely incriminate his brother and another defendant on an important point of the case.
The lawyer, Willard Byer, said he posed the erroneous question to his client, Paul Archer, in a court hearing last June as Mr.
Archer was pleading guilty to a misdemeanor charge in the case so he could be admitted to a probation program.


Skiing; Snowboarders and Skiers Learn to Get Along
When snowboarding began to be a serious sport in the mid-1980's, most ski areas didn't allow snowboarders on the slopes because the sport seemed dangerous and disrespectful to Alpine skiers.
Since then, according to the United Ski Industries Association, snowboarding has become more acceptable, with boarders growing to include an estimated 10 percent of all skiers.


U.N. Chief Says Strife Imperils Balkan Peace Plan
The United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, warned the Security Council today that the fighting in Croatia had placed "the entire peace process in the region in jeopardy" and might lead him to recommend pulling out the 16,000 peacekeepers deployed there when their mandate expires in three weeks.
The Secretary General called the positions of the Serbs and Croats "mutually unreconcilable" and said there was an "extremely high" risk of a serious increase in the fighting that broke out between them in Croatia on Friday.


USAir Group (N)
USAir Group Inc. reported a fourth-quarter loss of $254 million yesterday and a loss of $1.2 billon for the full year.
Much of the loss was made up of extraordinary charges.
The fourth-quarter loss compared with profit of $1.63 million in the same quarter in 1991.
The revenue for the fourth quarter totaled $1.63 billion, down slightly from revenues of $1.67 billion in the fourth quarter in 1992.


To Each His Spoon
STARTING tomorrow, 125 silver spoons by 45 artists are going on view at the Aaron Faber Gallery in Manhattan.
There will be spoons in the shapes of people, leaves, twigs and spirals, spoons made of silver with gold or coral, or acrylic and concrete -- all "to show the diversity of spoon design and use," said Rosanne Raab, the curator of the show.
Lucky is the baby who gets to eat with the sterling-silver "Rattle" spoon designed by Mardi-Jo Cohen: its handle is ringed with brightly colored acrylic disks to play with while eating.
It sells for $240.


INSIGHT;
For American Express shareholders, the cost of keeping James D. Robinson III around as chairman and promoting his chosen successor, Harvey Golub, to chief executive has been about $1.25 billion over the last three days.
The stock surged in early December when some board members tried to rush Mr.
Robinson's departure and go outside for a new chief.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Evergreen Leaf Loss
Q.
Is it a soil deficiency that causes the leaves of evergreen azaleas to yellow and drop off in colder weather? -- Stanley Rabinowitz, Washington


UNITED AIRLINES DISMISSES 10 TOP EXECUTIVES
United Airlines has cut the jobs of 10 top executives, or one-fifth of its upper management, as part of an effort to reduce costs.
The carrier also plans to eliminate about 2,800 workers from its total force of 83,000.
Through the cutbacks, United hopes to achieve savings of about $400 million a year.


Economic Scene; If cars become trucks, the middle class may bear the freight.
WHILE Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen acknowledged this week that the White House was agonizing about a middle-class tax increase to pare the deficit, Mr.
Bentsen was not advertising the fact that the Treasury could soon impose a new tax aimed squarely at the middle class with the stroke of a pen.
The catch: Most of the revenue would end up in the pockets of Detroit's auto makers, which are reportedly pressing on a variety of fronts for a helping hand from Uncle Sam.
Well, make that catches.
The tax -- actually a tariff on imported mini-vans and Jeep-like sport utility vehicles -- would further sour economic relations with Japan and distract from the "strategic" trade issues in high technology.


Prosecutor Says Jurors Erred in Arms-Plant Case
The United States Attorney who prosecuted the case against the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant said yesterday that the grand jury, which wanted to bring more charges, had misunderstood what constituted a hazardous waste, what constituted a crime and how violations could be ended by agreements with regulators.
Last spring, Rockwell International, which ran Rocky Flats under contract with the Department of Energy from 1975 to 1989, pleaded guilty to 10 violations of Federal environmental laws and agreed to pay a fine of $18.5 million.
But the grand jury that heard the case, and was dismissed when the plea agreement was announced, was dissatisfied with that result.
A majority of the grand jurors later signed a letter to Bill Clinton, then President-elect, asking for an investigation of the way the Justice Department handled the case.
Millions of Pages of Data
The report -- prepared after the jurors had sat for more than two years, heard more than 100 witnesses and reviewed millions of pages of documents -- called for prosecution of individual employees of Rockwell and the Department of Energy, and said crimes were continuing.


Swipe at Mason Costs Sixers' Bol
MANUTE BOL of the Philadelphia 76ers was fined $3,500 by the National Basketball Association yesterday for throwing a punch at ANTHONY MASON of the Knicks.
Bol was ejected after the foul, which came with 28 seconds remaining in the first quarter of Tuesday's game, a 98-90 victory for the Knicks.
The ejection also calls for a $250 fine.
"Mason shoved me," Bol said after the game.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Commerce Department imposed steep temporary tariffs on steel imports from 19 countries after determining they were selling steel in the United States for less than at home.
It was the Clinton Administration's first big trade decision.  [ Page A1. ]
The Federal Reserve chairman gave his blessing to the Clinton Administration's economic policy of modest stimulus.  [ D1. ]


Super Bowl XXVII; Where Talley Goes, Close Calls Follow
First, the Bills say, linebacker Darryl Talley lost a one-round decision to a steam pipe and a headboard in the basement of his Orchard Park, N.Y., home last Thursday.
Then, he reportedly suffered a TKO last Sunday when Magic Johnson's bodyguard punched Talley in the nose at a nightclub called Roxbury on Sunset Boulevard.
And the main event, Super Bowl XXVII, isn't until this Sunday at Pasadena, Calif.


In New Jersey, Two Candidates Share One Problem


Tournament to Feature Borg and Laver
It's not a revival that's going to fly on Broadway but a competitive reunion of a dozen tennis greats is scheduled to be staged this May in Manhattan, the first time since 1989 that a men's tournament has been presented in New York City proper.
And it also marks the first return to New York in more than a decade for BJORN BORG , the charismatic Swedish star who is busily reneging on his premature retirement of 1982 by competing in both senior and regular tour events this year.
This exhibition event has been dubbed the Manhattan Masters in honor of its site -- the 69th Regiment Armory at 26th Street and Lexington Avenue, an East Side site often used, appropriately enough, for antiques exhibitions -- and its participants, who share 113 Grand Slam titles between them.
For five evenings of team doubles competition, May 5-9, the format will feature former champions ranging from the legendary ROD LAVER , now a fixture on the seniors circuit, to Borg, who hasn't won a New York title since defeating IVAN LENDL in the 1980 Masters.


Results Plus
BASKETBALL Lucas's Spurs Win 10th in a Row  The San Antonio Spurs made a shambles of Seattle's home-court advantage while winning their 10th consecutive game for the first time in franchise history, 119-99 over the SuperSonics last night.
The Spurs got a season-high 24 points from J. R. Reid and improved their record under Coach John Lucas to 15-2. (AP)
Suns 117, Timberwolves 116: Danny Ainge, who missed a 3-pointer with 8.6 seconds to play, scored on a rebound with 0.7 seconds left in overtime to lift Phoenix to its 14th consecutive victory over Minnesota, in Minneapolis. (AP)
Hornets 117, Kings 107: Rookie Alonzo Mourning scored all of his 23 points in the second half, lifting Charlotte over Sacramento in Charlotte, N.C.
Sacramento was playing without center Duane Causwell, who has a sprained left foot. (AP)
Pistons 103, Celtics 94: Terry Mills scored 21 of his 25 points in the second half and Detroit ended a six-game losing streak by beating Boston in Auburn Hills, Mich.
The victory was the first in 11 games for the Pistons this season without the league's leading rebounder, Dennis Rodman, who is out with a leg injury. (AP)
Pacers 127, 76ers 125: Detlef Schrempf scored 31 points and his two free throws broke a tie with 2.6 seconds remaining in overtime, giving Indiana the victory over host Philadelphia. (AP) HOCKEY Mogilny Falls Short in Sabres' Victory  Dale Hawerchuk scored his 10th goal of the season to cap a comback from a two-goal deficit as the Buffalo Sabres beat the Washington Capitals by 4-3 last night in Buffalo.
The Sabres' Aleksandr Mogilny failed in his bid to become the sixth National Hockey League player to score 50 goals in 50 games.
The right winger, who had 47 goals, was playing in his team's 50th game and was trying to join Wayne Gretzky, Mario Lemieux, Brett Hull, Mike Bossy and Maurice Richard. (AP)
Whalers 6, Canadiens 5: Pat Verbeek scored into an open net with 43 seconds left, taking advantage of a misplay by Montreal goaltender Patrick Roy to give Hartford the victory over the Canadiens in Montreal.
Roy mishandled a puck behind his net, and Patrick Poulin checked the puck clear to Verbeek. (AP)
Red Wings 2, Oilers 2: Keith Primeau beat goaltender Ron Tugnutt with a wrist shot midway through the third period as Detroit came back to tie host Edmonton. (AP)


Oil Inquiry Tests Resolve of Kuwait's Parliament
The investigation of a Government-owned company's senior officials in the theft of as much as $200 million is fast becoming a test of the new Parliament's quest to contain the unrestricted rule of the Sabah family in this oil-producing country.
The case, and a companion inquiry into the disappearance of at least another $1 billion in Kuwaiti investments in Spain, led to overwhelming parliamentary approval last week of a new law for the protection of public money.
The law allows retroactive prosecution.
The cases being investigated have their origins in 1987, a fact seized on by opposition figures who link problems with public funds to the Emir's 1986 decision to dissolve the last Kuwaiti Parliament.


Breaking German Taboo, a Critic Focuses on Kohl's Future
A leading politician from eastern Germany has upset the country's political establishment by suggesting that it is time to discuss a successor to Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
The suggestion came from Heinz Eggert, Interior Minister of the state of Saxony, who is a deputy chairman of Mr.
Kohl's Christian Democratic Union.
Mr.
Eggert won his party post in an upset last year, against the Chancellor's wishes.


Dr. W. H. Decker, 70, Specialist in Infertility
Dr.
Wayne H. Decker, a retired obstetrician and gynecologist who specialized in the treatment of infertility, died on Monday at Phelps Memorial Hospital in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
He was 70 and lived in Scarborough, N.Y.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Review/Television; Diverse Young Voices Speak on Racism
With Oprah Winfrey as host, today's "ABC Afterschool Special," at 4 P.M., lets young people across the country of all colors and ethnic backgrounds say what they think about racial differences and racism in America.
Called "Shades of a Single Protein," the compilation of interviews, while sometimes distressing, is oddly comforting in its group portrait of youngsters today.
At the outset, Ms.
Winfrey says: "Black people are not black and white people are not white. We're all really different shades of a single protein that we call melanin." Change doesn't necessarily mean progress, she concedes, but "change is exactly what we need" when it comes to the issue of race in this country.
"One of the great things about being young," Ms.
Winfrey will conclude, "is that you can reject what came before."


Few Advertisers For Gay Program
An NBC News special on Tuesday about gay men and lesbians in America was timely, but it was also costly.
The network said yesterday that it had difficulty selling commercial time for the special, "The Gay 90's: Sex, Power and Influence." The special, part of NBC's "First Person with Maria Shriver" series, carried a large number of in-house promotional spots.
Of the dozen paid commercials that did run, some, including spots for Ultra Slim-Fast, Hot Pockets microwave sandwiches and Alpine Lace cheeses, appeared two or three times, which is unusual for network television and highly unusual for its time period (10-11 P.M., Eastern time).


The Talk of Sundance; At Sundance, a Yoking of Youth and Thrift
"Zee Place" is the place to be every evening at 6.
A squat building on Maine Street, it is the swarming headquarters of the Sundance Film Festival and has been known, in this ski resort's quaint version of a French accent, as zee center of town.


Study Casts Doubt on Accepted Heredity of Whales
Sperm whales, those mountainous squared-skulled beings that inspired the story of Moby Dick, and the great toothless whales like humpbacks and blue whales, long thought to be distant marine cousins, are far more closely related than anyone had suspected, a new study suggests.
The findings capsize some cherished assumptions about whale evolution and indicate that major changes in whale shape, behavior and feeding habits occurred in what amounts to an eyeblink, in evolutionary terms.


3 Quit American Express Board
Three members of the American Express Company board who had unsuccessfully opposed retaining James D. Robinson 3d as chairman and promoting Harvey Golub to chief executive said yesterday that they were resigning.
Rawleigh Warner Jr., 71, the retired chairman and chief executive of the Mobil Corporation and an American Express director for more than 20 years, told the board after its meeting on Monday of his intentions and submitted a letter yesterday saying that he would step down immediately, two months before he had planned to retire.
He said he no longer felt it was appropriate to remain a director after he had opposed the company's top managers. 'Thoughtful Consideration'
Joseph H. Williams, a director since 1981, told the company that he would not stand for re-election in April and that he would resign immediately as a member of the compensation committee.
Mr.
William, 58, said in a statement that "after thoughtful consideration" and "the very strong dissent I registered" he felt it would have been inappropriate to remain on the board.
Mr.
Williams is chairman and chief executive of the Williams Companies.
John J. Byrne, 61, the chairman and chief executive of the Fund American Companies, confirmed in an interview that he had told the board in mid-November, two months after the search had begun, that he would not stand for re-election in April.
He cited personal reasons for his resignation that had nothing to do with the board's decision to keep Mr.
Robinson in place and elevate Mr.
Golub.
The three men had voted with the minority when Mr.
Robinson and Mr.
Golub won their new positions in a 15-to-4 board vote Monday.
The 57-year-old Mr.
Robinson had been chairman and chief executive since 1977; Mr.
Golub, 53, had been the company president since 1991.
The board considered their appointments as one ticket after a search committee, with Mr.
Robinson as co-chairman, failed in four months to produce an alternative candidate to Mr.
Golub to succeed Mr.
Robinson as chief executive.
Mr.
Warner stressed that he was stepping down of his own volition: "It was entirely me. There was no effort to push me off."
But he acknowledged that the ascension of Mr.
Robinson and Mr.
Golub had hastened his departure, with the company's mandatory retirement age at 72.
Had an alternative to the Robinson-Golub ticket been presented to the board, he added, he would have served out his term.
"It was a very simple decision," he said in an interview.
"I started the process of urging the board to replace Jimmy. The board did not see fit to agree with that position. So I didn't feel right having been so out of line with the rest of the board to stay on. It wouldn't have been good for me, for Jimmy, for Harvey or for the board. I would have been embarrassed to sit there as if I hadn't started anything."
Mr.
Warner denied he felt any sadness or disappointment with his decision, calling himself "a pragmatist." Before last year, he said, he was serving on six boards.
By April, when he intends to leave the Caterpillar Inc. board, he will have resigned from them all.
Mr.
Byrne, an American Express director since 1991, cited "personal reasons" for his pending departure.
He elaborated only to the extent that he said his own business affairs needed more attention.
He declined to entertain any questions about the succession or Monday's election results.
"This had to do with the fact that my own affairs needed attention," he said in a telephone interview from his office in Norwich, Vt., adding: "I am not a good outside director. I am used to managing things and not good when I am not. It was not a terrific fit for me and not a terrific fit for the board.'
Mr.
Byrne's company is a financial holding company, built upon what had been the Fireman's Fund Insurance Company.
With the departures of Mr.
Warner, Mr.
Williams and Mr.
Byrne, the American Express board is left with just one director who voted against the Robinson-Golub team.
However, it is not clear who the fourth dissenter was.
A spokesman for the American Express Company, Michael O'Neil, said he did not know if any other board members intended to retire.


Winnie Mandela Builds a Base Rooted in Despair
A white Mercedes-Benz pulls into the sun-scorched wretchedness of Phola Park squatter camp, and from the car's nimbus of dust and glare a familiar black woman emerges, all business in a tangerine-colored suit.
Residents lured out of their shanties by the apparition simultaneously grin and stiffen to attention.
Winnie Mandela, their patron and prophet, is back.


Subway in Los Angeles To Open in Modest Step
Years of debate, delay and construction turn into reality on Saturday when trains begin to roll under Los Angeles in a subway so different from others that passengers will pay their fares on the honor system.
Many in Los Angeles thought it would never happen, and skeptics call the project a boondoggle.
But the opening will be a milestone for this sprawling city whose very name suggests cars and clogged freeways.


Reeves Rings In The New For Giants
Day 2 of the new Giants era began with a departure from the old.
Dan Reeves promised to jazz up the offense and hired a new defensive coordinator, Mike Nolan, who began by promising: "We will attack and react on the move. We will be aggressive."
Reeves, hired on Tuesday as the new head coach, yesterday brought in Nolan, who is a month younger than Lawrence Taylor.
Nolan, who had been the linebackers coach under Reeves at Denver, replaces Rod Rust, whose fate with the Giants was not immediately clear.


Croats and Serbs Broaden Battle; U.N. Pessimistic
Fighting between Croatian and Serbian forces intensified today, with United Nations peacekeeping troops caught in the middle.
The fighting raised the possibility that the United Nations might withdraw from Croatia.
A Serbian counteroffensive was reported around Maslenica, a town on the coast that had been in Serbian hands until a Croatian offensive began on Friday.
Other reports from the area spoke of a large massing of troops along a front north of Split.


In Yeltsin's Russia, Glimmers of Hope Emerge; What Worries Ukraine
To the Editor:
As runner-up for the presidency of Ukraine, leader of the democratic movement Rukh, a member of parliament and a former dissident who has participated in the struggle for a democratic and free Ukraine more than 20 years, I would like to respond to misunderstandings on Ukraine's nuclear weapons position in "Ukraine: Barrier to Nuclear Peace" (editorial, Jan. 11).


Hunter Gets a Curriculum Covering Many Cultures
After their own battle in an emotional and intellectual war being played out at college campuses nationwide, Hunter College officials this week adopted a multicultural curriculum that will emphasize the contributions of American minority groups, women and non-Western civilizations.
When the plan was first introduced in the fall of 1991 by the college's president, Dr.
Paul LeClerc, it was met with opposition from some faculty members who said the college was playing politics with academics.


Hair Sample Is Requested In L.I. Case
John Esposito was asked in court today to provide samples of his handwriting, blood and other body fluids to prosecutors, who said they were still trying to determine whether he took other children to the underground bunker where Katie Beers was held captive for 16 days.
Samples of dark stains, hair and other evidence that might indicate that others had been in the bunker were still being analyzed, said William Ferris, an assistant Suffolk County District Attorney and prosecutor in the kidnapping and sex-abuse case against Mr.
Esposito.


In Long List of Options, U.S. Seeks Balkan Policy
As part of a Government-wide review of policy toward the former Yugoslavia, the State Department has laid out a sweeping array of options, from maintaining the status quo to the large-scale use of United States military power, State Department officials said today.
The study, which was sent Tuesday to Secretary of State Warren Christopher, makes no recommendations.
Its breadth indicates that the new Administration is beginning to develop a new policy from the bottom up, rather than to build on what it inherited from the Bush Administration.


We Have to Break Persian Gulf Oil Habit
To the Editor:
As an epilogue to Leslie H. Gelb's superb "Iraq Balancing Iran?" (column, Jan. 17), there is yet another cogent reason for decreasing, even abandoning, our dependence on Persian Gulf oil.


Corrections
A chart in Science Times on Tuesday about environmental stresses on rivers and streams omitted a source of the material.
The chart was adapted from work by Dr.
James R. Karr, now director of the Institute for Environmental Studies at the University of Washington in Seattle.


Feinstein Loses Bid In Corruption Case
A Federal judge has rejected an effort by Barry Feinstein, president of Local 237 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, to reinstate a proposed settlement of civil corruption charges against him.
The settlement was rejected recently by Frederick B. Lacey, the court-appointed independent administrator of the union.
Mr.
Feinstein, an influential New York labor leader, sought an expedited court hearing to enforce the settlement and remove Mr.
Lacey from the dispute.


Expo's Interactive First
To the Editor:
"The first theatrical showing of a live-action interactive film" ("When the Film Audience Controls the Plot," The Arts, Jan. 13) is not a first.
The most popular exhibit at Expo 67 in Montreal was a presentation called Kinoautomat at the Czechoslovak pavilion.
It was a totally delightful screwball comedy, directed by Raduz Cincera, in which every five minutes or so the audience controls the plot by pressing buttons on their chairs.
The screen was surrounded by a series of squares which would light up red or green so that you could see your vote being tallied.
As in "I'm Your Man" the plot choice is only an illusion as the script is written to bring the audience back to the same moments at each choice point and to the same conclusion.
RONALD BLUMER  New York, Jan. 14, 1993


Lower Bailout Costs Seen
The Congressional Budget Office, reflecting the rosier picture in the financial industry, has lowered its estimates of the cost of closing failed banks and savings and loan institutions over the next few years.
The estimates include both losses expected to be incurred by the Bank Insurance Fund, and by the Resolution Trust Corporation and its successor in financing the closings of savings and loans.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 24 about employers that have been terminating health benefits for retirees misstated the number of people who would be affected at the Primerica Corporation.
On Jan. 1, the company stopped contributing to health benefits for 1,600 retirees of the American Can Company, as Primerica was formerly known.
A spokeswoman said the company had a total of about 7,800 pensioners, of whom only the American Can retirees were receiving company-subsidized health coverage before Jan. 1.
Primerica disputed the figures in a letter dated Jan. 13; this correction was delayed for clarification of the background.


Ceridian Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A New Place With Items for the Deaf


Leetch (Out), Patrick (Out), Wells (Out). What Now Rangers?
Late in last night's 5-2 victory over Winnipeg, Jeff Beukeboom of the Rangers crashed into the boards, bumped his head and didn't immediately get up.
Under most circumstances, an injury to a defenseman like Beukeboom would be a problem.
This time, it amounted to a crisis.
Hours before the game, the Rangers announced that Brian Leetch will be out for at least six more weeks.
Leetch, who won the Norris Trophy last season as the National Hockey League's best defenseman, hasn't played since Dec. 17 because of a nerve injury in his neck and left shoulder.
It seems only fair to wonder whether he will ever be ready at all this season.


PRIMERICA SETS STOCK SPLIT AND RAISES DIVIDEND
The Primerica Corporation declared a 3-for-2 stock split yesterday and raised its quarterly dividend by 20 percent.
The company has increased the dividend on its common stock for seven straight years, but the stock split is a first.
Additional shares will be distributed on Feb. 26 to shareholders of record on Feb. 8.
Primerica, which sells insurance, runs mutual funds, provides consumer financing and owns the brokerage firm Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, will raise its quarterly dividend to 24 cents a share, or 16 cents after the stock split, from 20 cents.
At the new rate, the New York financial powerhouse will pay about $26.7 million to holders of the common stock over the next four quarters.


First Boston Set to Sell Sealy Stake
Ending its problems from a buyout of the Sealy Corporation, the First Boston Corporation agreed to sell its 94 percent interest in the mattress company to the Zell/Chilmark Fund for $250 million, the companies announced yesterday.
With the transaction, the Zell/Chilmark Fund, a limited partnership based in Chicago that specializes in investing in troubled companies, will be buying a company its executives have been wanting for years.
Through the transaction, the fund is acquiring control of a large bedding franchise with a strong balance sheet at only a fraction of the cost the company could have fetched just a few years ago, analysts said.


Baker Hughes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Former L. L. Bean Official Named to Lead Lands' End
Lands' End Inc., the catalogue merchant, announced yesterday that William T. End would succeed Richard C. Anderson as chief executive on Feb. 1.
In addition, the company said David Dyer, a merchandising and sales vice president, had been named a vice chairman.
Mr.
Anderson, who is 63, will remain a vice chairman and stay on as a consultant.


McDonald's Corp. (N)
Overseas sales at its fast-food restaurants continued to provide the strongest growth for the McDonald's Corporation, producing double-digit increases in earnings for the company's fourth quarter and all of 1992.
Fourth-quarter net income rose 14 percent, to $228 million, or 61 cents a share, the low end of the range Wall Street had expected.
For all of 1992, net income rose 12 percent, to $958.6 million, or $2.60 a share.


No Merger Without Open Skies
U.S. airlines don't like British Airways's 20 percent purchase of financially ailing USAir for $300 million; fearing competition from the merged company, they are pressuring the Clinton Administration to reject the deal.
That it should do, but not to protect the shareholders of American, Delta and United.
There is a more important goal to be served: knocking down barriers to international travel that jack up prices and diminish service for travelers everywhere.


Essay; NATO on the Brink
Looking southward in 1876, Bismarck of Germany, borrowing a phrase from Frederick the Great, recoiled from Continental responsibility: "The Balkans are not worth the healthy bones of a single Pomeranian musketeer."
Many Americans today feel the same way.
What the rapacious Serbs have been doing to the Bosnians is horrible, and what the Croats are now doing to the Bosnians as they get even with the Serbs is almost as bad -- but what do all these ancient hatreds have to do with us?


Westinghouse Chief Steps Down
Paul E. Lego, the 62-year-old engineer who presided over the collapse of the Westinghouse Electric Corporation's finance subsidiary, announced yesterday that he was retiring after two and a half years as the corporation's chairman and chief executive.
The company's directors declined to name an immediate replacement and said it might look outside the company for one.
But Richard M. Morrow, a member of the board and the retired chairman of the Amoco Corporation, was installed as the nonexecutive chairman.
Gary M. Clark, head of the company's special operations group, was chosen president and acting chief executive and given a seat on the board.


Dinkins Falters In Effort to Add To Street Patrols
The Dinkins administration's push to put more police officers on the street is behind schedule because at least 620 officers are still doing work the city had said would be turned over to civilians, City Hall and police officials said yesterday.
The hiring of more civilians to free officers for patrol has lagged, the officials said, because about $16 million of the $40 million set aside for such hiring has instead been spent on unanticipated police costs and the city's Youth Services Department.
As a result, officers are still fixing patrol cars, repairing radios, answering phones and processing paper work.


Bridge
According to Dr.
Johnson, when a man knows he is to be hanged in a fortnight it concentrates his mind wonderfully.
The bridge equivalent, less lethal, concerns a man who is trying to make a slam when missing two aces.
If he is playing for a very high stake, he can be expected to make a desperate effort to turn disaster into triumph.
The diagramed example was played in a rubber bridge game at TGR's Club in London, and the South player was Irving Rose, one of the world's most brilliant card players.
After finding a spade fit his partner took a wild shot at six spades, thinking that his partner was likely to have an ace in a red suit.
This is admittedly a difficult bidding situation, since Blackwood is of little value when holding a void suit.
In experienced partnerships North's second bid should be a jump to four clubs, which is a splinter bid even though partner has bid the suit.
North should then accept a sign-off in four spades, since it is probable that the partnership is missing two red aces, or one red ace and the spade queen.


MCI Revenue Hit $10 Billion Last Year as Profit Rose 13%
The MCI Communications Corporation, whittling away at A.T.&amp; T.'s domination of both the residential and corporate markets for long-distance calls, said yesterday that its annual revenue had exceeded $10 billion for the first time.
MCI, the nation's second-largest long-distance carrier, said fourth-quarter earnings were $160 million, or 60 cents a share, up nearly 17 percent from $137 million, or 52 cents a share, a year earlier.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
MAPPING the electrical circuits in your home is fairly easy and will let you know at a glance which outlets are served by each circuit.
A map can also help you determine whether any circuits supply too many outlets, possibly creating a fire hazard.
Begin by drawing a simple floor plan on notebook-size paper, using at least one sheet for each floor.
You need not draw to scale, but the rooms should be large enough to allow labeling.
Include all areas supplied by electricity, even the attic, basement, garage and outdoor areas.
Name each room or area inside its outline.


Borden Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CHRONICLE
Dr.
LUC MONTAGNIER, a discoverer of the AIDS virus, and FEDERICO MAYOR, the Director General of Unesco, announced the establishment yesterday of a private fund-raising foundation to accelerate research into AIDS and curb its spread.
The Paris-based organization, the World Foundation for AIDS Research, also plans social welfare projects like the schooling of African children orphaned by AIDS, Mr.
Mayor said.
Dr.
Montagnier said he needed $10.9 million to set up three centers and $27 million yearly to run them.
The foundation already has $500,000 in gifts, he said.


Big Demand Seen as American Re Trades Today
Shares of the American Re Corporation will begin trading today on the New York Stock Exchange at a price of $31 a share, far above the initial indication of $27 to $29 a share, company executives said yesterday.
The new issue makes American Re one of the fastest returns to the public market after a leveraged buyout.
Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, the New York buyout firm, purchased the reinsurance company at a price of about $10 a share just in September from the Aetna Life and Casualty Company.
While Kohlberg, Kravis is not selling any of the shares it purchased, and will continue to control about 65 percent of the company, the offering indicates that the buyout firm has tripled its investment in a matter of months.


A Rule Regarding Blood
The football rules committee of the National Collegiate Athletic Association has recommended a rule requiring players who are bleeding or have open wounds to leave the game until treated, the association announced yesterday.
The rule is subject to approval by the N.C.A.A. Executive Committee.


Court Ruling Leaves Clinton With Uncomfortable Choices
The decision by the Israeli High Court upholding the deportation of more than 400 Palestinians disappointed the Clinton Administration, which was clearly hoping that the court might relieve it of having to choose between supporting United Nations sanctions against Israel or antagonizing the Arab countries that are likely to seek sanctions.
In any event, the continuing impasse over the deportees jeopardizes the Middle East peace talks.
No date has been set for their resumption, but at any rate they are now threatened by an Arab-wide boycott.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Big East Notebook; N.C.A.A. Field Might Show Fall of the Mighty
Now that Big East bashing has become an art form in college basketball circles, the time has come to ask what the current cyclical downturn will mean to a conference that once threatened to take over the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
Since the N.C.A.A. field was expanded to 64 teams in 1985, the Big East has averaged 5.5 bids each year.
There were seven representatives from the conference just two years ago and six in 1985, 1988 and 1990.
Only once since the expansion has the number been reduced to four, in 1986.


Major Powers Back a Fund For Soviet-Design Reactors
After months of bickering among themselves, the United States and six other major industrial nations have agreed to create a multimillion-dollar fund to improve the safety of nuclear reactors in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
The results of a secret meeting in London on Wednesday were disclosed today by French and German officials, who said at a joint news conference here that an accord had been reached unexpectedly and that the London-based European Bank for Reconstruction and Development would manage the fund.


CHRONICLE
Planning the surprise party for SKITCH HENDERSON'S 75th birthday took six months of plotting, hiding of guest lists and fielding of telltale calls.
Only when he was on tour with the New York Pops was there time to relax, said RUTH HENDERSON, his wife, who planned the party with a friend, JUNE FREEMANZON.
"And I was totally surprised," the maestro said yesterday.
The celebration was on Wednesday night at the Peninsula Hotel in New York, where hundreds of his friends turned up.


Balkan Peace Talks Inch Forward But Vance May Issue Ultimatum
The three warring parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina made "some progress" today toward a peace settlement despite continued clashes in the republic, a United Nations spokesman here said.
But the co-chairmen of the Conference on Former Yugoslavia, Cyrus R. Vance for the United Nations and Lord Owen for the European Community, were described by officials as nearing the end of their patience after four weeks of negotiations.


Art in Review
Frank Moore
Sperone Westwater Gallery  142 Greene Street (near Houston Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 6
The first image one sees in Frank Moore's strong show of paintings -- the figure of a young nurse with a tray of syringes and vials who stands like a goddess surrounded by an aureole -- suggests with unnerving immediacy the hallucinatory world of medicated illness.


F.B.I. Is United, but Not Behind Boss
Five days after William S. Sessions began a campaign to save his job as Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, he appears to be gaining ground outside the agency but losing support within it.
Defenders like Representative Don Edwards, a Democrat of California, have written to President Clinton supporting Mr.
Sessions as "the best F.B.I. Director ever." But interviews at the agency suggest that his employees do not share Mr.
Edwards's views.


A Goalie Keeps Faith For an Iroquois Nation
The old goalie is heavy with honors.
Thirty-five years ago, he was an all-American.
Next week, he will be inducted into the Lacrosse Hall of Fame as "a player who has made a truly great contribution to society."
But the award he cherishes most nearly killed him.
He was a teen-ager then, playing in the shadow of his father, a mythic goalie who would be buried with his stick.
The boy stood dry-mouthed in the net as the awesome Angus Thomas burst through the defense and bore down on him.


Omnicom Expands In Health-Care Field
The Omnicom Group Inc. said yesterday that it had acquired a leading health-care advertising agency, Harrison, Star, Wiener &amp; Beitler in New York, to join its diversified agency services group.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.
The acquisition underscores the booming interest in agencies specializing in health-care and drug advertising.
Omnicom already owns two New York-based medical advertising shops, Kallir, Philips, Ross and Lavey/Wolff/Swift.


Olympic Spot Unlikely
When JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH speaks, Olympic organizers listen.
And on Wednesday, the president of the International Olympic Committee was quoted by an Italian sports daily as saying that golf had very little chance of being included as a medal sport at the 1996 Olympics.


Big Losses For 3 U.S. Airlines
Three of the country's largest airlines -- United, Delta and Continental -- reported big quarterly losses yesterday because of fare wars and a slump in travel.
United Airlines, a subsidiary of the UAL Corporation, reported a loss in the fourth quarter of 1992 of $224 million on revenues of $3.2 billion.
In the similar 1991 period, the company lost $253 million on 10.3 percent lower revenues of $2.9 billion.
The 1991 results included $130 million in one-time pretax charges.


Reports on Production Cuts And Tariff Proposal Lift Oil
Oil prices briefly surged more than $1 a barrel yesterday after the chairman of the Senate Energy Committee said he would propose a tariff on oil and on reports that Saudi Arabia would push for lower output levels.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange, oil for delivery in March closed at $20.41, up 75 cents.
At one point, a barrel reached $20.75.


Review/Dance; Balanchine Lessons On Passion
George Balanchine's "Tchaikovsky Suite No. 3" could be described as a ballet that reflects the changing moods of its accompanying score.
But that is not the whole truth about this work, which Balanchine created in 1970.
As a glowing performance by the New York City Ballet revealed on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater, "Tchaikovsky Suite No. 3" is more than a danced music-appreciation lesson; it is a vision of disorderly passion and passionate order.
In the opening "Elegie," a man searches for and ultimately loses a mysterious woman.
She and the other women in the scene are barefoot and have their hair loosened.
That alone is significant.
Throughout his career, Balanchine let bare feet and unruly hair symbolize turbulent emotions.


U.S. SAYS ECONOMY GREW AT FAST PACE IN FOURTH QUARTER
The economy grew at a faster-than-expected annual rate of 3.8 percent in the final quarter of 1992, the strongest performance in four years, the Commerce Department reported today.
The encouraging report was issued as the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Alan Greenspan, offered a surprisingly strong endorsement of President Clinton's plans to cut the Federal budget deficit.
He met with the President this morning, and afterward told Congress that Mr.
Clinton's goal of reducing the annual deficit by $145 billion by the end of his term, from a projected $319 billion, seemed about right.


Israel's Highest Court Upholds The Deportation of Palestinians
In a much-awaited decision carrying immediate implications for Israel's diplomatic standing and for the future of the Middle East peace talks, the Israeli High Court of Justice today unanimously validated the deportation of more than 400 Palestinians from the occupied territories to Lebanon.
Although the seven justices expressed reservations about some aspects of the Government action, they declared the mid-December mass expulsions to be legitimate and rejected appeals to bring the Palestinians back.


Dow Chemical Co. (N)
The Dow Chemical Company said yesterday that its fourth-quarter loss resulted from a $433 million pretax charge against earnings and the adoption of two new accounting changes.
In the corresponding period of 1991, Dow lost $94 million, because of a $370 million pretax special charge.
Dow said its $496 million loss for the year was a result of the special charge, which reflected plant shutdowns, work force reductions and the accounting changes regarding retiree health-care costs and the method used to calculate income taxes.


Review/Art; The New Guggenheim Starts to Show Its Face
The Guggenheim Museum is beginning to look something like its new self.
Who knows whether the museum is entirely on firm financial footing: it has recently postponed major exhibitions because of a lack of sponsors and has yet to find the money for the finishing touches on its seemingly underattended SoHo branch.
But with its inaugural extravaganza of the summer and its Russian avant-garde blockbuster of the fall over with, the museum is at last emerging from the spectacle of its own re-emergence.
While the Guggenheim SoHo will reopen with two new exhibitions on Feb. 12, the uptown museum is already up and running, but in a relatively quiet mode.
The new offerings include a meditative installation work by the German Conceptual artist Lothar Baumgarten, which discreetly occupies the building's famous spiral; a small exhibition of works by the American sculptor Richard Serra, several being shown in this country for the first time, on the fifth level of the new wing, and in between several galleries graciously installed with works from the permanent collection.


Marked Down
Just because you're in the catalog retailing business and your name isn't Sears doesn't mean you can always glisten.
Service Merchandise has been an investor passion, rising from 2 3/4 two years ago to a record on Wednesday, closing at 15 1/8.
After a flat earnings report yesterday, the company's most deeply discounted merchandise is its stock.


Paris Journal; Today's Lament: Where's Yesteryear's Gay Paree?
"You know what today's tourists think about le gai Paris?" asked Georges Terrey, a man used to making money by selling the faintly naughty, lusciously louche image of this city that has long held sway.
"They don't give a damn."
Mr.
Terrey, the manager of the Folies-Bergere theater, was standing backstage amid life-size golden models of rearing horses and other bric-a-brac that once adorned the best-known show in town.
Since last month, when the theater closed after losing more than $600,000 in 1992, the only daily spectacle he has witnessed is that of cleaners dusting the 1,679 red-velvet and red-leather seats of the once glorious music hall.


Most Valuable Copy, All Before the Game
Either it's Jim McMahon yanking down his trousers, Stanley Wilson doing cocaine in a locked bathroom, or John Matuszak closing down bars in New Orleans.
Something always happens during the week of a Super Bowl.
Darryl Talley monopolized today's news.
The lines at his interview booth were five-deep, and the Buffalo linebacker was being asked little about the coming game.
Instead, he was harangued about his alleged scuffle with Magic Johnson's highly paid and martial art-trained personal bodyguard.


Knicks Dig a Hole and Can't Climb Out
In an awkward game full of jagged rhythms, a furious comeback by the Knicks couldn't overcome a lethargic first half last night as they lost to the Atlanta Hawks, 110-105, at Madison Square Garden.
After falling behind by 21 points in the second quarter, even New York's league-leading defense couldn't retard the explosive Hawks enough for the Knicks to get back the lead.


No Winter Clearance Sale By the Rangers Just Yet
He has has four injured defensemen, an ailing captain and a veteran goaltender that he cannot protect and must therefore trade by the end of June.
But as his wounded team headed to Buffalo yesterday for its game tonight against the Sabres, Neil Smith, the Rangers' general manager, said he was not ready to make any major transactions.
Smith even insisted for the first time that he could see sticking with both goaltenders, Mike Richter and John Vanbiesbrouck, until the playoffs were done.


Diner's Journal
North Woods Breakfast
If a Scandinavian breakfast sounds like just the thing for midwinter languor, you can find Swedish pancakes, venison "ham," herring and more at Snaps, 230 Park Avenue, at 46th Street, Manhattan.
The new breakfast, served Mondays through Fridays from 7 to 10 A.M., includes miniature pancakes with sugar, cloudberries and cream ($9.75), traditional thin Swedish pancakes with a compote of Arctic berries or with salt pork and lingonberries ($9.75), and goat's milk yogurt with fresh fruit and toasted Norwegian bread ($11).
Reservations: (212) 949-7878.
Wine Alert
L'Acajou, the bistro at 53 West 19th Street in Chelsea, is holding an Alsatian festival through Sunday, with traditional Alsatian food and more than 60 Alsatian wines, many by the glass.
L'Acajou serves lunch from noon to 3 P.M.
Mondays through Fridays, dinner daily from 6:30 P.M. to midnight.
Telephone: (212) 645-1706.
The Changing Scene
REOPENED: Gallagher's Steak House, 228 West 52d Street, Manhattan, which was damaged by fire on Jan. 20.


Fed's Chief Also Likes Clinton Plan on Deficit
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, gave another endorsement to President Clinton's economic plans today, calling the Administration's goals for deficit reduction about the right size and suggesting that if the effort weakened the economy, the central bank might cut interest rates to soften the blow.
Hours after he met with Mr.
Clinton this morning, Mr.
Greenspan appeared before the Senate Budget Committee and signaled a surprisingly cooperative spirit with the Administration, endorsing the President's promise to cut the annual budget deficit $145 billion by the end of his term.


Critic's Notebook The Dietrich Mystique
THAT husky laugh you hear coming from the great beyond is Marlene Dietrich's.
She's not around to control her image anymore, but at least she has managed to confuse it.
"There have been 55 books written about me!" she snapped at Maximilian Schell in his 1984 documentary "Marlene," in which the aged star granted hours of interviews but refused to be shown on camera (all of that specified in the contract she kept reminding him of).
She hated anyone else mucking around with her legend.
It seems as if 55 more books have appeared since she died in May, a 90-year-old recluse who had not left her Paris apartment in years.
The actual number is closer to five, including two major biographies intent on revealng the truth behind the glamorous, ageless woman she always pretended to be.


A Goalie Keeps Faith For an Iroquois Nation
The old goalie is heavy with honors.
Thirty-five years ago, he was an all-American.
Next week, he will be inducted into the Lacrosse Hall of Fame as "a player who has made a truly great contribution to society."
But the award he cherishes most nearly killed him.
He was a teen-ager then, playing in the shadow of his father, a mythic goalie who would be buried with his stick.
The boy stood dry-mouthed in the net as the awesome Angus Thomas burst through the defense and bore down on him.


Giving to Neediest to Honor Teachers
During the recent holiday season, the New Canaan Country School in Connecticut sent a letter to the parents of its students, urging them to refrain from giving presents to teachers because it often led to awkward situations.
That request left Norma Rein Zandman at a loss.
Was there an appropriate way to thank her son's first-grade teachers for their work?
Ms.
Zandman, a lawyer in Pound Ridge, N.Y., then thought of honoring the teachers, Sandy Burn and Cheryl Wilder, by making a $50 donation to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Other parents have also contributed to the fund during the current appeal to show their appreciation for the women and men who, lesson by lesson, are helping to mold the next generation of Americans.


Ex-Sanitation Officer Arrested as Illegal Gun Supplier


GlenFed Will Miss A Payment
GlenFed Inc., parent of the nation's fifth-largest savings and loan association, said today that it had run short of cash and would be unable to make a $4.6 million debt payment due in March, which could result in the company being forced into bankruptcy by its bondholders.
In addition, GlenFed announced a $79.4 million loss for its fiscal second quarter, ended Dec. 31, compared with earnings of $27.6 million in the comparable period a year earlier.
The results reflect a $77 million loan-loss provision in the most recent quarter, as the company's nonperforming assets climbed 6 percent.


The Spoken Word
"A RUSSIAN WEEKEND WITH CLAIRE BLOOM," Symphony Space, Broadway and 95th Street.
A weekend of readings of Russian literature by the actress and others, including the actor Fritz Weaver and the Russian actress Alla Demidova; and a performance of Russian poetry set to music by Prokofiev, by Anna Steiger, a soprano.
Tonight at 8, Ms.
Bloom and Mr.
Weaver will read from short stories by Chekhov; tomorrow at 4 P.M., Ms.
Bloom will give a solo reading from of Tolstoy's "Anna Karenina"; and on Sunday at 5 P.M., Ms.
Steiger will sing the Prokofiev settings, with piano accompaniment by Brian Zeger.
Admission: $16 for each event, or $42 for all three (for students, members of Symphony Space and the elderly, $14 per event, or $36 for all three).
Information: (212) 864-5400.
PANEL DISCUSSION ON SEX, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
"Is Sex Politically Correct?," a discussion with the authors Erica Jong, Gay Talese, Nicolson Baker and Christopher Cerf, and Nadine Strossen, the president of the American Civil Liberties Union.
Sunday at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


At the Bar; Prefering more red ink to more black eyes, the bar association hires an image maker
During the inaugural festivities for President Clinton, Michael T. Scanlon Jr. walked into one of his favorite Washington restaurants.
"Anybody here heard any good lawyer jokes recently?" he asked.
There was silence.
"See!" Mr.
Scanlon declared.
"It's working already!"
"It" is Mr.
Scanlon's mission to burnish the battered image of the nation's lawyers.
To him the problem was neatly reflected in the election, when the Democrats refrained from lawyer-bashing, he says, only because the Republicans had beaten them to it.
Though the Republicans lost, a nevertheless chastened American Bar Association hired Mr.
Scanlon as its first public relations guru.


Revised Secondary To Benefit Both Teams
In Super Bowl XXVI, the Buffalo Bills' secondary was chiefly responsible for allowing the Washington Redskins to make 292 passing yards, 12 passing first downs and scoring tosses of 10 and 30 yards.
Buffalo lost, 37-24.
In a second-round 38-6 playoff loss to the Detroit Lions a little more than a year ago, the Dallas Cowboys' secondary was ripped for 337 passing yards, 29 completions and scoring throws of 31, 9 and 7 yards.


The Art Market
Newhouse-Geffen Deal?
The principals aren't talking, but word is out that S. I. Newhouse Jr. has sold several paintings to the multi-millionaire producer and investor David Geffen.
The deal is said to have been brokered by Mr.
Geffen's longtime friend and art dealer, Larry Gagosian (the two are frequently seen at auctions together), and Arne Glimcher, owner of both Pace Galleries in Manhattan.


Mandatory Goals Urged for Integration
The plaintiffs in a lawsuit challenging the racial and economic segregation of Hartford's schools presented their last witness today, an expert who testified that a meaningful integration plan must cover the entire metropolitan area and set mandatory goals and deadlines.
Little has been accomplished without mandatory goals for addressing segregation, because "everyone knows it's there and no one ever wants to take responsibility for doing anything about it," said the expert, Gary Orfield, a Harvard professor of education and social policy.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Big East Notebook; N.C.A.A. Field Might Show Fall of the Mighty
Now that Big East bashing has become an art form in college basketball circles, the time has come to ask what the current cyclical downturn will mean to a conference that once threatened to take over the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
Since the N.C.A.A. field was expanded to 64 teams in 1985, the Big East has averaged 5.5 bids each year.
There were seven representatives from the conference just two years ago and six in 1985, 1988 and 1990.
Only once since the expansion has the number been reduced to four, in 1986.


Capital Cities/ABC (N)
Improved revenues and operating results at the ABC television network were offset by a provision for staff reductions as operating income declined slightly in the fourth quarter at the network's parent company, Capital Cities/ABC Inc.
For the full fiscal year, the parent company said yesterday that its overall revenues were down slightly and that its revenues from broadcasting operations fell 1 percent.
The network's decline was attributed to a surge in revenues the previous year in special events sports programming.


Scientific Evidence Doesn't Tell Whole Story; Drop in Federal Cases
To the Editor:
Your front-page article on Supreme Court review of scientific evidence quotes me as describing the decrease in liability cases for non-asbestos products from 8,200 in 1985 to 5,200 in 1991.


Hannah Wilke, 52, Artist, Dies; Used Female Body as Her Subject
Hannah Wilke, a sculptor and Conceptual artist who made the body and female sexuality the subject of her work, died yesterday at Twelve Oaks Hospital in Houston.
She was 52 and lived in Manhattan.
She died of complications from lymphoma, said her husband, Donald Goddard.


Computer Translator Phones Try to Compensate for Babel
Toshiyuki Takezawa sat down at a bank of powerful computers here this afternoon and spoke into a microphone.
"Moshimoshi," he said.
Instantly, the computers whirred to life, furiously digesting and analyzing this morsel of Japanese speech.
Twelve seconds later and half a world away, a computer in Pittsburgh spoke, conveying Dr.
Takezawa's message in English.
"Hello," it said, in its electronic voice.


China Offers Russia Border Cooperation
To the Editor:
"China Builds Its Military Muscle, Making Some Neighbors Nervous" (front page, Jan. 11) considers a possible future aggressive stance of China over borders.
The Northeast China border with Russia is under constant discussion, but the emphasis is on economic leverage for trade and transit, not military muscle-flexing.


Chinese Buy American Dream by the Inch
Sooner or later someone was going to discover a way to make money on the Chinese craze for America.
Now it looks as if someone has -- perhaps at the expense of thousands of naive Chinese.
All across the country, from the ice-glazed terrain of Harbin in the north to this moneyed metropolis in the south, Chinese people are talking about the chance to buy a "piece of America."


Ego and Error on the Gay Issue
President Clinton has made plenty of tactical errors in his efforts to lift the ban on gay men and women in the military.
But much of the blame for his current troubles falls on three prominent individuals who should be supporting him but instead are, deliberately or inadvertently, fanning the hysteria against him.
If these three men -- Senator Sam Nunn, Defense Secretary Les Aspin and Gen.
Colin Powell -- truly want to serve their nation, they need to help their new President execute his policy of fairness and stop undermining him.


I.B.M. Outlines Search Plan, Says Structure Will Remain
In an unusual statement, the I.B.M. director heading the search for a new chief executive said last night that his group would not review the company's structure and emphasized that a number of I.B.M. executives would be considered for the top job.
The director, James E. Burke, who is the retired chairman of Johnson &amp; Johnson, also endorsed the recent shift of the International Business Machines Corporation into a federation of more independent businesses -- an effort to help the computer giant respond faster to changes in the marketplace.
Reassuring Message
Analysts said the statement by Mr.
Burke was intended to assure I.B.M.'s employees, customers and suppliers that during the three-month search for a replacement for John F. Akers the company would be run by its current management and not second-guessed by a panel of outside directors.


Kay Swift, Composer, Dies at 95; Hits Included 'Can This Be Love?'
Kay Swift, who wrote the music for the popular standards "Can't We Be Friends?," "Fine and Dandy" and "Can This Be Love?," died yesterday at the Alzheimer's Resource Center in Southington, Conn.
She was 95.
She died of Alzheimer's disease, which was diagnosed three years ago, said a granddaughter, Katharine Weber.


Manager Is Charged in Trading Cover-Up
Edward Coyle, a former administrative manager at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. whose responsibilities included monitoring brokers' compliance with securities laws, was charged yesterday with lying to protect a broker accused of cheating a client.
Mr.
Coyle, who is 36, was a control administrator at a Shearson branch office in the General Motors Building at 767 Fifth Avenue.
He resigned from the firm in December.


N.Y.R.A. Warns of Enormous Deficits
Officials of the New York Racing Association, renewing their proposals to restructure horse racing in the state, predicted yesterday that the sport could produce a deficit of $58 million a year within five years unless changes were made.
Specifically, they called for the merger of the state's six Off-Track Betting corporations under the racing association's control, the reduction of the state's tax on bets and the suspension of racing in New York for six weeks each winter.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DATA GENERAL CORP., Westboro, Mass., said a United States District Court jury in Boston had ruled that the Grumman Systems Support Corp. of Bethpage, L.I., must pay Data General $36.4 million in damages and additional interest of approximately $15.9 million in a software copyright infringement and trade secret suit.


Compromise Near on Military's Ban on Homosexuals
President Clinton and top Senate Democrats appeared tonight on the verge of a compromise that would allow homosexuals in the military and might help head off the possibility of a bitter Congressional battle on the issue.
Mr.
Clinton and Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, who has been the most influential Democratic opponent to lifting the Pentagon's ban on homosexuals, were both essentially satisfied with what had been worked out, a Congressional aide said late tonight after Mr.
Nunn met with the President for more than an hour.
But, the aide said, the two wanted to brief the military and others involved in the debate before regarding it as settled.


Memories Drive NAACP Fund's New Leader
In the fall of 1967, when Elaine R. Jones was studying law at the University of Virginia, she took a break one day in a lounge off the women's restroom, the only place female students could congregate then.
She remembers sitting in a "state of shock," intimidated by the intricacies of legal theory and daunted by the massiveness of her legal texts.
But before she could recover from that bout of first-year blues, she had another shock.
"A middle-aged white woman came in," Ms.
Jones recalled.
"She looked at me sitting on the sofa and said, 'I know you're on your lunch break, honey, but when you finish could you please clean out the refrigerator?' "


KHMER ROUGE TIED TO ETHNIC KILLINGS
A Khmer Rouge soldier has confessed that he and a squad of other Khmer Rouge guerrillas killed 15 ethnic Vietnamese civilians last month in a massacre motivated by ethnic hatred, the United Nations announced today.
The massacre in the central province of Kompong Chhnang on Dec. 27 was the worst single instance of violence in Cambodia since United Nations peacekeeping forces arrived here in 1991 to carry out a peace treaty.


Knicks Dig a Hole and Can't Climb Out
In an awkward game full of jagged rhythms, a furious comeback by the Knicks couldn't overcome a lethargic first half last night as they lost to the Atlanta Hawks, 110-105, at Madison Square Garden.
After falling behind by 21 points in the second quarter, even New York's league-leading defense couldn't retard the explosive Hawks enough for the Knicks to get back the lead.


SUPER BOWL XXVII: Notebook; 500 Little Helmets Get a Big Chuckle
Thurman Thomas has a sense of humor.
Really.
Thomas may have been much maligned for his moody and selfish behavior in the past, but today he opened his final pre-Super Bowl news conference with a joke.
And it was on himself.


Dinkins Says Program for Making Streets Safer Is 'Right on Target'
Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that despite a lag in the hiring of civilian employees to free police officers for patrol, his program to put more officers on the street was "right on target."
By hiring fewer civilians, he said, his administration has been able to spend money on other projects related to fighting crime, including creating beacon schools, which offer social-service programs to children and their parents.


A Remade I.B.M. Reinvents the Mainframe
Trying desperately to reinvent itself, a battered I.B.M. has disclosed to consultants that it has reinvented the mainframe, the type of computer on which the company built its empire.
People who were briefed by I.B.M. said the machine was designed in less than a year -- regarded as record speed for a project of such complexity.
They said the new system, which will mark the International Business Machines Corporation's entry into a type of computing known as parallel processing, will be used initially for scientific supercomputing applications, but will eventually be useful for commercial purposes as well.


On Stage, and Off
The Price of 'Angels'
Among the complicating factors in the negotiations over bringing Tony Kushner's "Angels in America" to Broadway was, on the one hand, the playwright's stated intention to make the play affordable (and thus accessible) to a less affluent, less-than-traditional downtown audience and, on the other hand, the economic risk involved in staging a long, challenging and expensive work about AIDS.


Accord Appears Close in Gay-Ban Talks
After meeting tonight at the White House with Senate Democrats, President Clinton appeared close to reaching a compromise on his pledge to lift the ban on homosexuals in the military.
The chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee and the President were both satisfied with what had been worked out, but wished to brief the military before regarding the issue as settled, a Congressional aide said.


Mark Kaminski, 39, An Architect Noted In the World of Art
Mark Kaminski, an architectural designer, died on Wednesday at his parents' home in Buffalo.
He was 39 and lived in Manhattan.
He died after a brief illness, said his father, Richard Kaminski.


Look Out, Above: Here Come the Islanders
The Islanders are hot, playing better than they have in several seasons, closing in from the back of the pack in the Patrick Division.
Their 5-2 victory over the Pittsburgh Penguins tonight was their third triumph in a row and their sixth consecutive game without a defeat.
They are 6-1-1 in their last eight games, all with Mark Fitzpatrick guarding the goal.
"Everyone is making it easy for me," he said after stopping 26 shots.


TV Weekend; A New NBC Crime Drama From a Long Tradition
Long a television staple, the crime drama has had its periodic milestones, going back to 1952's "Dragnet," which came from radio, and moving on to Joseph Wambaugh's "Police Story" (1973) and Steven Bochco's "Hill Street Blues" (1981) -- all of which happened to be NBC series.
Now the same network can put another quality notch in its police-show belt: "Homicide: Life on the Street," having its premiere on Sunday evening immediately after Super Bowl XXVII.
Developed by Paul Attanasio from a David Simon book, "Homicide: A Year on the Killing Streets" (Houghton Mifflin, 1991), the new series has as its executive producers the film maker Barry Levinson ("Diner," "Rain Man") and the veteran television producer Tom Fontana ("St. Elsewhere").
The first hourlong episode is written by Mr.
Attanasio and directed by Mr.
Levinson.
"Homicide" is taped in Baltimore, Mr.
Levinson's hometown.


Motorola Cites 21 Investors In Satellite Phone Project
Motorola Inc. said yesterday that it had lined up 21 potential investors for its Iridium project, a $3.4 billion system to provide global wireless telephone service through 66 small satellites encirling the earth.
Adding details to an announcement made several weeks ago, the company said that the investors had tentatively agreed to provide more than $800 million in initial financing and that they hoped to close the deal by midyear.


The Dietrich Mystique
THAT husky laugh you hear coming from the great beyond is Marlene Dietrich's.
She's not around to control her image anymore, but at least she has managed to confuse it.
"There have been 55 books written about me!" she snapped at Maximilian Schell in his 1984 documentary "Marlene," in which the aged star granted hours of interviews but refused to be shown on camera (all of that specified in the contract she kept reminding him of).
She hated anyone else mucking around with her legend.
It seems as if 55 more books have appeared since she died in May, a 90-year-old recluse who had not left her Paris apartment in years.
The actual number is closer to five, including two major biographies intent on revealng the truth behind the glamorous, ageless woman she always pretended to be.


Steel Mill Collapses in Pittsburgh


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Big East Notebook; N.C.A.A. Field Might Show Fall of the Mighty
Now that Big East bashing has become an art form in college basketball circles, the time has come to ask what the current cyclical downturn will mean to a conference that once threatened to take over the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
Since the N.C.A.A. field was expanded to 64 teams in 1985, the Big East has averaged 5.5 bids each year.
There were seven representatives from the conference just two years ago and six in 1985, 1988 and 1990.
Only once since the expansion has the number been reduced to four, in 1986.


The Newest Hall of Famers
BO SCHEMBECHLER, ALAN PAGE and 11 others are the newest members of the College Football Hall of Fame, in Kings Island, Ohio.
The elections, held by the National Football Foundation, were announced yesterday.
Schembechler compiled a 234-65-8 record in 27 years of coaching at Miami of Ohio from 1963 to 1968 and at Michigan from 1969 to 1989.
Page played at Notre Dame from 1964-66, helping the Irish to a record of 25-3-2 and the 1966 national championship.


Grocer Thrives With Personal Touches
"Hi, Peter!"
YOU know those stories your parents tell and tell and tell so many times over the years until the words get drilled into your head and the entire family knows the story, word for word?


Rebels Continue Bombings In Effort to Halt Peru's Vote
Shining Path guerrillas exploded a pickup truck packed with dynamite today outside I.B.M.'s headquarters in Peru, wounding 15 people and damaging 50 houses in La Molina, an upper-class suburb.
The truck bomb was the culmination of a week of Maoist violence intended to disrupt mayoral elections on Friday and to show strength despite the arrest of the movement's leader, Abimael Guzman, four months ago.


Art in Review
Craigie Horsfield
Barbara Gladstone Gallery  99 Greene Street (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 6
The centerpiece of Craigie Horsfield's new exhibition is a sprawling 7-by-11-foot print of three bird skeletons that Mr.
Horsfield found in the chimney of his home in London.
The somber emotional tone of this imposing work, printed in rich, sooty shades of gray, is continued in the other photographs here.
In one, a crowd of people, bundled against the cold, gather outside a church in Poland; in another, a lank-haired young woman in a nightclub morosely clutches a beer bottle.
A photograph of dark wooden furniture is so shrouded in gloom that it's hard to make out the objects in it.


A New Era Heralded for Health Agency


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Big East Notebook; N.C.A.A. Field Might Show Fall of the Mighty
Now that Big East bashing has become an art form in college basketball circles, the time has come to ask what the current cyclical downturn will mean to a conference that once threatened to take over the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
Since the N.C.A.A. field was expanded to 64 teams in 1985, the Big East has averaged 5.5 bids each year.
There were seven representatives from the conference just two years ago and six in 1985, 1988 and 1990.
Only once since the expansion has the number been reduced to four, in 1986.


Olympic Spot Unlikely
When JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH speaks, Olympic organizers listen.
And on Wednesday, the president of the International Olympic Committee was quoted by an Italian sports daily as saying that golf had very little chance of being included as a medal sport at the 1996 Olympics.


Violence in Sarajevo Claims a Young Victim


Corrections
A picture caption in The Home Section on Jan. 14 with an article about home entertainment systems misidentified the makers of the audio and video components shown.
The television was from the Sony Corporation; the speakers were by Rock Solid Sounds, of Buffalo, and all others were by Rotel of America, also in Buffalo.


CHRONICLE
Thirty-five Hispanic women from government, corporate board rooms, small businesses and universities across the United States will meet in Washington next week to talk about ethnic and sexual barriers to career advancement.
The chairwoman of the conference, the National Hispanic Women's Summit, is MARIA ELENA TORANO, chief executive of META, a Miami environmental and management concern, who participated in President Clinton's economic conference last month in Little Rock, Ark.
"All 35 have accepted invitations to the Feb. 6 summit," she said.


Chrysler's Earnings Strong For 4th Quarter and the Year
The Chrysler Corporation, in the midst of a financial recovery after three years of weak performance, reported its best results in four years yesterday, posting profits for 1992's fourth quarter and the full year.
The improvement stemmed from the recovering economy and the successful introduction in the last year of new models with hefty profit margins.
Chrysler's restyled mini-van has been well received as have the new Jeep Grand Cherokee sport utility vehicle and three midsize sedans, the Eagle Vision, Dodge Intrepid and Chrysler Concorde.


Where and When to See Speed Skaters
To the Editor:
A Jan. 15 article on ice-skating rinks in New York City refers to finding men wearing "extended-blade skates" at many of them.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
DINKINS PLANS $215 MILLION LOAN
To help close a projected $2.1 billion budget gap in the next fiscal year, the Dinkins administration plans to borrow $215 million at 5 percent interest from Chemical Bank, using as collateral unpaid property-tax debts, senior officials said.
The unusual scheme would allow the administration to use the funds on the first day of the fiscal year instead of waiting until delinquent taxpayers get around to paying up.
A1.


Reeves to Give Giants Mile-High Look?
Dan Reeves and his new defensive coordinator, Mike Nolan, met yesterday in Denver and talked about candidates to fill out the Giants' coaching staff.
Reeves, who took over as head coach two days ago, will be meeting with some of his former Broncos assistants, and is very likely to ask several of them to rejoin him with the Giants.


HOMOSEXUAL BAN LOSES IN U.S. COURT
A Federal district judge ruled today that the Pentagon's ban on homosexuals was unconstitutional and permanently enjoined the military services from discharging or denying enlistment to gay people "in the absence of sexual conduct which interferes with the military mission."
The judge, Terry J. Hatter Jr., then ordered the Navy to reinstate permanently Petty Officer V. Keith Meinhold, 30, who was discharged last year after proclaiming his homosexuality on national television.
Judge Hatter ruled that the Navy's action violated the Constitution's guarantee of equal protection.


Exchange of Services Needn't Be Taxable
To the Editor:
In "When Helping Hands Have to Pay Taxes" (letter, Jan. 22), Prof.
Deborah A. Geier charges me with misrepresentation in characterizing Time Dollars as tax exempt.
She asserts that Time Dollars must be taxable as a form of barter currency.
She is wrong.


Woman Cites Grim Details On Doctor In Abortion
Testifying at the trial of a doctor accused of attempting an illegal third-trimester abortion on a woman and severing her fetus's arm, the woman yesterday described the doctor's East Village clinic as a terrifying place where dirty instruments were used and a woman's screams could be heard.
Rosa Rodriguez, 21, testified in State Supreme Court in Manhattan that on her first visit to Dr.
Abu Hayat's clinic at 9 Avenue A, "I heard screaming, someone saying not to kill the baby." When she asked why the woman was screaming, she said, Dr.
Hayat told her, "Not everyone wants anesthesia, and not everyone can pay for the anesthesia."


Catalogue Plant To Close
One of the first ripples from Monday's huge restructuring of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company surfaced today, when the R. R. Donnelley &amp; SonsCompany said it would close the Chicago plant that had printed the Sears catalogue for 80 years.
The Donnelley facility, the oldest of its 140 plants worldwide, employs 660.
The company said it would take a one-time charge of $60 million in the first quarter to cover the cost of shutting the facility.
Meanwhile, Donnelley, the world's largest commercial printer, today reported record sales and earnings for the fourth quarter and the year.


Novacek Qualifies As a Real Cowboy
On the field, Jay Novacek is distinctive.
He is an All-Pro tight end making $900,000 a year.
He is a dangerous third-down receiver, yet so good blocking that he may play one week primarily as a receiver and the next week primarily as a blocker.
Off the field, he is simply one of a kind.
He is the only Dallas Cowboy who is really a cowboy, and not only because he wears boots every day.
He is quiet and soft-spoken.
He cares little for fame.
He is so laid back that he never spikes the ball after a touchdown catch.
He speaks in homilies, believes what he belives and will argue to the end to defend those beliefs.


G.O.P. Braces for Fight on Party Chief
Opening its national meeting here, the Republican Party found itself today in the unaccustomed position of preparing for a spirited internal fight over who should lead the party back from political exile.
After weeks of intense campaigning, the race for chairman of the Republican National Committee still appeared wide open today, the day before the voting.
Those generally viewed as the leading candidates are Haley Barbour, a lawyer and political consultant from Mississippi; Spencer Abraham, co-chairman of the National Republican Congressional Campaign Committee, and John Ashcroft, the former Governor of Missouri.


A Way Out for Israel
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's expulsion last month of 400 Palestinians was a blunder for which Israel now pays dearly.
Successive American Presidents have consistently held that the expulsion of any Palestinians from Israeli-occupied territories violates a 1949 Geneva Convention.
But it would compound the blunder and jeopardize Middle East peace talks for Arab states to press for United Nations sanctions before President Clinton's team has even settled in.
Forcing a U.N.
Security Council vote on sanctions would put a well-disposed but untried Administration instantly in the briar patch.
Successive Presidents have also promised to protect a beleaguered Israel from punitive sanctions, if necessary by exercising the American veto on the Security Council.


West Doubts Yugoslavs Will Send In the Army
Despite renewed firefights between Croatian Army forces and rebel Serbs along Croatia's Adriatic coast, Western diplomats said today that they do not expect Yugoslavia's army to intervene on the Serbs' behalf unless the fighting radically intensifies and spreads.
"The Yugoslav Army won't move in if it remains localized," a Western diplomat said.
"But our experience here is that once the fire starts, it burns through a large part of the forest before it stops."


Kenneth Gaburo, 65; Composer and Teacher
Kenneth Gaburo, a composer, writer and teacher, died on Tuesday at his home in Iowa City, Iowa.
He was 65.
He died of bone cancer, said Philip Blackburn, a friend.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan region that close soon: Closing This Weekend
"TIME PIECE," Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
Dance works by Kenneth Tosti, featuring John Gardner and Kate Johnson.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Admission: $15.
Information: (212) 598-7150.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  COURT BACKS DEPORTATIONS
The Israeli High Court of Justice unanimously validated the deportation of more than 400 Palestinians from the occupied territories to Lebanon.
The ruling is likely to put Israel on a collision course with the U.N.
Security Council, which has condemned the deportations.
A1  Israel's ruling is a disappointment to the Clinton Administration.
A9


On Stage, and Off
The Price of 'Angels'
Among the complicating factors in the negotiations over bringing Tony Kushner's "Angels in America" to Broadway was, on the one hand, the playwright's stated intention to make the play affordable (and thus accessible) to a less affluent, less-than-traditional downtown audience and, on the other hand, the economic risk involved in staging a long, challenging and expensive work about AIDS.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Big East Notebook; N.C.A.A. Field Might Show Fall of the Mighty
Now that Big East bashing has become an art form in college basketball circles, the time has come to ask what the current cyclical downturn will mean to a conference that once threatened to take over the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
Since the N.C.A.A. field was expanded to 64 teams in 1985, the Big East has averaged 5.5 bids each year.
There were seven representatives from the conference just two years ago and six in 1985, 1988 and 1990.
Only once since the expansion has the number been reduced to four, in 1986.


Kim Foltz, Reporter and Columnist, 44
Kim Foltz, a reporter and columnist for The New York Times, died yesterday at New York Hospital.
He was 44.
Mr.
Foltz, a resident of Manhattan, died of AIDS.
After he learned he had the virus that causes AIDS, he wrote about his experiences as a man infected with H.I.V. in an article for The Times Magazine on Jan. 5, 1992.


Chicago Board Votes to Remove Chief of Schools
After three tumultuous years, the Chicago Board of Education has ousted the Superintendent it hired to oversee a plan to improve the schools by transferring power from the central board to parent-led councils at each of the city's 540 schools.
The Superintendent, Ted S. Kimbrough, a former Superintendent of Schools in Compton, Calif., was picked by the board in 1989 to oversee the ambitious plan.
Since then, the plan and Mr.
Kimbrough have faced criticism on such issues as high costs, low achievement scores and poorly run councils.


Harsh Homecoming for Senator Accused of Harassment
Two months after being accused of sexual misconduct over the course of his political career, Senator Bob Packwood returned home this week for a cautious tour of Oregon.
Even with carefully selected audiences, it has been a rough re-entry.
Protests, relatively small but vigorous to the point of violence, have greeted Mr.
Packwood at several stops.
Women's groups say they are infuriated that Mr.
Packwood, a Republican long considered a staunch supporter of their issues, has refused to meet with them.
Critics have dubbed his visit the "stealth tour" because the Senator has met only with small groups of supporters in certain towns.


Christie Shrugs Off Footnote
Steve Christie does not have a direct line to Scott Norwood's house in Virginia.
He is not Norwood's twin, or his brother, or even his friend.
He barely even knows the guy.
Not that anyone understands that.
Christie is the kicker for the Buffalo Bills; Norwood was the kicker for the Buffalo Bills, until this season.
By some strange form of reasoning, everybody seems to think that makes Christie an expert on Norwood.
At least, it seems that way to Christie, who can't make sense of all the questions he has been asked about Norwood this week.


Review/Photography; German Who Found Color in Paris
Like many artists in the 1920's and 30's, the photographer Josef Breitenbach (1896-1984) found his artistic salvation in Paris.
It was there that he came into contact with the leading artists and ideas of his time, and it was there that he began his own Surrealist-inspired experiments with the use of color in photography.
Two current shows, at the Houk Friedman Gallery uptown and Hirschl &amp; Adler Modern, in SoHo, offer a wide-ranging selection of the photographs Breitenbach made in Paris during the 1920's when he was there on visits, and after 1933, when he moved there from his native Munich.
The shows also present examples of his early work, and a few pictures from his later years in New York.


Critic's Notebook The Dietrich Mystique
THAT husky laugh you hear coming from the great beyond is Marlene Dietrich's.
She's not around to control her image anymore, but at least she has managed to confuse it.
"There have been 55 books written about me!" she snapped at Maximilian Schell in his 1984 documentary "Marlene," in which the aged star granted hours of interviews but refused to be shown on camera (all of that specified in the contract she kept reminding him of).
She hated anyone else mucking around with her legend.
It seems as if 55 more books have appeared since she died in May, a 90-year-old recluse who had not left her Paris apartment in years.
The actual number is closer to five, including two major biographies intent on revealng the truth behind the glamorous, ageless woman she always pretended to be.


Schools Seek Laws Deterring Illegal Students
School authorities in northern New Jersey today gave parents credit for creativity in enrolling their children in highly regarded suburban schools where they don't belong.
One New York City mother, a tollbooth operator at the George Washington Bridge, sent her son to live with his grandfather in Montclair and attend school there.


Books of The Times; Building on the Pain of a Past in China
Bone
By Fae Myenne Ng
194 pages. Hyperion. $19.95.
"Remembering the past gives power to the present," says Leila Leong, the narrator of Fae Myenne Ng's incantatory first novel.
"Memories do add up." Our memories, she continues, can't bring back the dead, "but they count to keep them from becoming strangers."


For Children
'Herman's New York City Winter Festival'
Great Lawn, Central Park  Central Park West at 81st Street  (212) 518-4800  Recommended for all ages  Tomorrow
Snow can make New Yorkers delirious, and forecasters have been talking snow.
But what if it doesn't show up?
Or what if it doesn't stick?
Well, you can experience the next best thing, perhaps, by trudging through snow that's blown from the snow-making guns of the Killington, Vt., Ski Resort at this winter festival in Central Park.


A Goalie Keeps Faith For an Iroquois Nation
The old goalie is heavy with honors.
Thirty-five years ago, he was an all-American.
Next week, he will be inducted into the Lacrosse Hall of Fame as "a player who has made a truly great contribution to society."
But the award he cherishes most nearly killed him.
He was a teen-ager then, playing in the shadow of his father, a mythic goalie who would be buried with his stick.
The boy stood dry-mouthed in the net as the awesome Angus Thomas burst through the defense and bore down on him.


Dow Issues Rise as Nasdaq Stocks Falter
Like a river reversing course, money continued to flow from Nasdaq stocks into the Dow industrial stalwarts yesterday.
Some recent institutional favorites, especially Intel, fell the hardest, but a broad range of smaller Nasdaq stocks declined as well.
The Nasdaq composite index was off 3.23, to 694.67, for a two-day loss of almost 1.8 percent.


When You're a Day Late And, Yes, $100,000 Short
This is a story of love and hope and luck and loss.
More precisely, it is the story of how one man's effort to save $4,500 in income taxes cost him a $100,000 lottery prize.
On April 26, 1991, Frederick R. DiGioia, who owns the Forest Grove Pharmacy in North Haven, Conn., went to the nearby Sav-Rite liquor store and bought four $5 Connecticut lottery tickets, all carrying the number 5013.
To some, those digits might have spelled doom, but since Mr.
DiGioia's 30th wedding anniversary was coming that May 13, he recalled yesterday, "I felt lucky."


Bond Prices Close Up in Seesaw Day
Prices in the bond market rode a roller coaster yesterday, rising, falling and then rising again at the end of the day.
The ride revealed a market that has become more and more driven by public comments surrounding the development of President Clinton's economic plan.
Comments on Sunday by Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen drove the yield on the 30-year bond down to 7.20 percent on Monday, a six-and-a-half-year low.
Yesterday, a prominent Senator's proposal of a minimum price of $25 a barrel on imported oil quashed a morning rally that had pulled the yield on the long bond a notch lower, to 7.19 percent.


A Goalie Keeps Faith For an Iroquois Nation
The old goalie is heavy with honors.
Thirty-five years ago, he was an all-American.
Next week, he will be inducted into the Lacrosse Hall of Fame as "a player who has made a truly great contribution to society."
But the award he cherishes most nearly killed him.
He was a teen-ager then, playing in the shadow of his father, a mythic goalie who would be buried with his stick.
The boy stood dry-mouthed in the net as the awesome Angus Thomas burst through the defense and bore down on him.


Review/Dance; Stepping to Music by Elusive Prince
A ballet that involves four offbeat choreographers and music by Prince is bound to attract attention.
The Joffrey Ballet's premiere of "Billboards" on Wednesday night at the University of Iowa had, in fact, all the trappings of a true media event.
Halfway through the evening, following the performance of Laura Dean's exultant segment and Charles Moulton's funky section, reports circulated through Hancher Auditorium here (where 15,000 tickets are expected to be sold by Sunday) that Prince was en route but that his plane was delayed in either Minneapolis, his home base, or Los Angeles.
A member of a local television crew even reported an Elvis-like sighting: Prince was in town, holed up in the Holiday Inn.


Buyer in the Wings For Clio Awards
The tangled tale of the Clio Awards, once advertising's most famous prize, could be taking another twist.
Representatives of Ruth L. Ratny, the Chicago trade-magazine publisher who mounted a "New Clios" ceremony in September, said an announcement of the acquisition of Clio by James M. Smyth would be made Wednesday.
Agency executives in Chicago not connected to the Clio contretemps identified Mr.
Smyth as the former owner of Optimus, a Chicago commercial production company that was sold to Anheuser-Busch.


1992 Unemployment Rate Hit a 15-Year High
New York City's average unemployment rate last year was the highest in 15 years, according to Federal statistics released yesterday.
The city's unemployment rate rose to 10.8 percent from 8.6 percent of 1991, according to the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics, the highest level since the end of the city's last fiscal crisis in 1976.


Corrections
A report on Jan. 20 in the "Boomers' Ball" column, about inaugural festivities in Washington, referred incorrectly to a diamond that the American Diamond Industry Association said was being worn by Hillary Rodham Clinton.
It was a 4.25-carat yellow uncut diamond found in Arkansas, the association reported, not the 40.23-carat "Uncle Sam diamond," also found in Arkansas, which the organization says is in a private collection.


Review/Fashion; From de la Renta, Sensible Chic
Oscar de la Renta made his debut as a couture designer in a quiet, unobtrusive manner today, exactly as he planned.
His collection for Pierre Balmain was the last of the French haute couture shows for spring and summer.
He was the first American to design a major couture collection since Main Rousseau Bocher, known as Mainbocher, closed his salon here in 1940.


Challenges From a Headstrong Public
President Clinton is improvising a cease-fire in the battle over homosexuals in the armed services.
Whether it turns out to be a peace settlement -- and, if so, on what terms -- remains to be seen.
The public, not the military or the Senate and House of Representatives, is the most unpredictable element in the equation Mr.
Clinton will seek to solve during the six months that he seems to have gained.


On My Mind; Dances With Wolves
Since the Arab states started their wars against Israel a half-century ago, hardly a week has gone by without worried warnings that Israel was in danger of losing its soul.
The warnings come from people who announce themselves friends of Israel -- most often foreign Jews and European diplomats -- but who are displeased by Israeli survival tactics or politicians Israelis choose to govern their country.


Dinkins to Propose Using Unpaid Taxes To Get a Bank Loan
To help close a projected $2.1 billion budget gap in the next fiscal year, the Dinkins administration plans to borrow $215 million from Chemical Bank, using as collateral unpaid property-tax debts, senior officials said last night.
The unusual plan would allow the administration to use the funds on the first day of the fiscal year, July 1, instead of waiting until delinquent taxpayers finally get around to paying up.


Cops Behind Desks
New York City's effort to put more cops on the street is being hobbled by shortfalls in civilian hiring.
This is a management problem that Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly and Mayor David Dinkins dare not ignore.
The 1991 "Safe Streets, Safe City" plan crafted by Mayor Dinkins and former Commissioner Lee Brown called for adding more than 5,000 officers to the 25,000-member uniformed force by this summer.
The Mayor now deservedly takes credit for keeping that wise boost in the patrol force on track.
Uniformed strength is about 28,700 today; an additional 1,500 are to be hired July 1.


Restaurants
Those who remember the original One Fifth Avenue, with its ocean-liner motif accented with dark oak and brass, might find the current incarnation reminiscent of a different kind of ship, one that cruises in outer space.
Based on the reaction of fellow diners over four visits, it is not the kind of vessel in which you would care to spend much time.
More on that later, however, because the food is worth talking about.
The new One Fifth Avenue is the latest production of the group that created Gotham Bar and Grill and Mesa Grill in Manhattan, both resounding successes.
Jerome Kretchmer, the most visible investor, and Alfred Portale, the chef at Gotham Bar and Grill, saw the available One Fifth Avenue as a perfect spot to anchor a Greenwich Village answer to Le Bernardin at downtown prices.


Orphaned Girl to Get Millions Over Faulty Heater
A 4-year-old girl whose parents and sister were asphyxiated by fumes from a gas-fired heater used to de-ice the driveway of their home will be the main beneficiary of a $3.2 million settlement.
The agreement, in civil suits against the companies that installed and repaired the de-icing system, was announced on Jan. 14.


Knicks Dig a Hole and Can't Climb Out
In an awkward game full of jagged rhythms, a furious comeback by the Knicks couldn't overcome a lethargic first half last night as they lost to the Atlanta Hawks, 110-105, at Madison Square Garden.
After falling behind by 21 points in the second quarter, even New York's league-leading defense couldn't retard the explosive Hawks enough for the Knicks to get back the lead.


U.S. May Buy Less From Europeans
The Clinton Administration is leaning toward restrictions on Federal purchases of certain European goods in retaliation for European Community procurement rules that favor European manufacturers, Congressional and executive branch officials said today.
President Clinton has not yet made a decision, but is likely to approve the restrictions on Friday.
The order would then be sent to the Federal Register for publication.


Courier to Play Edberg For Australian Title
Forget about bad backs and bad attitudes.
Forget about upsets and scandals and all those other elements that so often muddy the waters at Grand Slam tennis tournaments.
The last week of the Australian Open has been nothing other than true to form.


Sex-Case Defense Witness's 3 Versions
A lawyer for a defense witness in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial testified today that his client gave the authorities three different accounts about the sexual use of a broom handle in the case.
The admissions from the lawyer, Willard Byer, emerged in his own cross-examination during an afternoon of tense emotions and short tempers.
At one of the session's stormiest moments, at least three of the seven lawyers in the case were arguing at the same time, and the presiding judge, R. Benjamin Cohen, who has been soft-spoken and mild-mannered throughout the trial's 15 weeks, was on his feet scolding them.


The People Are Heard, at Least Those Who Call Talk Radio
It is becoming a familiar rite of democracy in the talk show age.
An issue, usually one with visceral appeal, becomes the topic of the moment on AM radio.
Within days, or even hours, the Capitol switchboard in Washington is flooded with calls .


Review/Photography; German Who Found Color in Paris
Like many artists in the 1920's and 30's, the photographer Josef Breitenbach (1896-1984) found his artistic salvation in Paris.
It was there that he came into contact with the leading artists and ideas of his time, and it was there that he began his own Surrealist-inspired experiments with the use of color in photography.
Two current shows, at the Houk Friedman Gallery uptown and Hirschl &amp; Adler Modern, in SoHo, offer a wide-ranging selection of the photographs Breitenbach made in Paris during the 1920's when he was there on visits, and after 1933, when he moved there from his native Munich.
The shows also present examples of his early work, and a few pictures from his later years in New York.


Review/Music; Kissin As Ozawa's Soloist
Rachmaninoff's Third Piano Concerto was one of Vladimir Horowitz's specialties.
In fact Rachmaninoff himself, not overly generous with praise, thought the pianist played it better than he did, which would have been no mean feat.
So it is perhaps no accident that the young Russian-born pianist Yevgeny Kissin has turned his attention to this work.
Mr.
Kissin has been compared again and again to his countryman, by virtue of his dazzling technique and a temperament that is imposing in one so young (he is 21).
On Wednesday night he played the concerto with Seiji Ozawa and the Boston Symphony in Carnegie Hall; last week, the collaborators recorded the work for future release by BMG Classics (which has also, coincidentally, re-released Rachmaninoff's own recording in an invaluable set of the composer's piano recordings).


Ex-Sanitation Officer Charged in Gun-Running Scheme
A former New York City Sanitation Department police officer who the authorities believe supplied 3,000 illegal guns over five years for sale to drug dealers and street gangs in the Bronx was arrested in Florida after a sting operation, the Bronx District Attorney said yesterday.
District Attorney Robert T. Johnson said the former officer, Peter Portero, 49 years old, who is now a pawnbroker, was arrested in Leesburg, Fla., on Wednesday on a New York warrant charging him with conspiring to sell 20 or more firearms.
He was being held without bond yesterday pending extradition proceedings, Mr.
Johnson said.
If convicted, Mr.
Portero could be sentenced to a maximum of 15 years in prison.


St. Patrick Isn't the Exclusive Property of Any Church Alone
To the Editor:
Of all the spurious reasons cited against sponsorship of New York's St.
Patrick's Day Parade by organizers willing to permit the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization to march, the most questionable is the allegation that the Roman Catholic Church has an exclusive proprietary right to celebrate in St.
Patrick's honor.


A.T.&amp; T. Reports $1 Billion In Record Quarterly Profits
A.T.&amp; T. yesterday reported record fourth-quarter earnings of $1 billion, or 75 cents a share, up 57.5 percent from a year earlier, when it earned $635 million, or 48 cents a share.
Quarterly revenue of A.T.&amp; T., the world's largest telecommunications company, which has been struggling in an increasingly competitive industry, totaled $17.5 billion, up 6.3 percent from a year earlier and about equal to the gross domestic product of Morocco.


China, as a Land of Sorrow That's Also Rich in Hope
"China, My Sorrow" was shown as part of the 1990 New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Caryn James's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 19, 1990.
The film -- in Cantonese, Mandarin, and Shanghai dialect
with English subtitles -- opens today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
In a re-education camp during the Chinese Cultural Revolution, a guard asks a prisoner to identify the melody he's playing on a makeshift wind instrument.
The hapless man blurts out "Mozart," then quickly saves himself by adding, "It's a song called 'Mozart Dreams of Mao Zedong.' " Though "China, My Sorrow" is not always so pointed or witty, it is a deft and oddly lighthearted tribute to the traditions and spirit of freedom that survived the Cultural Revolution.


Post Buyer Says He'll Restore Some Pay
The prospective new publisher of The New York Post told about 100 applauding but chary newsroom employees late yesterday that he would restore half of the 20 percent pay cut they agreed to last week as soon as he receives the required permission of the Federal Bankruptcy Court.
Steven Hoffenberg, the chairman of the Towers Financial Corporation, who has signed a letter of intent to purchase The Post and has put up a $2.5 million line of credit to back it up, said a 10 percent restoration would cost The Post about $75,000 a week at a time when its financial condition is regarded as extremely precarious.


INSIDE
Diphtheria Rising in Russia
Diphtheria is spreading rapidly in Russia.
The acutely infectious disease is also being reported in other former Soviet republics.
Page A8.
Battle for Dam in Croatia
Serbs and Croats fought a fierce artillery and mortar battle for control of a dam that provides power to much of the southern Croatian coast.
Page A3.
Rehnquist Lauds Marshall
At funeral services for Justice Thurgood Marshall, the Chief Justice, frequently an ideological foe, told of profound admiration for him.
Page A16.
Day Late, $100,000 Short
A story of love and hope and luck and loss: how one man's effort to save $4,500 in income taxes cost him a $100,000 lottery prize.
Page B1.
The Messiah in Brooklyn?
A dispute has erupted among the Lubavitcher Hasidim over whether the sect's leader has proclaimed himself the Messiah.
Page B1.
The Ultimate Game Show
From Mike Ditka to Michael Jackson, there will be a crowded television lineup for Super Bowl XXVII on Sunday.
A viewer's guide, page B9.


Sounds Around Town
Offbeat Combination
Gavin Friday, Fez, under Time Cafe, 380 Lafayette Street, at Great Jones Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 533-2680 or 533-7000.
Punk and cabaret aren't styles that readily overlap, but as ends of a spectrum they actually share some ground: a directness of emotion, an alienation from contemporary currents, an overindulgence in theatricality.
Gavin Friday lives at the vortex between the two.
His song "Melancholy Baby," from his recent solo album "Adam 'n' Eve" (Island), isn't the pop standard, but a self-conscious hat-tip that includes the lines "Zing zing a zang go the strings of my heart/Cling cling a clang I'll never let you part." Tonight at 9:15; there is a $6 cover charge.
Soul Funk
The Meters with Maceo Parker, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
In the Meters' soul-funk stew, the classic Stax sound of the Booker T. and the MG's song "Green Onions" goes to New Orleans: swampy, slinky instrumentals that are heavy on Art Neville's pumping organ, Leo Nocentelli's jiving guitar, George Porter Jr.'s deep basslines and Russell Batiste's polyrhythms.
The tight, airborne grooves could send your noggin spinning to dizzy new heights.
The soul trumpeter Maceo Parker (from James Brown's J. B.'s and Parliament) joins the jam, as well as opening with his own combo, Roots Revisited.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow night at 8:30 and midnight; tickets are $25.
Power Pop
Goo Goo Dolls, CBGB, 315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street, East Village, (212) 982-4052.
Few sounds in rock are quite as cathartic as that of loud melancholy.
Back in the mid-80's, the Replacements perfected it; these days bands like the Goo Goo Dolls are still working on it, loading guitar distortion on top of solid pop hooks and sentiments of post-adolescent confusion.
The band's forthcoming album, "Superstar Car Wash" (Warner Brothers), occasionally ventures toward metal or punk, but most tracks, like "We Are the Normal," remain in familiar power-pop territory.The show tomorrow night begins at 8:30; tickets are $10.


Tours Take Outsiders Inside
THE long-suffering Jay Leno is not the most oppressed employee at NBC.
He's edged out in that department by a robotic arm on the fifth floor of 30 Rockefeller Center, a silent slave that cruises back and forth past floor-to-ceiling stacks of videocassettes containing the network's prime-time programming, commercials and promotional announcements.
With creepy efficiency, it scans bar codes, plucks the appropriate cassette from its slot, then pops it in a tape player for broadcast out across the land.
Twice a day, the tape supply is refreshed by humans.
You never hear or read about the arm.
It has to be seen.
And the only way to see it is to take the NBC tour, a glimpse behind the scenes of one of the city's most public institutions.
It's one of many such tours in New York City, whose museums, concert halls and gardens offer the opportunity to peek at their inner workings, pick up a bit of institutional history and collect fascinating odds and ends of useless information, which is often the best kind.
Some charge admission, others are free.
Some are rigorous and scholarly, others are subject to the whims of the guide, not unlike this article, which offers a small and random sampling of the dozens of tours available throughout the city.


No Conclusions Reached On Crown Heights Violence
Three months after they began inquiries into the 1991 Crown Heights racial violence, Federal and state investigators said yesterday that they still have not made any findings about the disorders or about how they were handled by city officials and the police.
The official heading the state's inquiry said "we haven't reached any conclusions" about the four-day outbreak in the Brooklyn neighborhood, during which a Hasidic Jew was stabbed to death while he was surrounded by a group of young black men.


Procter &amp; Gamble Co. (N)
A vigorous overseas acquisition campaign is paying off for the Procter &amp; Gamble Company.
The Cincinnati-based consumer products giant said yesterday that net income in its second quarter ended Dec. 31 rose nearly 13 percent, to $590 million, or 83 cents a share, from $523 million, or 73 cents a share, a year earlier.


Art in Review
Martin Wong
P.P.O.W.  532 Broadway (at Spring Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 6
In the mid-1980's, Martin Wong was painting oddly rapturous evocations of inner-city life.
His subject was the streets of the Lower East Side, where he lived, and although his tenements, rendered brick by brick, were as forbidding as prisons, the night skies above them were rich with constellations painted and labeled in gold.


Deputy to Fill Post As U.S. Prosecutor
With Otto G. Obermaier stepping down on Monday as the United States Attorney in Manhattan, the Justice Department has appointed his chief deputy, Roger S. Hayes, to head the prestigious prosecutor's office on an interim basis.
Following tradition, President Clinton is expected to nominate a replacement for a full four-year term based on the recommendation of Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York.


St. Patrick Isn't the Exclusive Property of Any Church Alone; Being Fair-Minded
To the Editor:
Re "St. Patrick's Parade: It Gets Worse" (editorial, Jan. 12): I am concerned over the implication in your statement that the refusal of the Hibernians to admit homosexuals insults all fair-minded New Yorkers.


Edward P. Morgan, 82, Anchor And Reporter for TV and Radio
Edward P. Morgan, a retired national radio and television reporter, anchor and commentator, died Wednesday at his home in McLean, Va.
He was 82.
He died of complications of lung cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Morgan and Howard K. Smith were anchors for ABC's television coverage of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy and for Presidential nominating conventions.
Mr.
Morgan also served on the press panel at the second campaign debate between Mr.
Kennedy and Vice President Richard M. Nixon in 1960.


L. Van Norden, 78, Lawyer Who Led Opera Association
Langdon Van Norden, a lawyer and a former chairman of the board of the Metropolitan Opera Association, died on Wednesday at Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 78 and lived in Greenwich.
He died of a heart attack, said his son, Langdon Jr., of Manhattan.


Public Radio Wins Award
National Public Radio has won the highest honor, a Gold Baton, in the annual Alfred I. Dupont-Columbia University awards for broadcast journalism.
In addition, 14 Silver Batons were awarded yesterday to news and information programs broadcast on television or radio between June 1991 and June 1992.
The winners of silver batons included the ABC News program "Nightline," the CBS News program "60 Minutes" and two public television series, "The American Experience" and "Frontline."


Brunansky Finds a Home, And It's With the Brewers
TOM BRUNANSKY, a veteran of 11 years in the major leagues, finally got a job for 1993.
Brunansky, a free agent, who has played for California, Minnesota, St.
Louis and Boston, yesterday agreed with the Milwaukee Brewers on a $1.1 million salary.


No 'Smoking Gun' Seen as 4 Face 2d Trial in Rodney King Beating
Federal prosecutors filed court papers today indicating that evidence they will present in the civil rights trial of four policemen in the beating of Rodney G. King is likely to be essentially the same as that introduced in the failed state prosecution.
The trial memorandum outlining the Government's case days before the trial is due to start reveals no "smoking gun" or other new evidence to suggest prosecutors will have an easier time than did their counterparts in the trial in Simi Valley last year.


G.M. Chairman Backs Director
John G. Smale, chairman of the General Motors Corporation, issued a statement yesterday in support of Ann D. McLaughlin, a director of the company and a former Labor Secretary.
On Wednesday, Roger D. Smith, a former chairman and chief executive of G.M., resigned abruptly as a director of the giant auto maker and suggested that Mrs.
McLaughlin had leaked the news of this decision to The Washington Post.
"I, the other members of the board and the management team of General Motors have the utmost regard for Ann McLaughlin, and we are confident that she has at no time disclosed any information that could be detrimental to the corporation," Mr.
Smale said.
"Mrs. McLaughlin's performance on the G.M. board has been outstanding, her integrity is impeccable, and we have complete confidence in her ability to fulfill her board responsibilities."


Courier to Play Edberg For Australian Title
Forget about bad backs and bad attitudes.
Forget about upsets and scandals and all those other elements that so often muddy the waters at Grand Slam tennis tournaments.
The last week of the Australian Open has been nothing other than true to form.


Sounds Around Town
Brazilian and Jazzy
Leny Andrade, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, (212) 244-3005.
Leny Andrade, who has been called the Brazilian equivalent of Ella Fitzgerald and Sarah Vaughan, is a phenomenal scat singer who wields a large, deep and vibratoless contralto.
At the same time, Miss Andrade's passionate, earthy personality is not at all like theirs.
While most of her show consists of Brazilian sambas, her set includes a hot, sultry "S'Wonderful" and a rendition of Dizzy Gillespie's "Night in Tunisia" that is as jaw-droppingly virtuosic as it is heartfelt.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow night at 9 and 11:15, and Sunday night at 7.
Tickets are $20 ($25 ringside), with a two-drink minimum.
Cabaret and Comments
Mary Cleere Haran, Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, 65th floor, (212) 632-5000.
In her new show, "Swinging on a Star," New York's classiest cabaret performer under 50 sings 1940's movie songs with a directness and simplicity that evoke the young Doris Day.
Mary Cleere Haran's interpretive subtlety and taste in material are matched by her high-style patter, in which she muses on everything from the aura of Rita Hayworth to the impossibly glamorous image of nightclubs in Hollywood films.
A trio led by Fred Hersch at the piano provides superb support.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 8:30 and 10:30.; there is a $35 cover charge, and dinner is obligatory for the early show.
Merging Traditions
Badal Roy Quartet Featuring Glen Velez, Washington Square Church, 135 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village; (212) 545-7536.
Composed of musicians who are all seasoned world-music explorers, the Badal Roy Quartet performs original music that draws on Asian, African and American traditions and emphasizes Indian rhythms.
Badal Roy, the group's leader, has pioneered in bringing the tabla (a North Indian drum) into a jazz context.
He will be joined by Glen Velez on frame drum, Steve Gorn on bansuri (a North Indian bamboo flute) and reeds, and Amit Chatterjee on sitar, guitar and vocals.
Show time is tomorrow night at 8; tickets are $12.


Baseball Hires Lobbyist
Seven weeks after a Senate subcommittee held a one-day hearing into their exemption from antitrust laws, the major leagues for the first time have hired an in-house lobbyist.
EUGENE CALLAHAN, who has spent the last 25 years on the staffs of various officials from Illinois, was named director of governmental relations yesterday.


Market Place; A medical testing company awaits the fallout of a guilty plea.
AFTER pleading guilty to defrauding Government health insurance programs and agreeing to refund $111 million last month, National Health Laboratories Inc. faces an uncertain future.
Officials of National Health said the diagnostic testing company would still participate in Federal and state health programs, which account for about 40 percent of its revenues.
But exactly what impact the case and its adverse publicity will have on National Health's revenues remains unclear.


French Tastiness
The Yale Music Spectrum is to offer a program of chamber music mostly by French composers, tomorrow at 8 P.M. at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan.
The program, titled "Le Gout Francais," comprises Poulenc's Trio for Piano, Oboe and Bassoon; Satie's "Choses Vues a Droite et a Gauche (Sans Lunettes)"; and Debussy's Sonata in G minor for Violin and Piano, Sonata for Cello and Piano, and Sonata for Flute, Viola and Harp.
Tickets are $12; $7 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 362-8719.


Haitian Leaders Object to a U.N. Plan for Deploying Observers
Plans to deploy hundreds of United Nations observers in Haiti to monitor human rights violations and discourage political violence have been stalled by last minute objections raised by the present Haitian leaders over the mission.
In a speech broadcast on Haitian television late Wednesday, Marc L. Bazin, the Prime Minister, denounced as a violation of the nation's sovereignty a request by the United Nations for the mission to be allowed to "go anywhere freely, without being accompanied and without giving prior notice."


Olympic Spot Unlikely
When JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH speaks, Olympic organizers listen.
And on Wednesday, the president of the International Olympic Committee was quoted by an Italian sports daily as saying that golf had very little chance of being included as a medal sport at the 1996 Olympics.


Battle for Dam in Croatia Grows, Ousting U.N. Force
In a widening of the hostilities in Croatia, Serbs and Croats fought a fierce artillery and mortar battle today in a struggle to control a strategic and heavily mined dam that provides hydroelectric power to much of the Dalmatian coast.
By the day's end, the United Nations troops protecting the Peruca Dam had been chased away by Serbian militiamen, according to United Nations officials.
But then, the officials said, Croats who had been shelling the dam area since last night outgunned the Serbs and took ultimate control.


Knicks Dig a Hole and Can't Climb Out
In an awkward game full of jagged rhythms, a furious comeback by the Knicks couldn't overcome a lethargic first half last night as they lost to the Atlanta Hawks, 110-105, at Madison Square Garden.
After falling behind by 21 points in the second quarter, even New York's league-leading defense couldn't retard the explosive Hawks enough for the Knicks to get back the lead.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section yesterday about the artist Michael Lebron referred incorrectly in some editions to the cost of renting the large billboard in the lobby of Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan.
The rental for two months is $36,000.


The New White House Refrain: Please Hang Up and Dial Again
Hello? Hello? Is anybody there? Hello?
During Hillary Rodham Clinton's trip to New York on Tuesday, her press secretary, Lisa Caputo, tried to phone home.
First, she tried her own number at the White House.
Busy.
Then she tried the main number, 456-1414.
Also busy.
Over and over, she tried.
Beep.
Beep.
Beep.


A fledgling news service turns the tables on agency executives.
FOR years, executives in agency media departments have been advising clients to aim their sales messages more carefully at consumers by sponsoring advertising signs in unexpected places like supermarkets, airport lounges, bars and doctors' waiting rooms.
Now the signs are turning up in the most unexpected places of all -- the agency media departments.
Electronic ad signs identical to those above the aisles of supermarkets across the country have been installed in the offices of 11 agencies in New York and one in Chicago.
Plans call for the number of shops to quadruple and an expansion into cities like Detroit and Los Angeles after a test period.


Talley Incident Distracts The Bills
Trying to defuse a potentially distracting situation, Darryl Talley, his coach and some of his teammates spent much of this morning denying reports that the Buffalo Bills linebacker was involved in a scuffle at a nightclub here five days ago with the bodyguard of former Lakers star Magic Johnson.
"Nothing happened, no incident, no fight, no nothing," Talley said emphatically, at one point standing before a crowd of reporters and yelling "attention everybody, nothing happened."


Review/Film; In the Mind Of a Killer: It's Empty
Thomas Beckett (Tom Berenger) has reached a crossroads of sorts.
As a master gunnery sergeant in the United States Marine Corps, he's a professional killer, a sniper who assassinates on command.
When he was younger, he used to feel an intoxicating rush after taking out a target.
Only later did he feel what he calls "the hurt." Now things are worse.
Having been on the job too long, he no longer feels the hurt.
Whither Thomas Beckett?
In "Sniper," a movie for undiscriminating armchair assassins, he goes off on another assignment in Panama.
His targets: a Panamanian politician planning a coup d'etat and the Colombian drug lord financing the coup, whom the politician is meeting at a jungle hacienda.
Beckett and his partner, Richard Miller (Billy Zane), a young, very green official of the National Security Council, have just one week to complete their mission.
Will they?
Won't they?


Deputy Mayor for Public and Community Affairs Takes Oath


Courier to Play Edberg For Australian Title
Forget about bad backs and bad attitudes.
Forget about upsets and scandals and all those other elements that so often muddy the waters at Grand Slam tennis tournaments.
The last week of the Australian Open has been nothing other than true to form.


Steals Unlikely at New U.S. Auction
Two manhole assemblies, 124,250 bars of soap and a house on Long Island, along with a host of other items, went on the block today in a new Federal auction program expected to attract the curious and the crafty.
The sales, run by the Customs Service and the Internal Revenue Service, are not for those looking for knickknacks to decorate the house or to "steal" a car with a ridiculously low bid.
The bidding sometimes drives the prices above an item's competitive value.
And the Federal agencies can reject bids they feel are too low and offer the items again at a future sale.


Scientific Evidence Doesn't Tell Whole Story
To the Editor:
The Supreme Court has decided to rule on what scientific evidence juries can hear, you report (front page, Jan. 2).
Your account gives much attention to Peter Huber and his book "Galileo's Revenge: Junk Science in the Courtroom," which contends that courts are awash in crackpot testimony and unproved claims.
Ironically, Mr.
Huber's book about good and bad science is very unscientific.


Review/Photography; German Who Found Color in Paris
Like many artists in the 1920's and 30's, the photographer Josef Breitenbach (1896-1984) found his artistic salvation in Paris.
It was there that he came into contact with the leading artists and ideas of his time, and it was there that he began his own Surrealist-inspired experiments with the use of color in photography.
Two current shows, at the Houk Friedman Gallery uptown and Hirschl &amp; Adler Modern, in SoHo, offer a wide-ranging selection of the photographs Breitenbach made in Paris during the 1920's when he was there on visits, and after 1933, when he moved there from his native Munich.
The shows also present examples of his early work, and a few pictures from his later years in New York.


Thousands Fill Cathedral To Pay Tribute to Marshall
As a young lawyer in the segregated South, Thurgood Marshall ate and slept in his car because he could not get a hotel room.
Today, at his funeral service under the vaulted arches and blue stained glass windows of the National Cathedral, he was mourned by the President of the United States and most of the nation's leaders.
Millions of viewers watched the service broadcast by several networks, joining the 3,500 who managed to get seats in the cathedral and the 100 more who stood outside in the cold morning air.
They heard Justice Marshall recalled as one of history's greatest civil rights figures, a lawyer and judge whose achievements opened up schools, courtrooms, housing projects and voting booths to Americans long treated as second-class citizens.


Knicks Dig a Hole and Can't Climb Out
In an awkward game full of jagged rhythms, a furious comeback by the Knicks couldn't overcome a lethargic first half last night as they lost to the Atlanta Hawks, 110-105, at Madison Square Garden.
After falling behind by 21 points in the second quarter, even New York's league-leading defense couldn't retard the explosive Hawks enough for the Knicks to get back the lead.


Chief Executive Leaves Northern Telecom
In a turbulent week for corporate America that saw the fall of chief executives at I.B.M. and Westinghouse, one corner of corporate Canada yesterday showed a talent for being different.
Northern Telecom Ltd. announced that its chief executive, Paul G. Stern, was leaving.
His company is not in trouble, or even close to it.


Two New Law Journals Plan To Focus on Asian Americans
University of California students in Los Angeles and Berkeley are working separately to produce the nation's first two journals that will focus on legal issues of concern to Asian Americans.
The undertakings reflect in part the growth in the number of Asian-American law students and lawyers.
In 1991, the latest year for which data are available, 5,028 Asian Americans were enrolled in accredited American law schools, up from 1,755 in 1981, according to the American Bar Association.


Abroad at Home; The Issue Is Bigotry
Over the last half-century Americans have come to understand that a civilized society does not mistreat people because of what they are.
It is unacceptable to assault someone because he is a Jew, or deny him a job because he is black.
The question now is whether we are ready to apply that civilized standard to homosexuals.
Are they to be despised and rejected because of what they are -- because of a status that nature gave them?


Nets Can't Cool Jackson's Hot Hand
It's one thing when the Denver Nuggets are running at a pace few mortals can keep up with, but when guard Chris Jackson is hitting from the outside, there is little any team can do to stop them.
Tonight, he shot the life out of New Jersey.
Behind four 3-pointers, Jackson led all scorers with 32 points as the Nuggets won, 110-100, at McNichols Arena.
Last season, Jackson struggled badly, but tonight he was hot, and so were the Nuggets, who ended New Jersey's three-game winning streak.
Because the Knicks lost to Atlanta, the Nets remained two games behind their first-place rivals in the Atlantic Division.


Corrections
An obituary headline yesterday about a former Speaker of Parliament and Governor General of Canada misidentified her.
She was Jeanne Sauve.


Courier to Play Edberg For Australian Title
Forget about bad backs and bad attitudes.
Forget about upsets and scandals and all those other elements that so often muddy the waters at Grand Slam tennis tournaments.
The last week of the Australian Open has been nothing other than true to form.


A New Crisis Engulfs Angola As the Rebels Make Big Gains
Angola is sinking ever closer to disintegration as it confronts the worst crisis of its nearly 30 years of armed conflict, economic hardship and political strife.
Fighting between Government and guerrilla forces in the last three weeks, the most intense in years, has left tens of thousands dead.
The 1991 pact between the warring factions, which was meant to end the civil war and prepare Angola for free elections and Western-style democracy, appears on the brink of coming apart.


Stop the Porn Explosion
H ow do you explain to a child that the Doll House across the street is not for children but is a topless bar with lap dancing?
Or that the movie "Edward Pe-nishands" is not an instructional toilet-training video?
Residential areas across the country have recently been inundated with adult video stores and topless and even bottomless bars.
The problem is difficult: freedom of speech must be respected, but no one wants advertisements for "Debbie Does Dallas" plastered on neighborhood walls.


CUNARD IS IN VENTURE WITH CROWN CRUISE LINE
The Cunard Line, the British-owned company best known for its Queen Elizabeth 2 luxury liner, announced yesterday that it had formed a long-term joint venture with Crown Cruise Line of Finland to market Crown's three ships under the Cunard Crown name.
The pact will increase the number of berths marketed by Cunard by 40 percent, to more than 7,000, or about 7 percent of the industry total.
Crown is owned by the EffJohn Group of Helsinki.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The economy grew at a faster-than-expected annual rate of 3.8 percent in the final quarter of 1992, the strongest performance in four years, the Commerce Department reported.  [ Page A1. ]
Alan Greenspan called the Administration's deficit goals about the right size and suggested that if the effort weakens the economy the Fed might cut interest rates to soften the blow.  [ D2. ]


Debate Splits Lubavitcher Hasidim; Showdown Nears on Whether Grand Rebbe Is the Messiah
Crown Heights has become the center of a battle between two factions of the Lubavitch Hasidic community.
On one side is a group of rabbis and followers who maintain that the Grand Rebbe of the Lubavitcher Hasidim, Menachem Mendel Schneerson, has proclaimed himself the Messiah.


Sports of The Times; The Bear Who's Still A Cowboy
TWO teams, two head coaches. That equation is much older than the Super Bowl.
But in the National Football League's new math, three head coaches will be involved in Sunday's game: Marv Levy of the Buffalo Bills and Jimmy Johnson of the Dallas Cowboys, of course, plus Dave Wannstedt of the Chicago Bears.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Daly Greeted by Quiet  John Daly's first competitive round of the season left him in the middle of the pack yesterday in the Phoenix Open.
The round, however, was good enough to convince him that no one is holding his battle with alcoholism against him.
"I didn't know what was going to happen; I was just going to come out here and play golf and whatever happened happened," said Daly, who finished with a two-under-par 69 at the TPC of Scottsdale course in Arizona.
That was three shots off the lead shared by seven players.
"Thank God it was great," Daly said of the reaction to his round, during which he heard no hecklers.
Daly sought treatment for alcoholism a month ago and left a rehabilitation clinic last week. (AP) N.B.A.
Rockets Topple Bulls  Hakeem Olajuwon had 18 points and 17 rebounds as the Houston Rockets beat the Chicago Bulls, 94-83, last night for the fifth time in their last six meetings.
The Bulls, who have won one of their last 13 games in the Summit, provided the Rockets with their first sellout of the season.
Former President George Bush was among the 16,611 spectators. (AP)


Reviews/ Film; Eek! There's a Horror Movie in Here!
The centerpiece of the movie-mad comedy "Matinee" is "Mant," an expert, side-splitting parody of an early-1960's black-and-white horror film.
"Half Man . . . Half Ant . . . All Terror!!!" proclaim the ads for this low-budget opus, which tells of a mishap involving man, ant and X-rays at a dentist's office.
The human patient is accidentally transformed into a large, buggy mutant, leading him to exclaim, "Go, my brothers and sisters!" while smashing an ant farm to smithereens.


Executive Changes
AUTOINFO INC., Fair Lawn, N.J., which provides computer and information services to the vehicle repair industries, appointed Scott Zecher president and chief operating officer and William I. Wunderlich chief financial officer.
BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB CO., New York, said Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, Secretary of Health and Human Services in the Bush Administration, and John D. Macomber, immediate past-president of the Export-Import Bank of the United States, were elected to its board, effective Feb. 1.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
2.94
4.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.85
2.90
3.94
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.05
3.93
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.99
6.08
6.91
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.20
7.24
7.78
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.35
8.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.31
6.32
6.72
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing in some editions of Business Day on Tuesday about the appointment of a president and chief operating officer at Bradlees Inc. misidentified him.
He is Samuel Mandell.


Viewers Beware: A Guide to the Super Bowl
GO GENTLY INTO THAT GOOD NIGHT
The advice from Mr.
Couch Potato Head is to relax your tube-watching muscles before your testosterone or estrogen levels soar after kickoff.
If you miss TBS's "Andy Griffith" marathon (including the "Aunt Bee the Swinger" episode) starting at 1 P.M., and MTV's 1:30 "Tailgate Party" with Bell Biv Devoe, the Giants' new defensive coordinator under Coach Dan Reeves, then catch the "Dallas Cowboys Cheerleaders" at 2 P.M. on Channel 9, a timely, inquiring film that stars Oscar winners Bert Convy and Lauren Tewes.
Need I say more? (Yes. The "Mr. Ed" marathon starts at 8 P.M. on Nick at Nite.) YES, THE PRE-GAME SHOW IS 150 MINUTES LONG AGAIN.
WHAT'S SO SPECIAL?
Well, golly, Glenn Frey and Fleetwood Mac will sing!
Garth Brooks will be interviewed!
Mike Ditka will join Siegfried &amp; Roy!
Cris Collinsworth will criticize Lou Holtz just for fun!
Todd Christensen will read from Roget's Thesaurus!
It will also be Bob Costas' finale as host of the pre-game show.
Look for the shock on Will McDonough's face when Costas reveals that he, not McDonough, will become general manager of the New England Patriots, reuniting him with his ex-"N.F.L. Live" partner, Bill Parcells.


Diphtheria Epidemic Sweeps Russia
Diphtheria, an acutely infectious disease that has been practically eliminated in the West through regular immunization, is now spreading rapidly through Russia, reaching what the World Health Organization calls epidemic proportions.
In the last two years, the number of people stricken by the disease has risen from 1,000 to 4,000 at the end of 1992, according to estimates, with the numbers of new cases doubling from July to December.
It is also rising dangerously in Ukraine, where more than 1,300 cases were reported in the first 10 months of last year, and cases are being reported in other former republics of the Soviet Union.


Courier to Play Edberg For Australian Title
Forget about bad backs and bad attitudes.
Forget about upsets and scandals and all those other elements that so often muddy the waters at Grand Slam tennis tournaments.
The last week of the Australian Open has been nothing other than true to form.


Art in Review
Gerhard Richter  Nolan-Eckman Gallery  560 Broadway (at Prince Street)  SoHo  Through tomorrow
This exhibition of Gerhard Richter's works on paper looks a bit like a miniature retrospective.
Several of the watercolors relate closely to his spectacular color-based abstractions of the last decade, and the set of six black-and-white photographs in the show anticipates the striking series of post-mortem images of the Baader-Meinhof terrorists, which he painted in 1989.


Austin Attempts Comeback
TRACY AUSTIN is already in the Tennis Hall of Fame, but the 30-year-old player is making another comeback attempt.
Austin confirmed yesterday that she has received a wild card into the Matrix Evert Cup, a $375,000 Kraft Tour event at Indian Wells, Calif., Feb. 22-28.
In August 1989, Austin's previous comeback effort from injuries ended when she was seriously injured in an automobile accident in Short Hills, N.J.


After a Meningitis Death, Striving to Calm the Fears of Other Pupils' Parents
While some concerned parents kept their children out of school yesterday, New York City health officials moved quickly to reassure them that there have been no further cases of meningitis reported after the death last week of a 6-year-old boy from Washington Heights.
At a meeting at Public School 132 yesterday, more than 400 anxious parents were told not to panic but to remain vigilant.
City Health Department officials said the main period of concern for spread of the disease was over and they did not recommend preventive actions for anyone beyond the immediate family of the child.


Art in Review
The Photo League: 1936-1951
292 Gallery  120 Wooster Street (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 27
The Photo League, formed in New York in 1936, promoted the use of documentary photography as an instrument of social change through exhibitions, workshops, lectures and a newsletter.
An offshoot of the leftist Film and Photo League, the group remained an important focus for photographers in New York City until 1951, when it was forced to dissolve during the McCarthy era.
This small exhibition offers a fine selection of work by members of the league, including Sid Grossman, Max Yavno, Rosalie Gwathmey, Jerome Liebling, Aaron Siskind and Arthur Leipzig.


No Headline
"Inscribed above the front entrance to the Supreme Court building are the words 'Equal justice under law.' Surely no one individual did more to make these words a reality than Thurgood Marshall." -- WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST, Chief Justice of the United States.  [ A16:1. ]


A Goalie Keeps Faith For an Iroquois Nation
The old goalie is heavy with honors.
Thirty-five years ago, he was an all-American.
Next week, he will be inducted into the Lacrosse Hall of Fame as "a player who has made a truly great contribution to society."
But the award he cherishes most nearly killed him.
He was a teen-ager then, playing in the shadow of his father, a mythic goalie who would be buried with his stick.
The boy stood dry-mouthed in the net as the awesome Angus Thomas burst through the defense and bore down on him.


Joint Chiefs Curtail Plans For Reducing Duplication
In his latest assessment of the military's future, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff has backed away from some of his earlier modest recommendations for reducing duplication in the roles and missions of the services.
The changes in the report, "Roles, Missions and Functions of the Armed Forces of the United States," by Gen.
Colin L. Powell are a sign of the difficulties President Clinton and Defense Secretary Les Aspin face in realigning the military's roles as the four services try to hang onto their missions at a time of reduced funding.


Blanche Bernstein, 80, Official Who Criticized Welfare System
Dr.
Blanche Bernstein, a welfare expert and former government official known for her criticisms of the welfare system, died on Wednesdayat Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 80 and lived in Manhattan.
She died of lung cancer, said Barbara Rulnick, a niece.


Ice-T and Warner Are Parting Company
Warner Brothers Records, which last year was at the center of a national controversy over Ice-T's song "Cop Killer," has released the rap and rock artist from his recording contract because of what it calls "creative differences." The company has also abandoned plans to release his new album next month.
A statement released Wednesday by Warner Brothers said that by "mutual agreement," Ice-T had been "granted an unconditional release" from his contract.
The statement did not specify the differences that precipitated the move, but a lawyer familiar with the situation said that it involved a disagreement over artwork for the cover of the new album, "Home Invasion."


John F. O'Donnell, 85, a Lawyer And Advocate for Union Workers
John F. O'Donnell, a leading labor lawyer who represented the national postal and transport unions and played a central role in New York City's transit strikes, died yesterday at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 85.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Fair of Outsider Art Opening in East Village
Outsider Art -- art described as naive, visionary or intuitive -- is the subject of a fair this weekend at the Puck Building, on Lafayette Street at Houston Street in the East Village.
More than 30 galleries from across the country will exhibit paintings and sculpture at the fair, which begins with a preview today from 5:30 to 8 P.M.
Preview admission is $25, which includes a catalogue and readmission during the weekend.
Weekend hours are 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. tomorrow and 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. on Sunday.
Admission is $10 each day.
Information: (212) 431-9537.


More Turmoil at Sunbeam-Oster
Even though he was ousted as chairman and chief executive of the Sunbeam-Oster Company earlier this month in what amounted to a mutiny by his managers, Paul B. Kazarian maintains considerable control over the company.
But in the latest twist in this murky corporate saga, his ownership position and authority have now come under attack.
In documents filed this week in courts in Rhode Island and Delaware, two Sunbeam executives who are also Mr.
Kazarian's partners have signaled their intention to reduce Mr.
Kazarian's stake in their partnership, Japonica Partners, which on paper has made more than $200 million on the original investment in Sunbeam-Oster.
Japonica was part of the investment group that brought Allegheny International out of bankruptcy as Sunbeam-Oster in 1990.
Partnership Rift
The court cases, involving Michael G. Lederman, Sunbeam's general counsel, and Robert H. Setrakian, the chief financial officer, shed light on the circumstances that led to the abrupt dismissal of Mr.
Kazarian.


St. Patrick Isn't the Exclusive Property of Any Church Alone; A Different Agenda
To the Editor:
"St. Patrick's Parade: It Gets Worse" (editorial, Jan. 12) makes important legal and constitutional points about the parade controversy.
The event is privately sponsored, and the sponsors define its purpose and meaning.
Traditionally, the parade, and St.
Patrick's Day, have been a celebration of being Irish.
While others have participated -- Italians, Jews, Germans and Poles -- each group joins in acknowledging, "Yes, you should be proud to be Irish."


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
CHICAGO BULLS -- Signed Darrell Walker, guard, to a 10-day contract.


Accord Made To Cut Staff For Probation
The way the New York City Probation Department supervises 60,000 adult criminals will be refashioned -- with less individual attention paid to nonviolent probationers -- as a result of an agreement reached yesterday between the Dinkins administration and the probation officers union.
The agreement will enable the city to cut the number of probation officers in its adult division by 19 percent through attrition, from 383 to 310.
While the $3.3 million in annual savings is relatively small, the move appears to represent progress in the city's efforts to wrest greater productivity from its labor unions.
Earlier this week, the city announced an agreement with the sanitation workers union that it says will save $20 million a year.
Linked to Years of Service
The probation changes are part of a tentative contract agreement reached yesterday with the United Probation Officers Association, which represents 970 officers in the Probation Department's three major divisions: adult supervision, adult investigations and family court.
The agreement calls for the same basic terms reached recently with the city's largest municipal unions, with an 8.25 percent pay increase over three years.


Coca-Cola Co. (N)
The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that heavy holiday sales helped lift fourth-quarter earnings.
Strong foreign demand, aided by price increases at the end of 1991, was largely responsible for record profits for all of 1992.
"The fourth-quarter results benefited from volume growth, which became progressively better as the calendar moved from October through December," Roberto C. Goizueta, Coca-Cola's chairman, said in a statement.


Ah, Heaven: A Big Game, A Jug of Beer and Thou
SPORTS fans, you're in luck. Life sometimes
is
like a beer commercial.
Happy, handsome young people, cheerful and affectionate, engaged in friendly competition over a few brews, winners and losers united by the spirit of the game.
No sore losers here.
Waiter, bring us another round!


Doctor at the White House Is Dismissed
Dr.
Burton J. Lee 3d, the New York cancer specialist who stayed on in the Clinton White House after serving as President George Bush's personal doctor for four years, has been dismissed.
Dr.
Lee said in an interview yesterday that Bush officials had told him that the Clinton transition team wanted him to stay on temporarily until a successor was named.
He said he did not know why he was let go.


Departing Chairman Scolds Republicans Over 'Zealotry'
In a striking repudiation of his party's performance at the Republican National Convention in August, the departing chairman today appealed to Republicans to end their divisiveness as well as their opposition to abortion and "not cling to zealotry masquerading as principle."
The swan song address by the chairman, Richard N. Bond, startled many Republicans at a meeting in which they elected as their new chairman Haley Barbour, a lawyer, lobbyist and longtime party insider who is not well known nationally.


Classical Music in Review
Leonidas Kavakos Violinist Walter Reade Theater Lincoln Center


QUOTATION OF THE DAY
I saw the blood coming from her chest.
She looked at me and I said to myself, 'She's gone.' She looked at me and it was like she was trying to say, 'I'm leaving.' That's what I saw in her eyes. -- RAYMOND VARGAS-SANTIAGO, describing his sister's death in a shootout in New York City.  [ 26:3. ]


Classical Music in Review
Markus Hinterhauser Pianist Weill Recital Hall


Sports of The Times; A Cowboy Returns to The Scene
ASK me who I like tomorrow in Super Bowl XXVII and I'll tell you, without a pause: I like Dallas.
After so many years of covering events and pulling either for the best story or the most fitting angle, this is a dramatic departure.


George Rude, 82, A British Historian Of Common People
George Rude, a British historian and author known for his study of the role of common people in social upheaval, died on Jan. 8 at a hospice near his home in Rye, England.
He was 82.
The cause of death was not known.


Out of the Incubator, Into the Marketplace
Sometime early this evening, as the lucky ones with tickets to a basketball game between the two highest-ranked women's teams in the nation fill Vanderbilt University's 15,317-seat Memorial Gymnasium, the paying customers will provide the latest evidence that the old-time attitude toward women's athletics is getting older every day.
The rivalry between No. 1 Vanderbilt (17-0) and No. 2 Tennessee (17-1) would be intense even if the doors were locked and all the fans were kept out.
But the long-term significance of what will happen tonight has to do with what is happening outside the court -- Vanderbilt's creative effort to market its female athletes, and the overwhelming response that has resulted.


Corrections
An illustration in The Living Section on Wednesday showing a dress by Karl Lagerfeld for Chanel carried an incorrect credit.
The artist was Nino Caprioglio.


Despite U.S., Yeltsin Backs Rocket Deal With India
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia declared today that despite opposition from the United States, Moscow remained committed to the supply of powerful rocket engines for India's space program.
"We do not plan to backtrack," Mr.
Yeltsin said at a news conference here, adding that he would discuss the issue with President Clinton.
Mr.
Yeltsin said he hoped that the United States would respond with "common sense, sensibility" to the announcement.


Bridge
Ambiguity is a frequent cause of bidding misfortunes.
If a bid can have two possible meanings, it is best avoided unless you are confident that you and your partner will be on the same wavelength.
Consider, for example, the Blackwood convention.
Some bids are obviously Blackwood, when a suit has been clearly chosen.
Some are obviously not Blackwood, when no suit has been bid naturally.
But some fall between those stools and are ambiguous.
An example is the diagramed deal, played recently in London in a high-stakes game.
North might have passed three no-trump, since his partner was obviously well protected in spades, but he corrected to four hearts.
South corrected back to four no-trump, expressing a wish to play that contract.
This was right in theory, since a player who bids three no-trump naturally cannot then wish to bid Blackwood, but wrong in practice, since it opened the door to a misunderstanding.


Restoration for Recreation at Liberty State Park


Lawyers More Willing To Discuss Their Fees
LAWYERS are not blase about money these days, which means that they are not blase about clients.
While still not very amenable to negotiation -- lawyers have fairly firm rates, like surgeons or baby sitters -- they are increasingly receptive to requests to keep costs down.
Clients can minimize rude surprises by asking questions at the outset about fees.
Since the advent of computerized billing systems, they can also monitor statements more easily.
And increasingly, experts on billing say, clients are doing both.


On Broadway in the 90's, Fear Follows Shootout
Marie-Ange Pascal was ambling down Broadway, pushing her 10-month-old daughter in a pink stroller when the first pop-pop sounded, and then her baby started to wail, and the sirens began screaming, and the next rat-tat-tat unleashed a sudden, hysterical fear all around her.
Mrs.
Pascal, who was heading to the Chemical Bank branch at Broadway and West 91st Street that had just been robbed, scooped her daughter, Emilie, into her arms and, as the stroller rolled on ahead, dived underneath a van parked on Broadway between 92d and 93d Streets.
"As a Haitian, I know how to duck when I hear trouble," Mrs.
Pascal said later.
"But I was trembling like a crazy person. I closed my eyes, and I could swear to God I smelled blood."


SHELL OIL CO.
The Shell Oil Company slashed its work force by nearly 7,000 in the last  12 months, and the cost savings were the main reason for the company's fourth-quarter earnings improvement compared with the loss in the quarter a year earlier.


Israelis Strive to Prevent U.N. Sanctions
Feeling bolstered by a seal of approval from the country's High Court of Justice, Israel renewed its diplomatic offensive today to stave off United Nations sanctions over its deportation of more than 400 Palestinians to Lebanon.
Government officials said they were resigned to a new strong condemnation from the Security Council in coming days, possibly accompanied by a deadline for bringing back the hundreds of Islamic fundamentalists expelled from the occupied territories six weeks ago, accused of being threats to Israeli security.


Is Hong Kong Attack Tied to LaRouche?
To the Editor:
In "Hong Kong Money War" (Op-Ed, Jan. 9), Criton M. Zoakos alleges that the British Government of Hong Kong has shown favoritism to the Jardine Matheson construction organization and has discriminated against United States bidders.
He uses such allegations to present the case of certain Hong Kong business interests that the colony should cave in to China's intimidation tactics and halt democratic reforms.


May Stores to Merge Units
The May Department Stores Company said this week that it would consolidate two more of its department store divisions, continuing its efforts to squeeze every last excess cost out of its operations.
By May 2, the May D&amp; F, Denver division will be merged into Foley's, the company's Houston-based department store chain, creating a 49-store chain with $1.6 billion in sales.
Folding its various regional department store chains into one other to produce larger but leaner units has become a hallmark of May's strategy.


It Pays to Check Out Issuers Before Leaping into Direct Stock Sales
Last August, the Atmos Energy Corporation of Dallas joined a small but growing number of corporations that allow investors to buy their stock directly rather than through brokers.
In the past, such opportunities were reserved for stockholders who were reinvesting their dividends, but Atmos and other corporations discovered that the concept of buying without paying a broker's commission was very attractive to some investors.
Within three months of the Atmos offer, the natural gas utility had raised $2.3 million through stock sales, far in excess of expectations.


This Time, Nunn Tests A Democrat
For a man whose military experience is limited to a year in the Coast Guard, Sam Nunn displays an uncanny knack for single-handedly surrounding the White Houses and taking its occupant political prisoner.
When the victims were Ronald Reagan and George Bush, Mr.
Nunn's fellow Democrats rallied round and cheered.
This time, Democratic opinion is a bit more divided.


Kings Trade Coffey To Detroit in 6-Player Deal
All-Star defenseman PAUL COFFEY was traded to the the Detroit Red Wings yesterday in a six-player deal that returned center JIMMY CARSON to the Los Angeles Kings.
Coffey, 31, a member of Stanley Cup championship teams at Edmonton and Pittsburgh, is among the top scoring defensemen again this season with 57 points on 8 goals and 49 assists.


Rider College Imposes Sanctions Against Fraternity in Racial Incident


Irish Groups Expect Unity On Parade
The Ancient Order of Hibernians, the traditional sponsor of New York City's St.
Patrick's Day parade, is expected to announce within a few days that its national, state and local governing bodies all want the group to take back control of this year's march, parade organizers said yesterday.
That development could lead to the withdrawal of the event's new sponsor.
Charles J. Hynes, the Brooklyn District Attorney and a leader of the new St.
Patrick's Day Parade Committee, told John Cardinal O'Connor in a meeting on Jan. 11 that his group would withdraw if the Hibernians united in favor of taking back the parade, according to others who were present.


XEROX CORP.
Analysts applauded the decision by the Xerox Corporation's earlier this month that it was dropping its less-than-successful foray into financial services and would refocus on its document-processing business.
Investors joined the chorus of praise yesterday after Xerox released its fourth-quarter and year-end earnings.
Largely because of one-time charges associated with selling its financial services businesses and adopting accounting changes, Xerox said it lost $736 million in the fourth quarter and $1.02 billion for the year.


Health Claims Cause Turmoil In the Cellular-Phone Market
It began last week when a Florida man said on a national television talk show that his wife's incessant use of a pocket-size cellular telephone had led to her fatal brain cancer.
The next day, stock market investors, putting their faith in the man's story -- or fearing that others would take it on faith -- began dumping cellular telephone stocks.
The cellular industry scoffed at such a wild notion and defended the phones as safe.
But yesterday it became clear the issue would not go away.
Wall Street continued to batter the shares of companies involved with cellular phones, the kind that have antennas next to the head and allow users to make calls from just about anywhere.
They are different from cordless phones that broadcast a radio signal only a short distance within the home.
Harmful to Stocks
The shares of Motorola Inc., the biggest maker of cellular phones, have lost 20 percent since the scare began.
In yesterday's trading, Motorola shares lost $4.875 to close at $51.
McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., which is the largest provider of cellular service, has seen its shares skid 15 percent, including a drop of $3.375, to $32.50, yesterday.  [ Page 36. ]


No Quick Agreement on International Trade


No Tee Time for Golf in '96 Games
Golf was lost in the Olympic rough yesterday, as the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games reluctantly withdrew its petition to include the sport in 1996.
The controversy, which had grown to include a battle over the exclusive membership at Augusta National in Georgia, was ended by a single quote from Juan Antonio Samaranch, president of the International Olympic Committee.


For Milken, It's Halfway for a While
From his shared bedroom in a Hollywood halfway house, Michael R. Milken can hear the pop of nighttime gunfire.
Drugs are bought and sold at a corner laundromat and users light up in a recessed spot between a warehouse and Mr.
Milken's new temporary home.
His room overlooks concertina wire encircling the warehouse, which happens to be owned by the Wickes Companies.
Mr.
Milken, who is credited with inventing the market for junk bonds and came to symbolize Wall Street's excesses in the 1980's, was the principal financier of Wickes.
The manipulation of Wickes's stock was at the heart of the Government's insider-trading investigation that resulted in Mr.
Milken's pleading guilty to six securities violations and serving 22 months in prison.
The case also ultimately led to the demise of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., the brokerage firm he worked for.


Jack Lynn, 67, Writer And Executive for TV
Jack Lynn, 67, a novelist and former television executive, died on Jan. 20 at his home in Albuquerque, N.M.
He died of leukemia, his family said.


Kathleen Battle Pulls Out Of 'Rosenkavalier' at Met
Kathleen Battle has withdrawn from the Metropolitan Opera's revival of "Der Rosenkavalier," the Met announced yesterday.
She had been scheduled to sing five performances as Sophie in Richard Strauss's opera, the first of which was to be on Monday night in the season premiere.
The soprano, who has a history of confrontations within the opera theater, did not comment on her sudden withdrawal.
Her representatives at Columbia Artists said, "Ms. Battle has withdrawn, and there will be no further comment."


Rockets Are Now at Home, Fresh and Primed for Nets
It was only five days ago that Drazen Petrovic burned the Houston Rockets for 44 points, 32 in the second half, 25 in the last quarter.
Chances are that the Rockets remember that day.
And on Saturday night, the Nets will be on Houston's turf.
And this is a different, fresher Rockets team.


Washington Memo; Housing Secretary Is Suddenly Assertive on Aiding Homeless
In his first full week on the job, Housing Secretary Henry G. Cisneros declared homelessness "a highest priority," began drafting an eight-point policy plan and spent an evening touring a shelter and the streets.
"There will be fewer homeless people on the streets when we are finished -- that's a promise," he said today, following Thursday's tour of grief and grates.


Mann Memorial
A memorial service for the lyric soprano Patricia Brooks Mann is to be held at noon on Monday at Circle in the Square Theater, 254 West 50th Street.
Among those scheduled to participate are Beverly Sills, Philip Bosco, Nathan Lane and Dana Ivey.
Mrs.
Mann died on Jan. 22 at age 59.


The Word According to Levy Is No Looking Back by the Bills
With roughly 48 hours to go before Buffalo plays Dallas in Super Bowl XXVII, Coach Marv Levy said that the Bills were focused, prepared and not looking in their rearview mirrors at what happened in Super Bowls XXV and XXVI.
A lot of people have been asking Levy and the Bills players this week if they have any dread going into the game, considering they are faced with the prospect of becoming the first team to lose a third straight Super Bowl.
Levy and his players have constantly fought off the notion that their chances of returning dwindle each year.


Defiant Japan to Promote Eating Whale Meat
The Japanese Government and the nation's fishing industry, in their latest and most defiant challenge to the near-total ban on whale hunting, said today that they would begin separate campaigns to encourage Japanese to eat more whale meat, stressing nutritional value and medicinal benefits.
The campaigns, including television advertisements, newsletters and thousands of pamphlets to be distributed in the schools, are part of Japan's effort to build support for a resumption of commercial whaling after the International Whaling Commission meets in Kyoto in May.


A Morning's Errand, A Hostage's Death
It was the most ordinary of errands, a trip to deposit her paycheck at the Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, that brought Auera Bonnie Vargas to her death.
As she stepped out the door of her building, Miss Vargas, 41, a teacher at Public School 108 in Harlem, was grabbed by a man fleeing a robbery at a nearby Chemical Bank branch.
He tried to hold the police at bay by using the tall, slender woman as a shield.
Moments later, both were felled by gunfire.


Holding Down the Costs Of Buying Treasuries
WITH yields on Treasury securities scraping bottom -- this week the bellwether 30-year Treasury bond yielded just percent, a six-year low -- the costs of investing in these securities count all the more.
Do you get the best payoff buying Treasuries directly from the Federal Government?
From stockbrokers?
In mutual funds?
Here's a quick review of the options , with some strategies to increase yields.


'President' Is Confusing; Council May Alter Title
Question: What do Newbold Morris and Andrew J. Stein have in common?
Answer: They both held the title of City Council President -- a title that may be changed although the trappings and duties of the office remain the same.


'Bei Mir Bist du Schoen'
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 16 obituary of Sammy Cahn pays tribute to a very talented man.
But you seem to suggest that the composer of "Bei Mir Bist du Schoen," Mr.
Cahn's first No. 1 hit, was Saul Chaplin.
Mr.
Chaplin and Mr.
Cahn wrote the English lyrics.
The sole composer of the music was my father, Sholom Secunda.


For the Faithful, a Spiritual Scalpel
A FRIEND called to ask if I wanted to accompany her to her appointment with Reverend Philip, who, she said, was going to open her up with nothing more than his hands, remove bad tissue and then close the wound leaving no scar.
She said that the man had mastered the technique in his native Philippines and that he was performing the operations in this country during one of his short visits.
She had been to him on one of his earlier tours when, she said, he had removed something from her neck.
She said I should ask no questions and just watch.


Japan Sets Duties of Its Own To Prevent Import Dumping
Japanese companies have often been accused of selling their products at unfairly low prices in other countries, a practice known as dumping.
But today, the shoe was on the other foot.
For the first time, Japan imposed anti-dumping tariffs on imports from another country.
It ruled that Chinese producers of ferrosilicon manganese, a material used in making steel, were selling their products in Japan more cheaply than at home, thereby hurting Japanese competitors.


Ann Osterhout Edison, Pharmacist, Dies at 91
Ann Osterhout Edison, a pharmacist and daughter-in-law of Thomas Alva Edison, died on Monday at the Caleb Hitchcock Health Center at Duncaster in Bloomfield, Conn.
She was 91 and lived in West Orange, N.J.
The cause of death was heart failure, said her niece, Sandy Karplus.


Dow Ends the Day Up 3.78, To 3,310.03, on Brisk Volume
The stock market survived a bout of electrophobia yesterday that touched off panic selling of cellular telephone stocks.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed up 3.78, to 3,310.03, on volume of 247.2 million shares traded that continued the brisk pace of this month.
The Nasdaq composite managed a slight gain, arresting its decline of the previous two days.


Q &amp; A
I.R.A.'s and Keoghs
Q I have assets in both an I.R.A. and a Keogh plan.
Can I move the assets from the I.R.A. into the Keogh plan to consolidate them?
ROBERT WIESENBERGER, RIVERDALE, THE BRONX
A The answer depends on the source of the I.R.A. money.
"You may consolidate the funds of a rollover I.R.A. into a Keogh plan, which, with several exceptions, is treated as any other pension plan," said Howard Pianko, a partner of Epstein Becker &amp; Green, a New York law firm.
"A rollover I.R.A. contains only funds attributable to a rollover contribution from an I.R.S.-qualified plan maintained by a prior employer."


Corrections
A diagram in Science Times on Jan. 5 about a protein that is a receptor for signals in cell development misidentified the worm depicted.
It was an earthworm, not the roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans.


Israelis Strive to Prevent U.N. Sanctions
Feeling bolstered by a seal of approval from the country's High Court of Justice, Israel renewed its diplomatic offensive today to stave off United Nations sanctions over its deportation of more than 400 Palestinians to Lebanon.
Government officials said they were resigned to a new strong condemnation from the Security Council in coming days, possibly accompanied by a deadline for bringing back the hundreds of Islamic fundamentalists expelled from the occupied territories six weeks ago, accused of being threats to Israeli security.


British to Sell Saudis Warplanes And Supplies Worth $7.5 Billion
The British and Saudi Governments have agreed to an arms supply package that will send about 48 Tornado ground attack aircraft and other British military hardware worth as much as $7.5 billion to Riyadh.
The sale, agreed to late Thursday, is the second phase of an eight-year-old military supply arrangement, through which the Saudis have already signed contracts with the British worth $15 billion, including 72 Tornados, 30 Hawk jet trainers and three minesweepers.


Review/Film; A Satanic Cult Caper in the Bible Belt
One of the more cartoonish subsidiary characters in "Children of the Corn II: The Final Sacrifice" is a fire-and-brimstone-spouting preacher who thunders that "fornication is a pestilence." Moments later in a front pew of his church, a parishioner spontaneously bleeds to death.
Another parishioner, Red Bear, a wise American Indian and anthropology professor, speaks darkly of an angry deity who sees "a wrong done to the earth."
Whatever the troubles of the heartland, they manifest themselves in the murderous behavior of the children of Gatlin, Neb., who in the original "Children of the Corn" massacred their parents.
In the sequel, the orphaned youths, wearing grim, entranced expressions, are rounded up and sent to a neighboring town where -- despite the warnings of a local schoolmarm, who dies like the Wicked Witch of the West -- they are soon up to their old tricks.


INSIDE
Croatia Fights to Save Dam
Officers worked feverishly in Croatia to prevent a blasted dam from crumbling and flooding villages.
Page 4.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall


Stoltzman Puts Off Recital
The clarinetist Richard Stoltzman has postponed his scheduled recital tonight at the 92d Street Y because of the freelance musicians' strike.
Although the performance of chamber music by Mr.
Stoltzman and guest soloists did not involve any striking musicians, the 92d Street Y is involved in the negotiations as the management of the New York Chamber Symphony, and Mr.
Stoltzman chose not to cross a picket line.
The concert has been rescheduled for Feb. 21 at 3 P.M.
Tickets for tonight's performance will be honored.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


DE KLERK CONVENES LAWMAKERS TO PUT END TO WHITE RULE
President F. W. de Klerk convened South Africa's Parliament today to begin its final and most momentous task -- legislating the end of white rule, including Parliament itself.
Speaking from the podium where three years ago he stunned his audience by renouncing the racist policies of apartheid, Mr. de Klerk said the formal abdication of the old order would begin in a matter of months, hastened by the sobering realities of a shrinking economy and the nearly universal recognition that the only alternative was "a devastating war." Assuring the White Minority
Before it adjourns in June, Mr. de Klerk said, he expects Parliament to legislate the first phase of its surrender, handing over some executive powers to a multiracial transition committee that will prepare for the first universal elections by early 1994.


Johnson Hears the Whistle Blowing
Jimmy Johnson, as always impeccably groomed, was 10 minutes early today for his final Super Bowl news conference.
Like a train conductor, Johnson kept glancing at his watch, and he actually did have someplace else to be in an hour: a special-teams meeting.
"Every day when I wake up," Johnson said earlier this week, "I know what time I'll go to bed that night."


SUPER BOWL XXVII: Notebook; Dallas: Here Today, Here Tomorrow
Super Bowl teams have frequently been bedeviled by free agency, even under the old, restrictive system of Plan B, but the Dallas Cowboys should not be.
Nearly all of the leading Washington Redskins needed new contracts after Super Bowl XXVI, but the only high-profile Cowboy free agent this off-season will be running back Emmitt Smith.


Rape and Racial Tension Tear at Town
A series of rapes around a university campus is enough to put any rural college town on edge.
Add racial tension to the mixture and it is cause for a major civic upheaval.
Such an upheaval is tearing apart Bloomsburg, Pa., a town of 11,500 people.
Women have nailed their windows shut.
Prominent blacks have accused the law-enforcement authorities and the local college, Bloomsburg State University, of racism.
Black members of the State Legislature have demanded an investigation by the state civil rights agency.


Florida's Lure for Retirees
Cheaper housing an no income tax prompt thousands of older people to move south each year, but many fail to find a low-cost Utopia.  [ Photo ]


EDUCATOR IS FOUND GUILTY OF CONFLICT
A jury here today found the California Superintendent of Public Instruction, Bill Honig, guilty of violating the state's conflict-of-interest law by steering state contracts that benefited a nonprofit group headed by his wife.
The four felony counts on which Mr.
Honig was convicted after a trial that began on Jan. 11 carry a maximum sentence of up to five years in prison.
In addition the 55-year-old state schools chief, who had achieved national prominence for his efforts to overhaul California's approach to education, was immediately suspended from performing official duties and will be removed from his elected office when he is sentenced.
Sentencing was scheduled for Feb. 26.


Review/Music; Impassioned Singing of Sufi Mysticism
Shahram Nazeri, a singer from Iran, held his audience rapt last Saturday night at Town Hall with stark and mystical music.
He sings Persian classical and semi-classical music and Kurdish folk music connected to Sufi Muslim worship.
Using only drones, drumming and melodic lines (traded between the voice and a tar, tanbur or setar, long-necked fretted lutes that twang like Appalachian dulcimers), the pieces create a transparent framework for impassioned singing and meticulous improvisation.
The program's three segments were all suitelike groups of melodies: urban semi-classical music and Kurdish folk music bracketing a Persian classical avaz, a traditional sequence of vocal and instrumental tunes.
All evolved from sustained, improvisational introductions to melodies backed by a regular beat, with shorter, simpler tunes in the folk and urban music.


Religion Notes
Next: Gay Chaplains?
With President Clinton making the first moves to lift a 50-year ban on homosexuals in the military, the Rev.
Troy Perry says openly gay chaplains are sure to follow.


Karl Laufkotter, 93, Tenor in German Roles
Karl Laufkotter, a tenor who sang at the Metropolitan Opera in the late 1930's and early 40's, died on Dec. 14 at his home in Ojai, Calif.
He was 93.
Edyth Wagner, a friend, notified The New York Times about his death in a letter that arrived yesterday.


2 New Citadels of Lofty Thoughts
Two new organizations of noted international artists, scientists and intellectuals were formally introduced to the public here today, both created to address the world's problems toward the end of the second millennium.
The first was the Forum for Ad Hoc Reflection, presented by Unesco at a news conference at noon in a basement room at its headquarters.
The session quickly degenerated into open hostility from the assembled reporters when it turned out the news conference had been convened to announce that there was no news to report, other than the forum's existence.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
FOILED BANK ROBBERY LEAVES 2 DEAD
Encircled by a cordon of police firepower, a gunman and a terrified woman he snatched from her doorway in a chance encounter were slain in a wild sidewalk shootout on Manhattan's Upper West Side after a bank holdup went awry and two police officers were shot in a running, four-block gunfight.
Page 1.
The shootout sent a neighborhood used to mild levels of urban violence into a frenzy.
Page 26.


Ex-Officers Of Phar-Mor Are Accused
A Federal grand jury accused three former executives of Phar-Mor Inc. yesterday of fraud and embezzlement in a $499 million scheme the discount drugstore chain uncovered last July.
The grand jury indicted Michael Monus, former president and chief operating officer, on 129 counts of fraud and conspiracy.


CLINTON ACCEPTS DELAY IN LIFTING MILITARY GAY BAN
Giving ground to his political opponents, President Clinton authorized the Pentagon today to continue its ban on homosexuals for six months with little practical change while the Defense Department drafts an executive order to lift the prohibition.
After days of negotiation and rancor in the military and Congress, Mr.
Clinton temporarily suspended the formal discharge of homosexuals from the military and announced that new recruits would no longer be asked if they are homosexuals.
He ordered the Pentagon to produce an order for him to sign by July 15.
Victory for Senator Nunn
In the meantime, the military will continue discharge proceedings against avowed homosexuals or those it believes to be gay.
While acknowledged homosexuals will not actually be ousted from the service, Mr.
Clinton was forced to agree to a plan that will place them in the unpaid standby reserves -- in effect, putting their military careers in limbo -- and require that they petition for reinstatement if the ban is permanently lifted.


New York Lags on Meeting Pollution Standards
After years of struggle, the Federal Clean Air Act was revised in 1990 with a grand purpose: to force all 50 states to meet new air pollution standards so strict that everything from the way people got to work to the way factories were designed would have to change.
But three years later, the struggle is far from over, as industry groups, environmentalists and consumers continue the battle in state legislatures around the country.
Many states have been unable to comply with the first requirements of the law, and in New York, partisan squabbling and a recent court ruling have left state officials warning that the state could well fail to complete a plan altogether.


Canada Imposes Tariffs on Steel From U.S.
The Canadian Government imposed provisional tariffs on steel from the United States today, two days after the United States placed steep import duties on Canadian steel.
Canadian officials insisted that the proximity of the decisions was coincidental, but they also left little doubt that their investigation of unfair trade by American steelmakers was a tit-for-tat reaction to similar moves by Washington in relation to Canadian steel imports.


Mets Sign John Cerutti
The Mets yesterday signed JOHN CERUTTI, a 32-year-old left-hander, to a minor league contract.
Cerutti last pitched in the majors in 1991 with the Detroit Tigers.
Cerutti, who has a 49-43 record with a 3.94 earned run average in parts of seven seasons primarily with Toronto, would have a $200,000 salary if he wins a major league job this year.
He could also earn an additional $100,000 if he is on the Mets' active roster for 60 days.


Doctor Said to Raise Price Mid-Abortion
An East Village doctor stopped midway through an abortion and sent the patient home, semiconscious and bleeding, because her husband could not pay $500 more than the agreed-on price, the husband testified yesterday.
As the husband, David Moise, took his wife, Marie, from the clinic, he told Dr.
Abu Hayat, "If she dies, it will be your responsibility," Mr.
Moise testified in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
"He said, 'I don't care about this. I need $500.' "


Dinkins Proposes a Financial Plan To Fill Budget Gap
Mayor David N. Dinkins proposed a financial plan for New York City yesterday that relies on modest spending cuts, an unusual borrowing scheme and increased aid from the state and Federal governments that many fiscal experts consider doubtful.
The proposals are the heart of his plan to close a $2.1 billion budget gap for the fiscal year beginning July 1.
Over all, the Mayor proposed spending $31.9 billion, a 4.9 percent increase over spending in the current fiscal year.


The Rainbow, Revised
New York City's Schools Chancellor, Joseph Fernandez, proposes artful revisions in the curriculum guide called "Children of the Rainbow." The changes ought to calm the controversy surrounding the guide without diluting its purpose of teaching tolerance for different groups, including gay men and lesbians.
"Children of the Rainbow" is the Chancellor's effort to comply with central Board of Education policies to promote multicultural education and better intergroup relations.
The 440-page guide suggests ways in which teachers can introduce first graders to different cultures and other aspects of the world around them.


Uneasy Silence at Base Where Gay Sailor Serves
Moffet Field Naval Air Station here was a sullen, jittery place today, its officers, enlisted men and even civilian employees instructed to keep their opinions silent on Keith Meinhold, the petty officer stationed here who is at the center of the nation's debate about homosexuals in the military.
Mr.
Meinhold was far from the base, making a series of television appearances in New York related to his Federal court case.
A judge ruled in that case on Thursday that the military ban on homosexuals was unconstitutional.


Luverly Role for a Broadway Novice
This is a Cinderella story about a Cinderella story.
There were 10 long auditions between midsummer and Christmas before Melissa Errico, a 22-year-old actress, was chosen over 600 other aspirants as Broadway's next Eliza Doolittle, the famously transmogrified flower girl in "My Fair Lady." While she was waiting, she said, Eliza invaded her life.
She expressed Eliza's sentiments in conversation, listened endlessly to the score, tended violets in her apartment.


How Rules Will Be Altered On Homosexuals in Military
As part of a compromise worked out between President Clinton and Senate Democrats on the issue of homosexuals in the military, two significant changes will be made: the military will stop asking new recruits if they are gay, and avowed homosexuals will be assigned to a reserve limbo without pay or benefits instead of being discharged.
These two steps, along with a provision continuing field commanders' broad discretion to transfer gay service members during discharge proceedings, are the main results of an interim deal on the status of homosexuals as Congress and the Pentagon try to work out a permanent solution during the next six months.


Rider College Is Closing Fraternity
A national fraternity organization today suspended its affiliate at Rider College indefinitely over an incident in which white fraternity pledges were required to emulate black stereotypes during a fraternity work night.
College officials moved to close down the fraternity house, and suspended the student who organized the event for a year.
In addition to suspending activities at the fraternity, Phi Kappa Psi, the college will fine all registered chapter members $100 each and require them to attend training in racial sensitivity.


'94 World Cup Tickets on Sale
Tickets for the 1994 World Cup soccer tournament went on sale this week for the first two rounds at all nine sites.
Prices vary among locations, but must be purchased in strips that will put the cost at levels that might prove beyond the means of many fans.
At Giants Stadium, a strip of tickets to four first-round games plus one second-round game costs $127, $205 or $275, depending on seat locations.
The price of these same tickets will rise to $140, $245 and $355 if ordered after April 1.
The cheapest strip of seats is available at the Silverdome in Pontiac, Mich., for only the first round, for as little as $95.


Back to the Big Issue; After 10 Rocky Days, Clinton Seems Eager To Concentrate on Economic Problems
After 10 days of hullabaloo about gay personnel in the military and the household help of his nominee for Attorney General, President Clinton now seems hungry to concentrate on the issue that got him elected: the economy.
This week's huge layoffs by large corporations are pushing him to do something to create jobs, while strong economic growth in the fourth quarter is pulling him not to do too much.
But there is another factor -- probably the decisive one -- putting pressure on him to get under the hood and do something big about the economy -- and that is politics.


A Timid Stimulus Package
President Clinton, reacting to news of huge layoffs at I.B.M., Boeing, Sears and other corporate giants, plans to propose $15 billion or $20 billion in Federal spending hikes and tax cuts to stimulate job growth.
Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, says the Clinton plan sounds fine.
No wonder.
A $15 billion stimulus package is virtually meaningless to a $6 trillion economy.
Mr.
Greenspan isn't worried that the package will overheat the economy and ignite inflation because the package isn't big enough to matter.


Arabs Urged to Drop Sanctions Drive
Several third world members of the Security Council are pressing Arab countries and the Palestine Liberation Organization to drop their move for immediate sanctions against Israel for the deportation of Palestinians to southern Lebanon.
These nations argue that such a demand would only provoke an American veto, which in turn would undermine the Middle East peace process and weaken the United Nations.


Judge Blocks California Cuts In Welfare to New Residents
A Federal district judge has issued a preliminary injunction barring California from carrying out a law intended to reduce welfare payments to people who have lived in the state less than a year.
The injunction, issued on Thursday by Judge David F. Levi, was hailed by advocates of the poor as sending a message to other states considering similar measures -- that while such actions might be a politically expedient way to deal with a budget crunch, they will not stand up to court challenge.


Riley Admits Smith Is No Small Forward
Pat Riley's master plan for the Knicks may be about to undergo another redesign, with forward Charles Smith the project in question.
After Thursday's disappointing 110-105 loss to Atlanta at the Garden, in which Smith scored only 4 points in 10 minutes because of foul trouble, Riley said that the seasonlong decision to play the 6-foot-10-inch Smith at small forward might have been a mistake.


World Trade Pact Now Seen At Least Several Months Off
Arthur Dunkel, the man overseeing crucial world trade talks, today ruled out the possibility of a global trade pact before March 2, the deadline for a procedure allowing rapid approval of an accord in Congress.
It was the first time that Mr.
Dunkel, the director of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, had conceded that an agreement was impossible before this date.
As a result, it appears inevitable that final approval of the so-called Uruguay Round of trade negotiations will be put off for several months at least.


Executive Changes
CYPRUS COPPER CO., Tempe, Ariz., a unit of Cyprus Minerals Co., named Jeffrey G. Clevenger president.
EARTH TECHNOLOGY CORP., Long Beach, Calif., a provider of environmental consulting services, named Diane Creel chief executive, and Richard Pannell chief operating officer.


New Baldwin Piano Owner Maps Strategy
William A. Frank, a former management consultant and avid tennis player, is taking up piano.
As the new co-owner of the nation's largest piano maker, it will be both a vocation and an avocation.
Mr.
Frank, along with William D. Eberle, a former United States trade representative who was once chief executive of the American Standard Corporation, agreed this week to buy the Baldwin Piano and Organ Company through their newly formed investment group, Peridot Associates of West Palm Beach, Fla.


2-Year Term For Perjury To L.I. Heir, Nassau Aide
An heir to the inventor of the "rabbit ears" television antenna was sentenced to two years in jail today for paying a witness to sign a false affidavit in a dispute over a $5 million estate.
The defendant, Richard Middlemark, 40, is the executive assistant to the North Hempstead Town Supervisor, Benjamin L. Zwirn, and a former aide to the Nassau County Board of Supervisors.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DIGITAL BIOMETRICS INC., Minnetonka, Minn., was selected to provide 100 electronic fingerprinting systems to the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department for $5.2 million.
GENERAL MOTORS CORP., Detroit, is cutting prices on some collision replacement parts by more than 25 percent.


U.S.C. Names Garrett
MIKE GARRETT, who won the Heisman Trophy for Southern California in 1965, was hired yesterday as the Trojans' athletic director.
Garrett, 48, has been an associate athletic director at Southern Cal since 1990.
He replaces MIKE McGEE, who left to become athletic director at South Carolina.
Garrett played with the Kansas City Chiefs and San Diego Chargers. (AP)


How Bias-Victims Law Provides New Redress
To the Editor:
A Jan. 7 news article incorrectly characterizes a civil bias law passed by the New York City Council.
This legislation grants victims of bias-related violence for the first time the right to seek redress before the city's Human Rights Commission or in the courts and to obtain damages.


Israelis Strive to Prevent U.N. Sanctions
Feeling bolstered by a seal of approval from the country's High Court of Justice, Israel renewed its diplomatic offensive today to stave off United Nations sanctions over its deportation of more than 400 Palestinians to Lebanon.
Government officials said they were resigned to a new strong condemnation from the Security Council in coming days, possibly accompanied by a deadline for bringing back the hundreds of Islamic fundamentalists expelled from the occupied territories six weeks ago, accused of being threats to Israeli security.


Corrections
A map caption yesterday with an article about fighting in Croatia referred incorrectly in some copies to the troops protecting the Peruca Dam.
They represent the United Nations, not the United States.


CHRONICLE
She may not have won a seat in the Senate or been named to a Cabinet post in the Clinton Administration, but GERALDINE A. FERRARO is not exactly retreating out of the public eye.
On Tuesday -- with six days' notice -- she leaves for Geneva as a member of the United States delegation to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights.
"I still want to be involved and hope to make a difference, and maybe this is the way to do it," the former congresswoman from Queens and Vice-Presidential candidate said yesterday, as she read through briefing papers.
"My No. 1 interest is in setting up a vehicle to address the kind of human rights violations currently being perpetrated on Muslim women in Bosnia."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.97
4.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.89
2.85
3.82
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.03
3.02
3.90
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.96
5.99
6.87
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.19
7.20
7.75
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.35
8.35
8.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.31
6.31
6.72
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Donors to the Neediest Pick a Number, but Not Just Any Number
They are contributors who loathe round figures.
Fifty dollars?
How uninspiring!
One hundred dollars?
Positively banal!
Instead, they infuse their checks with a dose of creativity, plucking numbers from their lives that they use to shape a donation to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund that is all their own.
Take Leon and Mae Koppman of Jackson Heights, Queens.
Mr.
Koppman recently turned 72 years old.
The couple then celebrated their 44th wedding anniversary.
Voila!
The Koppmans mailed a check to the fund for $116, a big help for a poor child who lacks dental care.
Honoring a Marriage
Jane and Donald Linker of Scarsdale, N.Y., who have three children, began a tradition during the current Neediest Cases appeal that will cost them more every year.
Katie Linker is 7, Billy is 9 and Tommy is 13.
Those ages add up to 29.
Combine that figure with their parents' ages and the Linkers' donation is $122.


Florio Asks Lottery Group To Veto Keno
Gov.
Jim Florio today asked the New Jersey State Lottery Commission to withdraw its approval of a plan to allow keno, a kind of high-speed lottery game, in some 300 bars and restaurants.
The Governor, who has the authority to reject or accept the commission's decision, chose instead to call for a broad study of gaming in the state, including keno.
The Lottery Executive Director, Frank M. Pelly, said he would ask the commission at its February meeting to comply with the Governor's request.


Economics Puts a Mother's areer on Hold
Before she had children, Mary Ann Sharpe of Miller Place, L.I., saved most of the money she earned teaching French at a private school.
Her husband, Frank, a systems engineer, made enough to cover living expenses, so her income provided their primary savings cushion.
After their first child was born, Mrs.
Sharpe resumed teaching.
Child-care expenses took nearly half of her income; the remainder was added to savings.
With the birth of two more children, the balance changed radically.
If she returned to work, four-fifths of her net pay would go to child care, leaving only $200.
She decided it was no longer feasible to work, and now stays home to care for Jennifer, 10, Kimberly, 3, and Stephanie, 2.


Economics Puts a Mother's Career on Hold
Before she had children, Mary Ann Sharpe of Miller Place, L.I., saved most of the money she earned teaching French at a private school.
Her husband, Frank, a systems engineer, made enough to cover living expenses, so her income provided their primary savings cushion.
After their first child was born, Mrs.
Sharpe resumed teaching.
Child-care expenses took nearly half of her income; the remainder was added to savings.
With the birth of two more children, the balance changed radically.
If she returned to work, four-fifths of her net pay would go to child care, leaving only $200.
She decided it was no longer feasible to work, and now stays home to care for Jennifer, 10, Kimberly, 3, and Stephanie, 2.


Somali to Release Prisoners of War
The leader of a major Somali faction announced today the impending release of 387 prisoners of war, fulfilling a condition of cease-fire accords that 14 warring factions signed on Jan. 15.
In announcing the release in the courtyard of the Criminal Investigation Department headquarters, the faction leader, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, told the 24 former officers and other prisoners held there that he hoped their release would herald an era of peace in Somalia.


Keynes Wouldn't Know His Economic Heirs; The Empty Fortress
To the Editor:
"From P.C. to E.C." (Op-Ed, Jan. 12), Alice Amsden's excellent article on economic correctness, only touches the surface of the tyranny conservative "high" theory has imposed on economic discourse and economic training.
Two million college students a year are enrolled in introductory macroeconomics courses.
For more than a generation, these courses have been dominated by the Samuelson-originated, Keynesian synthesis.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Revenge for the Suns  Danny Ainge scored 13 of his season-high 26 points in the final quarter as the Phoenix Suns turned the tables on the San Antonio Spurs last night, beating them, 125-110, and ending the Spurs' team-record 10-game winning streak.
The Spurs, who ended the Suns' franchise-record 14-game winning streak on Jan. 3 in Texas, were unable to duplicate the feat this time.


No Super Friday for Rangers in Buffalo
In this season of transition in the National Hockey League, illness and injury have kept North American celebrities like Mario Lemieux and Wayne Gretzky out of action for long stretches of time.
Into the void has come a new wave of stars, many of them young Russians, with names like Aleksandr Mogilny of Buffalo and Pavel Bure of Vancouver.
The Rangers got a bitter taste of this tonight when Mogilny scored two goals and added one assist to lead the Buffalo Sabres to a 6-4 victory.


Gunman and Hostage Are Killed After Manhattan Bank Robbery
Encircled by a cordon of police firepower, a gunman and a terrified woman he snatched from her doorway were slain in a wild sidewalk shootout on Manhattan's Upper West Side yesterday after a bank holdup went awry and two police officers were shot in a running, four-block gunfight.
It was unclear whether the gunman, who fired first, or the police killed the woman, Auera Bonnie Vargas, a 41-year-old New York City teacher, though the victim's brother blamed the police and said they had failed to negotiate with a gunman who could not have escaped.


Brokerage Explains Purchases
Raymond James &amp; Associates has routinely bought over-the-counter stocks before issuing recommendations to clients of the same companies, according to Larry Silver, a spokesman for the brokerage firm.
While this could account for some of the unusual price and volume action in stocks before recommendations by the firm, it does not explain why trading picked up beforehand in cases where Raymond James has downgraded a stock.
Such activity is probably a result of "front-running," the use of leaked information about sensitive research before it is public.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6 SOUTH AFRICA ON THRESHOLD
South's Africa's President convened the Parliament to begin its final and most momentous task -- legislating the end of white rule, including Parliament itself.
President de Klerk said he expected the assembly to approve the handover of some executive powers to a multiracial transition committee by June.  1 ISRAEL SEEKS TO MOLLIFY U.N.
Feeling bolstered by ruling from its own high court, Israel renewed its diplomatic offensive to stave off United Nations sanctions over its deportation of more than 400 Palestinians to Lebanon.  3 Some nations urged the P.L.O. to drop its demand for sanctions.  3 BRITISH JET DEAL WITH SAUDIS
The British and Saudi Governments have agreed to an arms supply package that will send about 48 Tornado ground attack aircraft and other hardware worth as much as $7.5 billion to Riyadh.  3 GIVING GERMANY AND JAPAN A VETO
The Clinton Administration has indicated that it favors allowing Germany and Japan to have permanent seats in the United Nations Security Council.  5 CROATS STRUGGLE TO SAVE DAM
Engineers and officers worked feverishly to prevent a dam in Croatia from crumbling and unleashing a flood on villages downstream.
The dam was blasted on Thursday with explosives planted by Serbs.  4 U.S.
CHIEFS WARY ON BOSNIA
Senior military officials told Congress that lifting the United Nations embargo on arms shipments and enforcing the air-exclusion zone in Bosnia would do little to protect the Muslims from Serbian attacks.  4 Two days after his death in Sarajevo, no one claims Mujo Hadzanagic.  4 WHALERS, AND PROUD
In their most defiant challenge to the near-total world ban on whale hunting, the Japanese Government and fishing industry said they would begin campaigns to encourage Japanese to eat more whale meat.  6 CLASHES IN ZAIRIAN CAPITAL
French troops entered Zaire's capital to protect their compatriots from a rampage by rioting troops in which scores of soldiers and civilians have reportedly been killed.  6 A factional leader in Somalia said he would free 387 prisoners.  6 RUSSIA PLEDGES ROCKETS TO INDIA
President Yeltsin of Russia declared that despite opposition from the United States, Moscow remains committed to supplying rocket engines for India's space program.  2 National 7-10 CLINTON COMPROMISES ON GAY BAN
The President authorized the Pentagon to continue its exclusion of homosexuals for six months while an executive order that would lift the ban is drafted.  1 The practical effect is to maintain most of the status quo.  9 COMMANDER OF THE OPPOSITION
For years, the Democrats applauded when Senator Nunn's targets were Republican Presidents.
But his challenge to President Clinton has left some in his party questioning his motives.  1 Excerpts from news conferences by Clinton and Nunn.  8 The gay sailor who sued for change celebrated his court victory.  9 Religion Notes: An appeal for gay military chaplains.  10 G.O.P CHIEF ASSAILS 'ZEALOTRY'
Repudiating his party's national convention, the departing Republican chairman appealed for an end to "zealotry masquerading as principle." Haley Barbour of Mississippi was elected the new chairman in a race that centered on leadership issues instead of ideology.  1 CELLULAR PHONES AND CANCER
Responding to growing public fear that cellular phones may cause cancer, the industry said it would finance research into the issue and would ask for independent review of the findings.  1 ROBUST GROWTH BY DURABLES
In what economists took as a sign of growing momentum in manufacturing, the Commerce Department reported that orders for durable goods jumped 9.1 percent in December, the biggest gain in 17 months.  1 QUESTION FOR THE HOMELESS
Which Henry Cisneros speaks for the Administration?
Is it the cautious Housing Secretary who at times has had little to say about the homeless?
Or the poet of the poor who visited them in the streets this week?  7 CALIFORNIA WELFARE LAW VOIDED
A Federal judge has forbidden California to reduce welfare payments to people who have lived in the state less than a year.  10 SCHOOLS CHIEF CONVICTED
California's top education official was found guilty of conflict of interest in authorizing public contracts that benefited a nonprofit organization headed by his wife.  7 A SMALL TOWN'S CRUCIBLE
An upheaval is tearing Bloomsburg, Pa., apart, a result of racial tension and a series of rapes.  7 Metro Digest 23 DINKINS'S FISCAL PLAN
Mayor Dinkins proposed a financial plan for New York City that relies on modest spending cuts, an unusual borrowing scheme and increased aid from the state and Federal governments that many fiscal experts consider doubtful.  1 GUNMAN AND HOSTAGE DIE


Clinton's Big Mistake
Alexander the Great, some historians argue, was a homosexual.
The same has been said of Richard the Lion-Hearted, Gen.
Horatio Kitchener and Chinese Gordon.
The highly decorated hidden homosexual is neither uncommon nor uniquely modern.
Private sexual proclivities apparently have little to do with military skill.
So if gays can be outstanding soldiers, why not invite open homosexuals into the ranks?
President Clinton has made it clear that the invitation will eventually be extended.
Yesterday, in what he called "a dramatic step forward," he said recruits will no longer be asked about their sexual preference and ordered the drafting of an order by July 15 to lift the ban.
This is one of the first important commitments of his Administration.
It is also a dangerous mistake.


Baron Axel von dem Bussche, 73; Joined Officers' Plot to Kill Hitler
Baron Axel von dem Bussche, the last surviving member of a group of German Army officers who tried to assassinate Hitler in World War II, died here on Tuesday.
He was 73.
He died of natural causes, news reports said.


Observer; It's Bidness, General
"Twenty-One Dollars a Day Once a Month" was the title of a song popular just before Japan's Pearl Harbor attack pushed us into World War II.
It referred to the salary of newly drafted buck privates.
Even in that age of the iron dollar, $21 a month was ludicrous pay, and the song's popularity reflected public acknowledgment that Uncle Sam was entitled to serious sacrifice.
If this were still so, there would be no public uproar about admitting homosexuals to the military or giving women the right to be maimed and killed in combat.
These quarrels are evils caused by turning military service into professional careers for the millions.


Let the Hype Begin
The week leading up to next Saturday night's heavyweight championship bout at Madison Square Garden is about to begin.
The champion, RIDDICK BOWE, and his challenger, MICHAEL DOKES, will soon arrive in New York, although only Dokes is scheduled to work out daily at a midtown gym beginning Monday.
His workouts are closed.
Bowe and his entourage, who were initially expected to close their camp in the Poconos on Sunday, won't arrive until late Tuesday and won't conduct any training sessions in New York.


Tom Priestley, 75; His Documentaries Received 9 Emmys
Thomas A. Priestley, a photographer, producer and director of award-winning television documentaries, died on Thursday in New York City.
A resident of Manhattan and East Hampton, L.I., he was 75.
He died of a heart attack en route to his physician's office, said Ann Garfield Black, his companion.
They were to have been married this weekend.


SEARS DETAILS PAYOUT FOR CATALOGUE RETAILERS
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company detailed yesterday the severance terms that it is offering to the 2,000 entrepreneurs who operate its catalogue sales stores, most of which will be closed in a huge reorganization the company announced this week.
Sears said it would give its independent retailers payments equal to 10 percent of their sales in 1991 or 1992, whichever is higher.
And some may get to keep their stores open selling big-ticket Sears merchandise, like appliances.


Bank of New York Agrees to Buy New Jersey Bank
The Bank of New York Company, in its first move into New Jersey, said yesterday that it had agreed to buy National Community Banks of West Paterson in a stock swap estimated to be worth $640 million.
That price represents a bid of $55.55 a share of National Community's stock, about 2.5 times the bank's book value, a relatively high level, analysts said.
The bank's shares closed yesterday at $51, up $8.25.


Sex-Trial Jury Told Of Doctor's Findings
In a tactical move that eliminated the need to call a witness, opposing lawyers in the Glen Ridge sex-assault trial agreed today that a gynecologist found a mildly retarded woman had no pelvic injuries two weeks after the state contends she was assaulted in 1989.
A document prepared by a lawyer, legally called a stipulation, was read to the jury by the presiding judge, R. Benjamin Cohen, as the 15th week of the trial ended.


Harassment Inquiry Leads to Transfer Of Hospital Director
New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation announced yesterday that it had removed Bernard Rose, the executive director of Kings County Hospital Center in Brooklyn, one of the largest and busiest hospitals in the city.
Mr.
Rose, 36, had been on leave since November, when he was accused of sexual harassment by a woman who worked for the hospital.
He is under investigations by the Brooklyn District Attorney's office and the hospitals corporation.


Hold Off the Republican Dobermans
So now the battle over lifting the ban on homosexuals in the military will become sharply partisan.
Top Democrats, including the recalcitrant Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, have united in an effort to patch up the President they helped mug, by postponing a final decision.
Top Republicans, gleeful at the chance to wound Mr.
Clinton at the start of his Administration, will try to force a vote next week on retaining the ban.
There is little doubt on the best course of action at this sad juncture.
Moderates in Congress should recognize the Republican sally for what it is -- a cheap effort to exploit an inflammatory issue -- and keep the attack dogs at bay until Senator Nunn has a chance to hold thorough hearings.
Although the Senator himself favors the ban, he has promised to air all sides evenly and fairly.


Economics Puts a Mother's Career on Hold
Before she had children, Mary Ann Sharpe of Miller Place, L.I., saved most of the money she earned teaching French at a private school.
Her husband, Frank, a systems engineer, made enough to cover living expenses, so her income provided their primary savings cushion.
After their first child was born, Mrs.
Sharpe resumed teaching.
Child-care expenses took nearly half of her income; the remainder was added to savings.
With the birth of two more children, the balance changed radically.
If she returned to work, four-fifths of her net pay would go to child care, leaving only $200.
She decided it was no longer feasible to work, and now stays home to care for Jennifer, 10, Kimberly, 3, and Stephanie, 2.


CUNY and Faculty Reach Agreement on Four-Year Contract
The union representing faculty and other professional staff members at the City University of New York reached agreement yesterday with college administrators and with city and state officials for pay increases totaling 12.5 percent through 1996.
But the contract will also mean slashing the budget for academic sabbaticals.
The agreement, retroactive to September 1990, must be ratified by the Professional Staff Congress, which represents 14,000 full- and part-time professors and other professional staff at CUNY's 21 campuses.
It must also be approved by CUNY's board of trustees.


Reeves Adds Three Assistants to Staff
Dan Reeves, the Giants' new head coach, announced three more assistants today, bringing his new staff to four.
All coached under him with the Denver Broncos.
One is the son of a former National Football League head coach and another is Reeves's son-in-law.
The new Giants coaches are 45-year-old George Henshaw (offensive coordinator), 37-year-old Pete Mangurian (offensive line) and 27-year-old Joe DeCamillis (special teams).
Mike Nolan, 33, was named the team's defensive coordinator earlier in the week.
None had ever coached in the N.F.L. before their stints with the Broncos.


Tagliabue Gives Odds, But Not on the Game
In his annual state-of-the-league address, Commissioner Paul Tagliabue indicated today that instant replay was dead, that restricted pay-per-view television might become a reality in a few years and that expansion was on schedule for 1995.
Every year, the National Football League commissioner holds this news conference on the Friday before the Super Bowl.
In recent years, the lack of a collective-bargaining agreement has been a major subject.
But with labor peace having been achieved three weeks ago, Tagliabue's attention turned to a variety of other subjects.


George C. Seybolt, 78, Ex-Leader Of Food Company and of Museum
George Crossan Seybolt, retired president and chairman of the William Underwood Company, the food concern, and president emeritus of the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, died Thursday at Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital in Boston.
He was 78.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.
Mr.
Seybolt, a native of Manhattan, lived in Boston.
He graduated from Valley Forge Military Academy and began his business career with the American Can Company.
In World War II he was a lieutenant in the United States Naval Intelligence.


Harry Thomashevsky, Producer and Director, 97
Harry Thomashevsky, a producer and director in Yiddish theater, died on Thursday in Los Angeles.
He was 97.
Mr.
Thomashevsky, the eldest son of Boris and Bessie Thomashevsky, founding members of the Yiddish theater in the United States, made his theatrical debut in New York City at 13 in "The Pintele Yid." Later he was a director of the Federal Theater's Yiddish Theater Project.
He also staged productions of the classics, including "Macbeth" and "She Stoops to Conquer," for young audiences.


CROATS RUSH WORK ON CRUMBLING DAM
Engineers and army officers worked feverishly today to prevent a hydroelectric dam in southern Croatia from crumbling and unleashing a flood on villages downstream.
The Peruca Dam, which was blasted on Thursday night with explosives planted within it, has been a target in renewed fighting between Serbs and Croats along what was once a cease-fire line.
The Serbs had rigged the dam with explosives when they captured it from Croats in the war fought after Croatia's independence from Yugoslavia in 1991.
The Serbs retook the dam from United Nations forces on Wednesday and held it briefly until they were dislodged by the Croats.


Sol Sherry, a Researcher in Drugs To Treat Heart Attacks, Dies at 76
Dr.
Sol Sherry, a medical researcher whose work led to the development of clot-dissolving drugs to treat heart attacks, died Thursday at Temple University Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 76 and lived in Voorhees, N.J.
Dr.
Sherry died of pancreatic cancer, said Robert L. Villier, director of public relations for the Temple University Health Sciences Center.


A Wasteful Garbage Deal
The Dinkins administration's new deal with its sanitation union is yet another missed opportunity to improve government, another signal to municipal unions that New York City is willing to buy labor peace by tolerating waste and inefficiency.
After a year of negotiations that were supposed to produce reform, City Hall actually agreed to pay workers a
bonus
if they work a full day.
Mayor David Dinkins and his advisers argue that if the deal works out, the city stands to save money.
True.
But the savings would be significantly greater, and the message to unions stronger, if City Hall had insisted on a tougher, more sensible plan.


Excerpts From the News Conferences by Clinton and Nunn
Following are excerpts from news conferences today by President Clinton and Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription company:
BY PRESIDENT CLINTON
STATEMENT -- Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
I'm sorry; we had a last-minute delay occasioned by another issue, not this one.


Military Officials Say U.S. Role in Bosnia Would Help Little
Reflecting the reluctance of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to intervene in the fighting in the Balkans, senior military officials told Congress today that lifting the United Nations embargo on weapons shipments and enforcing the air-exclusion zone in Bosnia and Herzegovina would do little to protect the Muslims from Serbian attacks.
The assessment by top aides to Gen.
Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, comes as the Clinton Administration is conducting a policy review on the former Yugoslavia.
Even though the Administration is only in the early stages, the remarks were at odds with the policy direction outlined in recent weeks by the Clinton Administration.


Keynes Wouldn't Know His Economic Heirs
To the Editor:
Kudos to Alice H. Amsden for "From P.C. to E.C." (Op-Ed, Jan. 12) and to David Allen and Herbert Barchoff for letters the same day.
They demonstrate how far removed the academic mainstream of economics is from modern economic realities.
John Maynard Keynes himself, long a pariah in the profession, would find much of this work alien to his central concern with the capacity of the economy to provide adequate jobs and income for ordinary people, and to sustain high employment over time.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
New orders for durable goods jumped 9.1 percent in December, the biggest gain in 17 months and a clear sign of growing momentum in manufacturing.
The surprisingly strong gains lifted orders for long-lasting products to the highest level in four years.  [ Page 1. ]
Investors began dumping cellular telephone stocks last week after a Florida man said on national television that his wife's incessant use of a pocket-size phone led to her fatal brain cancer.
The industry scoffed, but investors have continued to batter cellular stocks, making it clear the issue will not simply go away.  [ 1. ]


Durable Goods Orders Rise 9.1% In Sign of Manufacturing Growth
In what economists took as a clear sign of growing momentum in manufacturing, the Commerce Department reported today that new orders for durable goods jumped 9.1 percent in December, the biggest gain in 17 months.
The surprisingly robust performance, which was broad-based, lifted orders for long-lasting goods to $134.5 billion, the highest level in four years.


Family Greenhouses Succeeding Farms
To the Editor:
The popularity of farm courses in a rural Connecticut high school, as you have reported, does not emphasize the main attraction of agricultural vocational schools.
Family tradition and a love of the land will always attract a few young people who find traditional family farming a satisfactory way of life, albeit in New England, a dying one.


Another Australian Open, Another Seles Title
It has become one of the sporting cliches of the 1990's: Monica Seles with warmup jacket neatly zipped, clutching a large silver trophy as a horde of photographers jostle for clear sight lines.
The scene was replayed today at Flinders Park, just as it has been replayed at Stade Roland Garros and Flushing Meadows.


U.S. Backs Council Seats for Bonn and Tokyo
The Clinton Administration has indicated that it favors allowing Germany and Japan to have permanent seats in the United Nations Security Council.
The Council has 15 members, but only 5 -- the United States, Russia, China, Britain and France -- have permanent seats, which allows each of them to block any action with a veto.


Sarajevo Journal; Another War Victim Dies Unclaimed
More than 48 hours after he died, nobody at the morgue knew who Mujo Hadzanagic was.
There had been no relatives to identify him, no inquiring telephone calls, nothing but what Mr.
Hadzanagic himself disclosed in the moments of extreme pain after he arrived at the Kosevo Hospital emergency department -- his name and the year of his birth, 1949.


A Journalist Killed In Cambodia in '70 Buried With Honors
Nearly 23 years after he was captured and killed in Cambodia while covering the war, the remains of Welles Hangen, an award-winning NBC News correspondent, were buried yesterday in a ceremony marked by a 21-gun salute at Arlington National Cemetery.
Mr.
Hangen and his television crew were seized by Viet Cong and Khmer Rouge guerrillas in southern Cambodia on May 31, 1970.
They were killed three days later.


World Awaits Change In U.S. Policy at U.N.
To the Editor:
Shame on Representative John P. Murtha, chairman of a Congressional delegation that visited Somalia, for United Nations-bashing (news article, Jan. 11).
Better that he and other critics of the world body's inadequacies (many due to lack of funds) would address our country's unwillingness to pay our $552 million in back dues and $308 million we promised for peacekeeping.


Transactions
Football National Football League
DENVER BRONCOS -- Named John Levra offensive line coach.
HOUSTON OILERS -- Named Buddy Ryan defensive coordinator.


Changing Cable Channels
Time Warner says it will reposition several cable television channels in Manhattan on Monday, despite the objections of WNYC-TV, the public station operated by New York City.
The city, which objects to the Time Warner plan to switch WNYC-TV from Channel 3 to Channel 31, asked the Federal Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan for an injunction this week to block the change.
The court turned down the request, noting that a related case was pending in the Federal District Court in Washington.
A hearing on the city's request is scheduled for Monday in the court in Washington.
Time Warner said the channels would be realigned early Monday.


For Some, Loan Proposal Calls Up Ugly Memories
For two decades, ever since New York City's questionable financing practices of the late 1960's and early 1970's nearly forced the city into bankruptcy, the idea of borrowing money to pay for operating expenses has been anathema at City Hall.
So dire were the consequences of avoiding the city's underlying problems by refinancing operating debts that any current budget proposal that smacks even remotely of the practice sets off alarm bells that can be heard as far away as Albany.
They were ringing loudly yesterday.


Growth and Income for the Long Term
Growth-and-income funds are no-frills diversified stock funds designed for long-term investing.
In a sense, the prototypical growth-and-income fund is the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index of big blue-chip stocks that mix growth with income.
The funds are usually slightly more income-oriented than the index because they have to cover their expenses; on average, they have to earn about 1.25 percent more in yield, which they do by owning a sprinkling of bonds or preferred stock.
The funds' average yield for the latest 12 months as of Jan. 7 was 2 percent, according to Lipper Analytical Services in Summit, N.J.


From Port to 17 Fathoms, Views on Dredging Differ; On the Docks Shipping Is the Issue, But at Sea They Worry About the Fishing Industry
Fish are partial to a varied seascape; a flat ocean floor holds little allure.
But give them a mound, a slope, a canyon, and they will materialize in communities large enough to attract food they can eat, predators that can eat them and fishermen who glory in it all.
This is what has happened over the last 79 years at a federally managed disposal site called the Mud Dump, six miles east of Sandy Hook, N.J., and 10 miles south of the Rockaway peninsula.
A mere spot on nautical charts, it has been the repository of uncounted tons of New York Harbor's dredged muck since World War I and is now in the middle of some of the richest fishing grounds on the East Coast.
Port Versus Fishermen
It is also in the middle of a big fight about what to do with the removed sediment, or dredge spoils, from Newark Bay that are contaminated with the industrial poison dioxin and whether they will cause harm if placed in the habitat of scallops, crabs and other bottom feeders and the fish that graze nearby.


Blazing a Trail For Finances
While New York City prepares its spending plan year round, the most serious part of the cycle begins in January, when the mayor offers his preliminary plan for the following fiscal year.
By the end of March, the State Legislature is required to approve a state budget.
Once the state budget is approved, the mayor must then propose a budget, which is based on aid from the state and other revenue sources, typically in late April or early May.


Corrections
A drawing with the Our Towns column yesterday carried an incorrect credit line.
The artist was Lynn Pauley.


CHRONICLE
There's nothing quite like being the inaugural poet to help book sales.
In the week after MAYA ANGELOU'S recitation of her poem "On the Pulse of Morning," sales of the paperback versions of her poetry and prose soared by 300 to 600 percent, said Stuart Applebaum, a spokesman for Bantam Books.
For example, he said: "Although 'I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings' has been a steady seller for more than two decades, in the week after her inaugural appearance, it shot up by 500 percent and is selling out everywhere. We have gone back to press with nearly 400,000 copies of all her books."


Only a Lobbyist Could Love 1-Cent Stamp
To the Editor:
Paul Feiner, Town Supervisor of Greenburgh, N.Y., proposes a "1-cent stamp for Congressional and White House correspondence" as a reverse-franking privilege for citizens (letter, Jan. 12).
Symbolically, this is a nice idea, but in practical terms it would be meaningless.
A typical Congressional office, even at the regular 29-cent postal rate receives (according to the book "Hill Rat" by John Jackley) 400 to 600 letters a week.


School Helps Children With Children
TANYA G. is 14 years old and she's pregnant.
She waited two months for an appointment at a prenatal clinic.
Now her history teacher is giving the class a midterm examination the same afternoon.
Does Tanya cut class or skip the doctor? (To protect Tanya from ostracism, her story was related on condition that her last name not be used.)
In Port Chester, some pregnant teen-agers and those with small children have a third option, thanks to a collaborative effort by the local high school and a group of social service agencies.
Advocates for the population known to social workers as "children with children" will help them negotiate workable solutions to what seem like insurmountable problems.


SEOUL ESTIMATING UNIFICATION'S COST
The Finance Ministry has issued a report saying that if South Korea is forced to absorb the North Korean economy by 2000, unification would cost $980 billion, the highest Government estimate so far.
But the report recommends a less costly process, and reflects a changing attitude toward reunification among the South Korean authorities.
"This is the first Government report which is saying reunification can be attained if approached in a cautious and realistic manner," said Ryu Suk Yul, a research fellow at the Institute for Foreign Affairs and National Security.


I'll Take a Window Seat; Put My Toothpicks on the Aisle
Leslie H. Wexner, the founder and chairman of the Limited, spared few expenses for his wedding last weekend to Abigail S. Koppel.
Held at the couple's home in New Albany, Ohio, the affair even included a fireworks display.
But perhaps the most extravagant touch was the importing of 60 waiters from Glorious Food, the high-priced, high-society New York catering concern.


Let Us Now Praise A Compromising Man
THE United States Mint is issuing three new commemorative coins honoring James Madison and the Bill of Rights.
Two of them are silver and one is gold.
The silver coins are a half-dollar and a $1 piece, each with a different design.
The gold design is a $5 piece.


Little Trouble in Canada When Its Gay Ban Ended
In Canada it has been almost a nonevent.
The decision three months ago to end all barriers to the enlistment and promotion of homosexuals in Canada's armed forces has barely caused a stir.
Although a definitive assessment has yet to be made, Capt.
Brett Boudreau, a Defense Department spokesman, said, "Important indicators lead us to believe the policy is accepted." He added: "There are no known reports of incidents involving physical abuse, harassment or gay bashing. There have been no resignations as a result of the change in policy and no open declarations of sexual preference by any of our members."


2 ISRAELI SOLDIERS AMBUSHED IN GAZA
Two Israeli soldiers were shot to death in an ambush in the occupied Gaza Strip today in the first such killings since Israel expelled some 400 Palestinians to Lebanon six weeks ago.
It was a series of similar attacks in December that prompted Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin to carry out the mass deportation as a way of striking at the Islamic fundamentalist group Hamas, which had asserted responsibility for the violence.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Jan. 16  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $265,000
16 West 16th Street  (Chelsea Lane)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, den, balcony; maintenance $831, 56% tax-deductible (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  Greenwich Village  $247,500
14 East Fourth Street  (Silk Building)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. duplex condo in a loft building; 24-hr. concierge, 11-ft. ceilings, fireplace, 2 exposures; common charge $382, taxes $1,800 (Brokers: Eychner Associates-Ambrose Mar-Elia)  SoHo  $175,000
2 Charlton Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 800-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining alcove, terrace; maintenance $637, 54% tax-deductible (Broker: Herbert H. Kliegerman Associates)  Upper East Side  $362,500
120 East 81st Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,550-sq.-ft. postwar co-op, 24-hr. doorman, dining area, Jacuzzi in marble bath, east exposure; maintenance $1,067, 57.5% tax-deductible (Broker: Halstead Property Co.)  Upper West Side  $715,000
110 Riverside Drive (83d St.)  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,260-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; part-time doorman, maid's room, dining room; maintenance $1,498, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Hunt-Kennedy)  West Side  $550,000
10 West 66th Street  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, marble bath, Central Park view; maintenance $1,275, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Marilyn Korn Real Estate)  BRONX  Kingsbridge  $181,000
3417 Tibbett Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family semi-attached brick Tudor; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,526 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy and Associates)  Riverdale  $170,000
750 Kappock Street  (Glen Briar)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, terrace, Hudson River view; maintenance $925, includes parking space, 58% tax-deductible (Brokers: ERA/Susan Goldy &amp; Co. Realtors-Marilyn &amp; Morris B. Sopher)  BROOKLYN  East Flatbush  $145,000
129 East 39th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family semi-attached brick house; dinette, hospitality suite, 1-car garage, 23- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $990 (Broker: Hellmar Brokerage)  Park Slope  $152,667
420 12th Street  (Ansonia Court)  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft duplex co-op; dining area, exposed-beams, 2 exposures; maintenance $512, includes heat; 65% tax-deductible (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  QUEENS  College Point  $155,000
5-04 Julius Road  (Silverpointe)  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. duplex condo in a 6-year-old building; dining area, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; common charge $221, 100% tax-deductible (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Forest Hills  $400,000
69-46 Exeter Street  5-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family detached 3-story colonial; dining room, library, breakfast room, 2-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,800 (Broker: Terrace Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Old Town  $138,500
8 Wilson Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached raised ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage, 42- by 126-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed)  West Brighton  $110,000
311 Davis Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached aluminum-sided house; dining room, sunporch, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $900 (Brokers: Foreman/ Rand Properties-Coldwell Banker/ DeSimone Realty)


Democrats Live It Up (a Bit) Before Biting Bullet (Maybe)
Aside from the coq au vin dinner, the twist contest and the spectacle of Dan Rostenkowski carousing in a conga line with a tablecloth draped over his head, this year's House Democratic retreat was hardly any fun at all.
The Representatives and their spouses were invited by their leaders to cut loose a bit and to celebrate the envisioned end of gridlock on Capitol Hill.
But the two-day conference at Johns Hopkins University that ended on Friday was a party that only a policy maven untethered to electoral politics could love.


JAN. 24-30: A Quick Study; A Diplomat's Diplomat Goes to Russia
Thomas R. Pickering, one of only three Foreign Service officers with the rank of career ambassador -- the diplomatic equivalent of a four-star general -- was chosen Ambassador to Russia last week.
Mr.
Pickering, fluent in French, Spanish, Swahili, Arabic and Hebrew, speaks no Russian and has no experience in Russian affairs.
But he is expected to make up in enthusiasm and brilliance what he lacks in experience.


Recent Sales
Commack  $173,000
47 Genesee Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1- car garage; taxes $4,200.
East Meadow  $189,000
1948 Stuyvesant Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old expanded Cape Cod; den, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $5,600.
East Northport  $175,000
44 Circle Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 2-car garage, pool; taxes $3,800.
Fort Salonga  $186,000
17 Highwood Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in-kitchen, deck, aluminium siding, 2-car garage; taxes $3,300.
Hauppauge  $325.000
3 Barnaby Court  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, skylights, 1 acre, 2-car garage; taxes $5,200.
Nissequogue  $265,000
1 Harbor Lane  6-bedroom, 4-bath, 25- year-old colonial; den w/fireplace, family room, 1.9 acres, 2- car garage; taxes $8,000.
OTHER AREAS White Plains, N.Y.  $279,000
116 Grandview Avenue  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 66-year-old Norman Tudor; den, fireplace, dining room, pantry, family room; taxes $2,767.
Deep River, Conn.  $115,000
39 Union Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 67-year-old bungalow; front porch, 1-car garage; taxes $1,673.
Howell, N.J.  $97,000
9 Brookside Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 25-year-old ranch; eat-in-kitchen, full basement, w/w carpeting; taxes $1,722.


RECORD BRIEF
Schnittke: 'Concerto for Choir,' 'Minnesang'
Danish National Radio Choir conducted by Stefan Parkman. Chandos CHAN 9126; CD.


Peregrine Murphy and Michio Hirano
The Rev.
Peregrine Leigh Murphy, an assistant Episcopal priest at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Michio Hirano, an assistant professor of neurology at Columbia University.
The Rev.
Richard Grein, the Episcopal Bishop of New York, performed the ceremony at the cathedral.
The bride is also a senior research associate at the Neurological Institute of Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from California State University at Hayward, from which she also received a master's degree in clinical counseling.
She also has a master's degree from the General Theological Seminary.


JAN. 24-30: Blue Chip Blahs; America's Corporate Giants Cope by Jettisoning Thousands of Jobs
The economic enigma facing the Clinton Administration -- strong growth but few new jobs -- can be explained by looking at the battered blue chips of corporate America.
Last week, I.B.M. announced that its chief executive, John F. Akers, would step down within three months.
A week earlier, the computer giant had reported a $4.97 billion loss for 1992, the largest in corporate history.
Since 1986, the International Business Machines Corporation has sliced its work force by 100,000 people and more cuts are planned.


Adena Eisen and Daniel Batterman
Adena Felice Eisen, a daughter of Arthur J. Eisen of Harrington Park, N.J., and H. Carol Eisen of New York, was married yesterday evening to Daniel Delmonico Batterman, a son of Michael and Jacqueline Batterman of New York.
Rabbi Amy Ehrlich performed the ceremony at the Georgian Suite in New York.
Mrs.
Batterman, 27, is a social worker at New York Hospital in New York.
She graduated from Rutgers University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in social work from Hunter College.


An Italianate Spirit Infuses the Week
ON Thursday the 15 dancers, singers and musicians of the Jose Greco Company -- including the dancer's four children -- evoke the spirit of Spain in performances in New London.
For information about the company's 10:30 A.M.
"School-Time Matinee," or the open concert that evening at 7:30, call the Garde box office at 444-7373.
At 8:30 P.M.
Thursday, the Center for Chamber Music in Greenwich presents the Arcadian Academy, an early-instrument ensemble founded and conducted by Nicholas McGegan.
Named for the Accademia del'Arcadia of Rome, a society of artists, musicians and writers founded in 1690, the Arcadian Academy is dedicated to the performance of the repertory composed by the masters of the original academy and their contemporaries; among those whose works will be performed are Marco Uccellini and Salamone Rossi as well as Scarlatti and Vivaldi (661-6626).


Rangers Continue Marching Downhill
During the slump that led to the firing of Roger Neilson, Mark Messier's philosophical differences with the former coach were part of the problem.
Now that the team is in a mini-slump with Messier on the injured list, they hope Messier's return from injury will be part of the solution.
After their losing streak reached two games tonight with a 3-1 loss to the Toronto at Maple Leaf Gardens, Ron Smith, the interim coach, said Messier might be back from a wrist injury in time for Monday night's game against the Islanders on Long Island.


A NATION DUMPS ITS WRITERS
Your article created a cockeyed impression of Stefan Heym.
Heym, whom I've known for exactly 50 years, is indeed "prickly," and he was grossly misguided when he defected East in 1952.
But he is also a card-carrying antiestablishmentarian, with more guts than the Flying Wallendas.
When some dozen of his books gave the East German Government fits, he didn't "simply have his books published in the West." He smuggled them out, risking a five-year prison term, with fines, every time.
For decades, his teasing and twinking of the Communist bosses brought him such adulation from ordinary people that the bosses dared not touch him for fear of making a martyr.
Your article made him look like a lost soul.
PETER WYDEN
Ridgefield, Conn.


Yes, Grieg Did Make Records
In april 1903, 13 years after his last appearance there and 4 years after he had given much-publicized offense by criticizing the trial of Captain Dreyfus, Edvard Grieg returned to Paris to conduct his music at the Concerts Colonne.
He made an impression.
Both his performance and his calm resourcefulness in facing down a rancorous claque of anti-Dreyfusards were the talk of the town and its press for weeks. (Even some Frenchmen who disapproved of Dreyfus's conviction resented a foreigner's pronouncements on the issue. Debussy wrote a regrettably sarcastic review of Grieg's concert -- but made amends in later years.)
Every biography of the great Norwegian composer records this eventually triumphal return to Paris, but none that I know mentions the most important thing, from posterity's point of view, that he did while he was there: on May 2, he visited the studios of the Gramophone and Typewriter Company and recorded about a quarter-hour's worth of his piano music on nine 10-inch wax masters.


A Science Center in Liberty Park
The new $67 million Liberty Science Center in Liberty State Park in Jersey City presents a complex of attractions aimed at making science fun for visitors.
More than 250 hands-on exhibits are on display at the center, which includes a 125-foot-high silver sphere housing a theater and a 170-foot-high tower topped by a glass observation deck with views of the Statue of Liberty and the Manhattan skyline.
The center was officially opened last Sunday.
Escalators with inner works visible through Plexiglas panels and a transparent elevator carry visitors to exhibits on three floors.
The environment floor features three living salt marsh displays with crabs and fish and a "bug zoo."


Turkey
To the Editor: During a recent trip to Turkey with my family, I discovered in a small town in central Anatolia that my wallet, with passports, airline tickets, money and American Express traveler's checks, was missing.
Because of the immediate, professional and efficient action of the police my wallet was recovered from a bus we had taken an hour before.
I will never forget the Turkish citizens who came to our aid and the police officer who turned in the wallet.
The complications of spending the last days of our vacation getting all of our valuables reissued were thankfully avoided.
RONNIE JANE LEVIN Williamstown, Mass.


The Military Balked at Truman's Order, Too
The President, without conferring with Congressional leaders, announces that he has decided to end discrimination in the military.
There is an immediate outcry, led, in part, by military leaders.
"When you pass a law to get somebody to like someone, you have trouble," one general said.
The time?
Early 1948, almost exactly 45 years before President Clinton proposed lifting the military ban on homosexuals.
And the President, Harry S. Truman, was proposing that the military desegregate its ranks.


Homosexuals Wake to See a Referendum: It's on Them
SO jubilant were gay and lesbian Americans on election night that many actually danced in the streets, celebrating the victory of Bill Clinton and the beginning of a new era that would, at last, accept them as part of the nation's family.
Last week, not even three months after that euphoric night and just days after gay celebrations at the Clinton inaugural, reality hit home.
President Clinton's plan to end the ban on homosexuals in the military ran into a firestorm of protest from the military, from Democrats and Republicans alike in Congress and, most important, from the American people.
Mr.
Clinton was forced to retreat, putting off for at least six months an executive order to lift the ban.


How the Neuberger Is Bidding for More Attention
THE little captain rows his wooden boat through waves of foam; three friends are caught in a moment of conversation, and Marilyn Monroe -- in her Abstract Expressionist incarnation -- beckons from a quiet corner.
An eclectic group inhabits the galleries of the Neuberger Museum of Art on the campus of the State University of New York here.
In addition to the figures above, painted by the American masters Philip Evergood, Milton Avery and Willem de Kooning, respectively, there are also Romare Bearden's melon eaters, Ben Shahn's accordion player, Jacob Lawrence's evangelists and many other subjects vying for the visitor's eye.


POSTINGS: Yacht Club Restoration; Back to the Brows
It may be true that what goes up must come down, but sometimes what comes down will go up again.
At the New York Yacht Club, on 44th Street west of Fifth Avenue, an ornamental wooden pergola that was part of the original turn-of-the-century design was removed several decades ago, perhaps in the 50's.
Now it is returning, via a faithful reproduction of the original.
"It's part of restoring the building to its original 1905 condition," said Geoff Grout, head of the club's house committee.
"The pergola really represents the eyebrows on the building."


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
ALASKAN COMEDY-DRAMA
"Brilliant Traces," a comedy-drama by Cindy Lou Johnson set in the wilds of Alaska, is the first work to be presented by Extremity Productions at the newly reopened Wildcliff Center for the Arts in New Rochelle.
It will run from Thursday through Feb. 13.


Municipalities Are Moving Forward On Housing
WHEN an Irvington resident offered to donate an acre of land for affordable housing recently, village officials were delighted -- and relieved.
A project sponsored by the community, they agreed, is far better than one imposed on it.
"The county has already developed a target list and a suggested quota," the Irvington Village Administrator, Stephen McCabe, said last week.
"This donation puts us in a proactive position of determining a suitable affordable-housing project for Irvington on our own terms," he said, "rather than waiting for the county to tell us we must."


Wintry Scenes and Looking-Glass Worlds
THE ideal time for taking in a Sylvia Plimack Mangold show is when the weather is clear and cold and trees congregate into taupe-color masses.
At the moment, those visiting the Neuberger Museum on the State University of New York campus here, will likely do so under such conditions; they will certainly find them duplicated in Mrs.
Mangold's retrospective of works on paper, done in the last 20 years or so.


Gays in Military Would Hurt Combat Efficiency
To the Editor:
"Who's in Charge of the Military" (editorial, Jan. 26) refuses to address the issues raised by the Joint Chiefs of Staff about ending the ban on homosexuals.
You engage in ad hominem attacks, questioning their willingness to obey civilian authority.
If ordered they will obey, or rather their successors will obey, since the objections of the Joint Chiefs will probably lead many to resign to protest a policy that will lead to a degradation of our country's military capabilities.
As a former marine officer and company commander who served in the 1980's, I had some opportunity to observe the dynamics of creating an effective fighting force.
The Joint Chiefs do not oppose homosexual integration because of an innate dislike of homosexuals; I suspect they have gay friends and relatives, as most of us do.
They oppose such an integration because they understand, as President Clinton does not, that the ingredients in creating an effective fighting force have little to do with logic and much to do with creating an atmosphere of aggressive camaraderie and group identification.


Defending Izzy
To the Editor:
I was mildly shocked to read, in John B. Judis's review of "Izzy," by Robert C. Cottrell (Dec. 20), that as late as 1983 I. F. Stone was "praising the Soviet Union as a 'distortion of socialism' but 'still socialism.' " Those who are familiar with Stone's work will attest that after his denunciation of the Soviet Union in 1956 ("This is not a good society and it is not led by honest men"), the Soviet Government served in his writings only as an example of repression and corruption.


A RIVER OF ONE'S OWN
Sandor's article brought fond memories of my very first catch -- an eight-inch rainbow trout (Shohola, Pa., 1948).
I still savor the event because I landed it with a sapling branch, a piece of string, a safety pin and an admonition to stay quietly on the edge of the creek, while my father and older sister waded out to where he could teach her the art of casting with a fancy new rod and reel.
She caught two minnows.
Today, my sister is an avid hunter and fisher, but, on that day long ago, triumph was mine.
And yes, we ate the fish.
DELIA MORAN CONTE
Pelham Manor, N.Y.


Fly Me to the Zone
WHO BAKED THE
NO-FLY
pie?
At the end of Desert Storm, Saddam Hussein was denied the right to send Iraq's aircraft into the areas over the embryonic Kurdistan above the 36th parallel, or to threaten rebellious Shiites below the 32d parallel.
Those areas were promptly dubbed
no-fly zones
by anonymous speakers of Pentagonese, and the curious locution was picked up -- uncritically at first -- by the media.


Da, Ballet in Vegas
To the Editor: My husband, Joel, and I had intended to splurge on a brief holiday in Britain to catch the Bolshoi Ballet at London's Royal Albert Hall (Travel Advisory, Dec. 27).
But Joel learned that the Bolshoi was performing at Bally's in Las Vegas and that the price of admission was included in the inexpensive ($118) two-night package, including a spacious room and some meals for both of us.


Public &amp; Private; Hold the Phone
It's a good thing they invented the telephone.
Otherwise some members of Congress might have to figure out how to work the touch-tone buttons on their consciences.
The outbreak of phonathon democracy in our nation's capital is a sorry exhibition of government in action. 100 to 1. 200 to 1.
The calls opposing gays in the military were reported as though the issue were a horse with a bum leg in the fifth race at Aqueduct.
I'd wager that some of those phone calls are to public opinion what David Duke's ascendancy was to the national ethos.
And yet public officials proffer the numbers as though they will let them off the hook of using their heads.


A Stewardship Of Garden Lore
WHEN Joanne Fuccello first saw a help-wanted ad about 20 years ago for someone to catalogue rare books, she figured she didn't have a chance.
She had no experience, having just graduated from Douglas College at Rutgers University with a major in classical studies.
But she knew Latin, French, Italian and classical Greek.
The ad stuck with her, so she called and made an appointment for an interview.
She didn't have a car, so her friend Bradford Lyon offered to drive her through the pouring rain.
The two young women set out to meet Elisabeth Woodburn at a place called Booknoll Farm, in Hopewell, N.J.


Too Many Plastic Pots, Too Few Uses
PLASTIC pots, how they accumulate.
If it is not a pile in the toolshed, it is a stack in the cellar or garage.
Nurseries favor plastic pots because they are lightweight and can be easily packed for shipping.
Their use also makes plants lighter to tote around.
Wholesalers and greenhouse managers like plastic pots, too, for the same reasons, that they can be stored and handled easily.


Russia on Verge of Hyperinflation, Premier Says
Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin of Russia warned Western officials today that inflation in his country would be close to 50 percent this month, putting Russia on what he called "the verge of hyperinflation."
His statement, at an annual gathering of political and business leaders known as the World Economic Forum, was issued as several leading Russian economic officials and Western advisers pleaded for quick financial support to rescue Russia from an imminent tumble into economic chaos.


Talking: Resales; Making A Home Move
KEEPING a home on the market looking fresh is no easy task.
Yet doing so is critical in these sluggish times.
Otherwise the brokers, who are being overwhelmed with new merchandise, quickly grow tired of showing the property.
And prospective buyers may not be interested in a home that nobody else has apparently found appealing.
Marketing professionals suggest the seller must be prepared -- at the very least -- to regularly re-evaluate and modify the three major elements that affect any sale: the asking price, the condition of the property and the incentives for a broker to bring customers to see this particular listing.


Status Issues Occupy Candidates
In many ways the two Republican candidates for New Jersey Governor have a lot in common.
Both are moderates in the mold of former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean.
He is a well-paid partner in one of the state's most prestigious law firms, while she is a wealthy horse-country patrician.
And both hired illegal aliens as domestic help.
But in the first days of the campaign to pick a challenger to Gov.
Jim Florio, the two candidates, Cary Edwards and Christine Todd Whitman, find themselves fighting over just how wealthy and privileged they are.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: The Gulf ands Western Building; Twisting in the Wind On Columbus Circle
FOR almost a quarter century, a 44-story black-and-silver-striped skyscraper known almost from the moment of its conception as the Gulf and Western Building has stood ungainly guard over Columbus Circle.
Sneered at by architecture critics, the building from early in its life has been called structurally problematic and inappropriate for its site.
Now it sits mired in 15-month-long bankruptcy proceedings amid allegations of "nightmarish conditions" created by structural defects that cause the building to twist slowly in the wind and hazardously misaligned facade panels that an engineer hired by the owner says have the potential to blow off in a windstorm and endanger pedestrians below.


Quality Bites The Dust
To the Editor:
So that's what happened to "Laurie Hill"  [ "The Short Life and Unhappy Death of 'Laurie Hill,' " Jan. 10 ] .
Thank you for solving the mysteries behind the disappearance of such a high-quality series.
My wife and I had been avid fans of the show, whose warm-toned sets, theatrical feel and honest portrayal of real human relationships gave us a glimpse into the meaning of our own terribly frantic and confused lives.


Corrections
An entry in a list of books on page 28 of The Times Book Review today, about American Indian captivity narratives, is incomplete.
A paperback edition of "A Narrative of the Life of Mrs. Mary Jemison" is published by Syracuse University Press at $12.95.


Aikman, at 26, Knows Value of His Role
Madison Avenue looks at Troy Aikman and sees stars.
Chiseled features, bright smile. Articulate with a winning personality.


BEST SELLERS: February 7, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
26
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
3
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) Two police detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer in southern California.
3
2
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $23.) The case of a woman journalist charged with killing an eminent novelist: was it self-defense or murder?
4
2
CLOSE COMBAT, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) In the sixth volume of the series "The Corps," there are new challenges for the Marines all over the Pacific in World War II.
5
2
DEVIL'S WALTZ, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware investigates the strange series of illnesses that befalls a small child.
6
3
10
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) After being accused of murdering her employer, a woman tells of killing her husband.
7
4
48
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
8
6
4
TERMINAL, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $21.95.) A medical researcher's pursuit of a treatment for cancer has extraordinary consequences.
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a psychopathic serial killer in Washington.
10
15
31
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
11
10
12
*MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.50.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
12
12
17
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
13
9
23
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
14
11
11
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) A vaquero's adventures.
15
8
12
*THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
21
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
2
26
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales.
3
5
12
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
4
4
34
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
5
3
18
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general.
6
6
20
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
7
8
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $20.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
8
11
3
*LIBERATION MANAGEMENT, by Tom Peters. (Knopf, $27.50.) How American industry is reorganizing to deal with the problems wrought by changing times.
9
10
3
NOBODY NOWHERE, by Donna Williams. (Times Books/Random House, $21.) The autobiography of an autistic woman.
10
8
14
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life of the physicist Richard Feynman.
11
7
34
*TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
12
9
23
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
MAKING THE MUMMIES DANCE, by Thomas Hoving. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The reminiscences of the former director of the Metropolitan Museum Art.
THE WIVES OF HENRY VIII, by Antonia Fraser. (Knopf, $25.) The lives of the six spouses of the 16th-century English monarch.
15
14
9
JFK: Reckless Youth, by Nigel Hamilton. (Random House, $30.) The first 29 years of the 35th President.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
3
EXCESS BAGGAGE, by Judith Sills. (Viking, $21.) A psychologist's counsel about conquering character traits that make one's life harder.
2
1
48
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
3
3
9
CREATING LOVE, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $23.) Ways to establish healthy relationships with other people.
4
4
30
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
5
1
TOUCHPOINTS, by T. Berry Brazelton. (Lawrence/Addison-Wesley, $22.95.) A pediatrician's counsel to parents about their children's emotional and behavioral development.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States.
*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
ANTHONY TROLLOPE, by Victoria Glendinning. (Knopf, $30.) A smart and winning biography, stuffed with details that come from knowing all Trollope's work and taking the Victorians seriously.
THE MAN WHO WAS LATE, by Louis Begley. (Knopf, $21.) Mr.
Begley's icy second novel, thematically a sequel to his "Wartime Lies," deals with a refugee fromc entral Europe, maimed by his experiences, who is driven to self-destruction by a sense of irremediable estrangement and inner contamination.
THE SECREAT OF CARTWHEELS, by Patricia Henley. (Graywolf, paper, $11.) The author's second collection of short stories presents brave and life-worn characters, unsettled, cast loose; but when they are brave enough, they manage to land on their feet.
A TASTE OF POWER: A Black Woman's Story, by Elaine Brown. (Pantheon, $25.) In 1974, Ms.
Brown was appointed leader of the Black Panther Party; hence this chilling, entertaining account of a woman in a movement rich in nihilism, sexism and misogyny.
HIGH NOON IN SOUTHERN AFRICA: Making Peace in a Rough Neighborhood, by Chester A. Crocker. (Norton, $29.95.) A history and defense of his conduct by Ronald Reagan's top diplomat for African affairs, highly circumstantial and highly instructive for those who agree with his policies and those who don't.
FABLES OF THE IRISH INTELLIGENTSIA, By Nina FitzPatrick. (Penguin, paper, $9.) Thirteen bright, vigorous stories, featuring, mostly, poets priests and academics, set in Ireland or whatever the Irish are.
There is lots of drinking and even more talk.
MUSORGSKY: Eight Essays and an Epilogue, by Richard Taruskin. (Princeton University, $35.) Illuminating studies of the composer whose operas are the living stuff of a continuing Russian tragedy.


Mutual Funds;   Those Wacky Little Stocks Abroad
COLLECTING oddball little stocks from around the world has catapulted the Acorn International Fund into first place among overseas stock funds, at least for the few short months since its startup.
Acorn soared 8.5 percent from Sept. 23 through Jan. 22 compared with a 0.7 percent gain for its peers, according to Morningstar Inc., the mutual fund researchers in Chicago.
Its offbeat strategy may make Acorn a good bet for the long haul, said John Rekenthaler, editor of the investment newsletter Morningstar Mutual Funds.
But the double risks of currency shifts and small-stock investing suggest the fund is not for everyone.


Let Us Now Praise A Compromising Man
THE United States Mint is issuing three new commemorative coins honoring James Madison and the Bill of Rights.
Two of them are silver and one is gold.
The silver coins are a half-dollar and a $1 piece, each with a different design.
The gold design is a $5 piece.


One Room, $2,250 a Month; Homeless Return to Hotels, To the Dismay of the Bronx
After 15 months living with his family in the Eden Motel in the northeast corner of the Bronx, Richard James has reluctantly mastered the rhythms of the place.
Violating city regulations, he brought in a toaster oven and disabled the smoke detector so he could cook meatloaf and corn bread for his girlfriend and their two small children.
He has grown accustomed to the ruckus as his neighbors beat each other in the wee hours.
And while he still does not understand why the city pays $2,250 a month for the single room that the four of them share at the Eden, he has gotten used to that idea, too.


It's Not Just How Well You Play the Game . . .
The DALLAS COWBOYS, playing in the Super Bowl today, have always liked to promote themselves as America's Team.
Winning Super Bowl XII in 1979 took them one step further, to America's sports merchandiser.
For the next six years the Cowboys sold more sweat shirts, T-shirts, hats, coffee mugs and other paraphernalia than any other team in professional sports.
At one point, sales of goods decorated with the Cowboys' distinctive star accounted for 30 percent of the National Football League's merchandise sales.


Sports of The Times; The Bills In a Psych Scenario
FOR all the X's and O's in the game plans, the Super Bowl invariably boils down to the A-B-C's of football.
"The idea of football," Vince Lombardi once proclaimed, "is to knock down the players on the other team."


Ho Canada
A Canadian, under the definition stitched together by the Royal Canadian Air Farce, is someone who drinks English beer, eats Chinese food, drives a German car, wears French perfume and Italian clothes, watches American movies on Japanese television sets and still thinks that free trade is not a good idea.
At least half a million people who call themselves Canadians flick on the Government-run CBC Radio for a half-hour every weekend as they listen to the Air Farce, a four-member comedy ensemble, skewer their country and its institutions, sometimes mercilessly, sometimes affectionately.


Auckland
To the Editor: Since Carole van Grondelle, author of "What's Doing in Auckland" (Dec. 27), lives in New Zealand, perhaps it did not occur to her to mention what strikes a visitor from New York: the great friendliness and kindness of New Zealanders.
As I entered the Filling Station, a nice prix-fixe restaurant with a large buffet, a waiter came up to show me to a table.
I told him I first wanted to see if there was a choice of foods for a vegetarian.
He had a brief conference with the manager and came back to tell me for that a vegetarian, dining would be half-price.
The food was good, fresh and plentiful.


4 Upstart Carriers Find Niche at Newark Airport
INSPIRED in part by the economic woes of the major airlines, four new carriers have suddenly made an appearance at Newark International Airport in the last four months.
Most of the newcomers -- three of which are already operating daily jet flights, with the fourth set to begin in March -- offer cheap fares but few frills; some even charge a fee for checking bags and encourage customers to take their own food aboard.
And many of the new entries' employees once worked for airlines that no longer exist.


Corrections
A letter on Jan. 17 about museums in Hong Kong misstated the admission policy of the Tsui Museum of Art.
The museum began charging an entry fee, equivalent to $2.60, when it moved to the Bank of China Building in September.


Gays in Military Would Hurt Combat Efficiency; Plain Talk on AIDS
To the Editor:
The contention by military leaders that repealing the ban against gays and lesbians would "increase the risk of AIDS for heterosexual troops" (news article, Jan. 23) is a gross case of spreading misinformation.


Corrections
The Dining Out column last Sunday about Ciaobella! in Old Greenwich referred incorrectly to an entree.
The serving was oven-roasted salmon, as stated on the menu, not tuna.


Woman Slain By an Officer, Kelly Says
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said last night that a bullet fired by one of his officers killed a woman taken hostage by a gunman Friday morning after a bank robbery on the Upper West Side.
Mr.
Kelly said police ballistics tests determined that the bullet that struck the hostage, Auera Bonnie Vargas, 41, a former New York City school teacher, in the chest was fired from a standard .38-caliber police service revolver.
He said further analysis was needed to determine which officer fired the fatal shot.


The Soul He Threw Away
THE MAN WHO WAS LATE
By Louis Begley. 243 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $21.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Jan. purchasing managers' index
55.9
57.5
Dec. construction spending, percent change
2.1
0.3
Tuesday Leading indicators, percent change 0.8 0.6 Dec. new-home sales, thousands 565 582 Wednesday Late Jan. car sales, in millions, annual rate 5.9 6.1 Thursday Weekly jobless claims, in thousands 364 350 Nonfarm productivity, percent change 3.0 2.5 Friday Jan. unemployment rate, percent 7.3 7.2 Dec. consumer credit, change in billions $1.2 $0.8


Barrasso Practices
Eager to get off the Penguins' sick list, Pittsburgh goaltender TOM BARRASSO resumed practice afer a debilitating bout with chickenpox, and forward MARIO LEMIEUX prepared to begin radiation treatment for Hodgkin's disease.
Barrasso, who declined interview requests, looked pale on the ice on Thursday, and team officials said he would not play before Feb. 8, the Penguins' first game after this week's All-Star Game break.


Officials Say Redrawn Census Area Will Affect Federal Spending
The Federal Government is redefining the boundaries of the New York metropolitan area to include far-flung suburbs, a little-noticed move that Government and health officials say could cost hospitals in New York City $121 million a year and could make thousands of New Jersey and Long Island residents ineligible for Federal housing subsidies.
The change, which lumps Long Island, northern New Jersey and one county in Pennsylvania with New York City in the same primary metropolitan statistical area, has raised a storm of protest among public officials and civic leaders.
They say the new district could affect Federal aid because it will alter statistics, such as the cost of living and labor costs, used in allocation of Federal funds.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball League  MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Activated Lance Blanks, guard, from the injured list.
Placed Gundars Vetra, guard, on the injured list.
Hockey National Hockey League  BOSTON BRUINS -- Recalled Tim Sweeney, right wing, from Providence of the American Hockey League.
American Hockey Association  AHA -- Announced it is suspending operations.
College  WESTERN MONTANA -- Named Bob Beers football coach.


Wall Street; So Long, It's Been Grim to Know You
INVESTORS are often told, when examining a company's performance, be sure to check out its management.
If recent trading of a few stocks is any indication, investors should ask a new question: What's the chance the boss will get dumped?
Take the American Express Company and I.B.M.
In recent months, American Express stock moved up as it searched for a replacement for James D. Robinson 3d, its chairman and chief executive.
Meanwhile, I.B.M. stock kept falling as John F. Akers, that company's head, stressed he would not leave.


No Headline
Let no one believe that there is time to await outside military intervention.
Let no one argue that time is on his side, time to endlessly consult, time to protract the negotiations.
This war has got to be brought to an end.
LORD OWEN, trying to broker peace in the Bosnian conflict.  [ 10:3. ]


Treasures of the Past
Winter Antiques Show preview, Jan. 22.


Workbench From Ordinary Lumber and Basic Tools
A STURDY workbench need not be expensive or hard to build.
The one shown here consists of ordinary construction-grade lumber and can be made with basic carpentry tools.
If you do not have a power circular saw for cutting the sheet materials required, have them cut at the lumberyard.
The cost is about $1 a cut.
Workbench dimensions can be altered to suit individual tastes, although the length and width used in the example permit making the bench with a single 4 x 8-foot sheet of plywood.
The height, which is just under 34 inches, should be comfortable for most people, but increase the length of the legs by one or two inches if you are taller than six feet.


Susan Imbriani, Henry Johnson
Judge and Mrs.
Michael R. Imbriani of Bound Brook, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Imbriani to Henry Pierce Johnson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul O. Johnson of Monroe, N.H.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Imbriani, 27, and her fiance, 26, both graduated from Vassar College.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in the history of art at Williams College.
Her father sits in Somerville as the presiding judge of the criminal division of New Jersey Superior Court for Somerset, Hunterdon and Warren counties.
Her mother, Claire Imbriani, is a painter.


SOME SEE RICHES IN TROUBLED LOANS
For the first time since real estate prices collapsed three years ago, the nation's banks are finding eager buyers for the troubled loans and repossessed property that have pushed many of them to the brink of collapse.
Since 1990, banks had been able to do little to rid themselves of their real estate problems other than watch their $80 billion in bad real estate debts lose value, and wait for prices to rebound.
But now, real estate executives at the largest banks are being deluged with telephone calls from people and companies offering to buy their troubled assets -- property that banks have repossessed, or on which the owners are no longer keeping up their loan payments.
A Chance for a Killing
This developing market means a reprieve not only for the banks but for the Federal Government.
Troubled real estate loans were the main reason several large banks failed in recent years, costing the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation billions of dollars and raising the prospect of a costly Federal bailout.


JAN. 24-30: Supreme Court; Justices Decline to Review Late Death Row Claims
At the Supreme Court last week, the irony could hardly go unnoticed.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist announced that the Court had decided that Federal courts in most circumstances cannot review state trials of inmates who come forward with new and belated evidence of their innocence.


I.R.S. to Help Do Taxes Abroad
American travelers as well as American residents overseas can get help with their tax returns.
During the 1993 tax season the Internal Revenue Service is staffing offices in 13 foreign cities as well as sending tax advisors to visit 100 cities abroad.
The offices and advisers will answer questions, help prepare tax returns and provide assistance with account and refund procedures.
Tax forms are available at the offices.
I.R.S. offices are maintained from November through July in the United States embassies in Bonn, Caracas, London, Mexico City, Nassau, Ottawa, Paris, Riyadh, Rome, Sao Paulo, Singapore, Sydney and Tokyo.
The advisers are sent overseas from this month through April.


No. 3 Tar Heels Taken Apart
Just when it seemed that the balance of power had been clearly established in the Atlantic Coast Conference for this basketball season, third-ranked North Carolina made its first visit to the court of an upper-division league opponent.
The result was a stunning 88-62 upset this afternoon by Wake Forest, which broke open a close game and coasted to victory before 14,475 fans here at Joel Memorial Coliseum.


Gerald Weiss and Melanie Haber
Mr. and Mrs.
Alan W. Haber of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Melanie Beth Haber, to Dr.
Gerald Brett Weiss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry H. Weiss of Kingston, Pa.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Haber, 32, is a graphic designer and computer graphics consultant in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father is a vice president at Shearson Lehman Brothers, the brokerage company, in New York.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 10 about the international shopping binge prompted by the elimination of duties within the European Community misidentified the country where Stella Artois beer is brewed.
It is Belgium, not France.


Arrest at Gracie Mansion
A 34-year-old man was arrested yesterday after he tried to enter Gracie Mansion, the residence of Mayor David N. Dinkins, a police spokesman said.
Jose Borges, of 564 West 160th Street in Washington Heights, was arrested about 10:30 A.M. at the entry gate to the mansion at East End Avenue and 81st Street, said Officer Scott Bloch, a police spokesman.
The Mayor was not home at the time.
"The officer challenged him a few times to find out why he was there," Officer Bloch said, "but he refused to say why and walked through the gate." Mr.
Borges then bit a finger on the right hand of detective August Peano, who was treated for the bite wound and a sprained ankle at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center and released.


Amy Cleary, John Mealey
Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Garrett Cleary of Rochester have announced April wedding plans for their daughter Amy Elizabeth Cleary and John Carroll Mealey, a son of Carroll J. Mealey of Albany and the late Maureen R. Mealey.


Too Many Plastic Pots, Too Few Uses
PLASTIC pots, how they accumulate.
If it is not a pile in the toolshed, it is a stack in the cellar or garage.
Nurseries favor plastic pots because they are lightweight and can be easily packed for shipping.
Their use also makes plants lighter to tote around.
Wholesalers and greenhouse managers like plastic pots, too, for the same reasons, that they can be stored and handled easily.


Pondering an Energy Tax That Can't Please All the People
THE energy tax being considered by the Clinton Administration could reduce the budget deficit, cut oil imports and meet environmental goals.
But before the Administration asks Congress to approve one, it will have to decide which problems it wants cured the most, and whom it is willing to offend in the process.
Last weekend the Treasury Secretary, Lloyd Bentsen, said the Administration was considering a "broad-based energy tax." Experts say that there are three practical ways to levy such a tax.
First is the "B.T.U." tax, in which each unit of energy, no matter what the source, would be taxed at the same rate; second is a sales tax on the fuel used by utilities, industries and individuals ; third is a "carbon tax" based on how much carbon dioxide the fuel's use creates.
Other possibilities -- not so broad-based -- are taxes on oil imports and on gasoline.


Gays in Military Would Hurt Combat Efficiency; A Cost-Effective Move
To the Editor:
As a citizen with military experience, I would like to respond to the statements attributed to Gen.
Colin L. Powell and senior naval officials in your Jan. 23 front-page article on homosexual rights in the military.
I will only comment on this issue as it applies to males.


Corrections
An article last week about the houses in Pasadena designed by Charles and Henry Greene misidentified the institution that operates the Gamble House.
It is the University of Southern California, in conjunction with the city of Pasadena, not the University of California.


Harking Back To the Days of Malaise
REMEMBER the last time that the Democrats controlled both the White House and Capitol Hill?
Then Washington was convulsed by a long and ultimately inconclusive battle over a national energy policy, a fight that pitted region against region.
By opening up the possibility of new energy taxes, the Clinton Administration has inadvertently walked into a possible re-run of that battle, a fight that many on Wall Street seem to have forgotten.
Last week, when J. Bennett Johnston, the Louisiana senator who chairs the Energy Committee, proposed a tax on imported oil aimed at assuring a price of $25 per barrel for domestic oil, the oil stocks went crazy.


Seeking Billy Ripken
The Texas Rangers are pursuing free agent BILLY RIPKEN after second baseman JEFF FRYE suffered a serious knee injury that is expected to keep him out next season.
Frye injured his right knee Tuesday night while jogging.
He will have surgery in about two weeks and be out for six months.


One Term (At a Time) In Hartford
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. has said plenty of times that he might well go down as a one-term leader of Connecticut, but some rumblings this week suggested that he might want to try another go-around when his term expires next year.
When he introduced his new chief of staff, A. Searle Field, to reporters this week, Mr.
Field's first utterance was to say he hoped to work with the administration for the next six years.
Mr.
Weicker stepped up to say that Mr.
Field's first lesson in his new job would be to learn that the boss makes his own announcements and that no such decision about running again had been made.


The High Cost of Living
Dr.
David MacDougall was taking a brief, well-earned nap on a couch in the neurosurgery department at Hermann Hospital in Houston when his beeper sounded at 3 A.M. on July 24, 1988.
It was the emergency room calling and the conversation was brief, a basic recitation of the facts.
The patient was a Latin American male, age 24, who had been shot in a dispute in Madisonville, 85 miles away, at 1:15 A.M.
One bullet had grazed his skull, near his left temple, and the other had entered through the back of his neck, penetrating the spinal cord.
The patient had been taken to a local hospital in a private car.
It was unclear whether he had been able to breathe on his own during that trip or if any lack of oxygen had affected his brain.
When he arrived at the hospital, about six minutes after the shooting, he was given cardiopulmonary resuscitation and put on a ventilator.
After he was stabilized, he was transferred by helicopter to Hermann.
Officially, Hermann's emergency room was full that night, closed to incoming trauma patients.
But this young man was admitted.
The word in the E.R. was that he would probably make a good organ donor.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Fords
WITH its sturdy, unpretentious housing and three-quarter-mile-long business district, the quiet unincorporated town of Fords hasn't changed much in the last 30 years.
One of five sections of Woodbridge Township, in Middlesex County, it has had little new construction since 1960, its business district dates from the early 20th century, the cars in most driveways are 10 years old and half of its residents are over 50.


Who's on First? Procrastinators
To the Sports Editor:
The most institutionalized professional sport, major league baseball, has become the most fractionalized one in the last year as Commissioner Fay Vincent was forced to resign and, as analyzed by Claire Smith ("Baseball Is Being Balkanized," The Times, Jan. 16), Deputy Commissioner Steve Greenberg left his post out of sheer frustration.


Carl Bettag, Susannah Roberts
Dr.
John M. Roberts and Judith Roberts of Oxford, England, have announced the engagement of their daughter Susannah Julia Monica Roberts to Carl Robert Bettag, a son of Tom and Claire Bettag of New York and Washington.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Roberts, 24, is an illustrator who is a partner in Spotted Dog Graphics, a publication-design concern in San Francisco.
She graduated from the Camberwell School of Art and Crafts in London.
Her father heads Merton College at Oxford University and is a professor of history there.
Her mother is a painter.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ALL ABOUT THE SOUND
The state of Long Island Sound and prospects for its future will be examined on Saturday and Sunday in Stamford during a conference organized by the Long Island Sound Watershed Alliance and the National Audubon Society.


Making Use of Dried Fruit in a Variety of Desserts
DRIED fruits aren't just for fruitcake.
They make great desserts, especially during winter when imported fresh fruit can be at a premium.
The other night I had a remarkably moist, rich cake at Follonico, a new Italian restaurant at 6 West 24th Street in Manhattan.
It was made with dried figs.
Alan Tardi, the chef, sent me the recipe, which he said was developed by his pastry chef, Chris Smreker.
The cake can be eaten as a dessert or a snack at any time of day (and it goes very well with a glass of sweet white wine at the end of a meal).


Chilling Isolation, Both On Canvas and Off
The retrospective of Clyfford Still here at the Albright-Knox Art Gallery may not redeem his reputation as one of the most irascible and dislikable men in the history of American art, but it should erase any doubt about whether he was a painter of significance and originality.
There has been some doubt, especially since the last major Still exhibition, in 1979, at the Metropolitan.
It was typical of Still, who tried to control everything having to do with his work, that he had his way about the size of that show (one of the largest ever at the Met devoted to a living artist), as well as the choice of paintings and the content of the catalogue, for which he wrote an essay.
The exhibition was widely regarded as too big, too full of the late and often bombastic pictures that underscored the decline of his career -- too much an expression of the worst of Still himself.


Elvis Costello Laces Punk With Grand Ambitions
Elvis Costello could never be accused of thinking small.
Starting with an assumed name that evokes the king of rock-and-roll himself, Costello has spent much of his career exploring ways of merging his dour, post-punk point of view with grander, more traditional musical forms without compromising his anti-establishment image.
And on his new album, "The Juliet Letters" (Warner Brothers 45180-2; CD and cassette), recorded with the Brodsky Quartet, a well-regarded English string ensemble, the tug between his "higher" aspirations and his scrappy roots has reached a new degree of tautness.
"The Juliet Letters" is a suite of 20 songs -- three of them instrumentals -- that the 38-year-old Costello created collaboratively with the quartet, whose members are in their early 30's.
Recorded like a classical chamber music album, without overdubs, the record is a fascinating study in aural contrasts that takes some getting used to.
Against the ensemble's sumptuous playing, Costello's stringy voice, with its choked intonation and sarcastic undertone, sounds like the wrong instrument for the right record.


With Casino Profits, Indian Tribes Thrive
With such adaptations as "wampum" credit cards and waitresses in skimpy maiden tunics, casino gambling on Indian reservations has become a multibillion-dollar industry that is fueling a renaissance of American Indian tribal fortunes and culture.
A movement that began tentatively in 1980 with a court fight over a Florida bingo hall has spread to at least 17 states and 52 tribes operating more than 100 casino and large-scale bingo sites.
Many more states, including New York, are negotiating casino agreements.


Martha Winnick, Jeffrey Blue
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward B. Winnick of Woodbridge, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Martha Ann Winnick to Jeffrey Todd Blue, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hugh Blue of Laguna Beach, Calif.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Winnick, 29, is an associate manager in licensing for Reebok International Ltd. in Stoughton, Mass.
Her fiance is a marketing manager there.
She graduated from Harvard University and she and her fiance received M.B.A. degrees from Dartmouth College.
Her father is a partner of Winnick, Skolnick, Ruben &amp; Block, a law firm in New Haven.
Her mother, Mary Lou Winnick, is a Selectwoman of Woodbridge.


Point of View: Style of Warfare
Capt.
John Mason and his English did not massacre the Pequots (Nov. 29).
In a massacre a defeated and helpless foe is rounded up and killed en masse.
In the 1637 battle the English chased the Pequots into their fortified village, and rather than go in after them and take heavy losses, they burned the village.
Because of the fire and as the Pequots came out, men, women and children were killed.


Highway Robbery
To the Editor: Readers of your paper should be aware of a problem in the Miami area.
My wife, son and I were driving from Miami Beach to the Miami Airport on I-195 last month.
Three young men in a new car pulled to the right of us and pointed to the rear tire.
They motioned for us to pull off the road.
We pulled onto the side of I-195 to see what was wrong.
Meanwhile the "good Samaritans" had exited I-195 onto the road that runs parallel to the highway.
One of them jumped over the low wire fence, came up to the car and continued pointing at the car.
When I told him that I could find nothing wrong, he suggested that I look on the driver's side.
Then he reached into our car, grabbed my wife's purse and, after a struggle, ran off, but fortunately her wallet fell out and we recovered it.


Trigger Happy


Ocean Driven To Its Knees
To the Sports Editor:
Pete Bodo ("Striped Bass Stirs Bitter Feud," The Times, Jan. 17) touches on a burning issue, but nevertheless one that is only the tip of a much larger and more urgent problem: what to do about the failing health of our marine fisheries?


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Congregation Genesis-Agudas Achim in Tuckahoe misstated the number of female rabbis in Westchester who lead their own congregations.
Besides Susan Grossman, of Tuckahoe, Helene Ferris leads Temple Israel of Northern Westchester in Croton-on-Hudson.


Down but Not Out Off Greenwich:


For Brien Taylor, Beaufort Is 60 Feet 6 Inches From the Bronx
The bumpy dirt road that led to Brien Taylor's mobile home has recently been replaced by a neatly paved cement road that looks curiously out of place in these rural backwoods.
The mobile home was also replaced five months ago by a comfortable two-story home with a two-car garage.
Change.


Publishing At Their Peril
Prime Minister John Major is the latest Briton to be linked in the press to a woman not his wife.
His response was unusual: he sued last week for libel.
His willingness to fight two magazines reflected a growing intolerance in Britain for a press that, in covering the royal family, politicians and business executives, is increasingly accused of irresponsibility and intrusion.


Off Base, Many Sailors Voice Anger Toward Homosexuals
The Commander in Chief had spoken.
But in the first 24 hours after President Clinton eased restrictions on homosexuals in the military, anger, resentment and truculence surged forth in the clubs, bars and stores just outside Mayport Naval Station.
"I'll tell you right off that it stinks," said Brian Grenard, a 25-year-old sailor stationed aboard the carrier Saratoga, as he and two shipmates emerged from the base commissary here.
"There's a general consensus that this goes against the moral grain of what the Navy is about. When you're proud of something, you don't want to see it defaced by something like this."


Profile/Leslie S. Turchin; Riding High on a Low-Cost Strategy
IT seems an unlikely office for any executive, let alone the founder, chairman and chief executive of a company with annual sales of about $350 million.
Well, not an office, really.
More like a desk.
And not a fancy one at that.
Of gray Formica and chipped at the edges, it is indistinguishable from the secretary's next to it.
And, overlooking the sales floor of a bustling appliance and electronics store, it hardly offers privacy.
Indeed, a steel chain is slung across the back when the boss is away so other people won't work there.
But Leslie S. Turchin, the top guy at Tops Appliance City Inc., says that the small desk in his store in Edison, N.J., is far better than the plush space he maintained at the nearby corporate headquarters for a couple of years.
"You have to stay close to reality," he says, jabbing a thumb at the store's chockablock displays of stereos, televisions, washers and microwaves.


The Accents Are Unmistakably Roman
TRENDY Tuscan and homey Sicilian eating spots crowd the Island, but Roman restaurants are a rarity.
La Cisterna in Mineola is the most venerable of the Romans.
The word on La Cisterna came from a native of Rome who said it was "like a trip home." More than our Roman friend feel at home at this 23-year-old veteran.
On a recent Saturday night happily laughing regulars mobbed the restaurant, and the welcoming staff fawned over them.


Kelly Feels Weight of Bills' Frustration
Jim Kelly recalls the fights he had with his five brothers when they were growing up in East Brady, Pa.
They fought over everything -- leftovers, hamburgers, which of them would ride in the front seat of the car.
"Nothing ever came easy in my family," Kelly said.
"The hardest thing was food. If there was leftovers, which there hardly ever was, you'd wrestle with everybody, saying it's my turn to have the extra hamburger."


Concertina Program for Pelham
LOTS of pop musicians have their fan clubs, so why not a group dedicated to a classical composer, guitarist and master of the English concertina?
This accordion-like instrument, now used primarily for folk music, was a favorite at salons and even serious concerts through much of the 19th century.
Giulio Regondi introduced the instrument to London audiences in 1837 and wrote many pieces for it over the next three decades and more (he died in 1872); his modern admirers are the concertina virtuoso Douglas Rogers, the guitarist David Starobin and the baritone Patrick Mason -- or, collectively, the Giulio Regondi Guild.
The guild's program next Sunday at 4 P.M. at the Pelham Art Center will offer various works by Regondi, including several etudes for guitar and two extended pieces for the concertina, "Les Oiseaux" and "Hexameron." More information can be obtained by calling 738-2525.


In a Game of Streaks, Rockets Stand Taller
The effort, the hustle, the heart.
Everything but the victory was there for the Nets against the Houston Rockets tonight.
In a wild game that featured an even wilder fourth quarter, New Jersey lost its second straight, 108-105, before 11,801 at The Summit.
Now, with apologies to the Dallas Cowboys and Buffalo Bills, Nets Coach Chuck Daly said that Monday's game against the lowly Dallas Mavericks is a must.
"For us, that's the Super Bowl when you lose two," Daly said.


Drawings With Ideas Expressed in Personal Symbolism
THERE are packing crates larger than the B. Beamesderfer Gallery, which is in a building that was previously a garage but now qualifies as one of this town's scenic attractions.
The gallery was established four years ago by Evan Brownstein and is currently displaying "Small Drawings," a show of which Mr.
Brownstein is co-curator, with Bob Paige and Deborah Pohl.
Mr.
Paige is the founder of Artists Representing Themselves, a title that shrinks handily into the acronym ART, and Ms.
Pohl is one of the group's members.


One Size Fits All the Way to Middle Age
DROP the personal trainer.
Lose the rice cakes.
No amount of pain is going to maintain that perfect size 8 figure the way a clothing maker can just by fiddling with labels.
As the sylphs of the 60's have aged, clothing sizes have slyly filled out, too.
A baby boomer with three kids can safely brag that she still wears the same size she did in college.
But if she tried to slip into a 20-year-old dress, chances are she couldn't get it over her hips.


Clinton Selects 2 Top Aides To a Boss to Be Announced
President Clinton has picked the No. 2 and No. 3 officials at the Justice Department while he continues to search for No. 1.
An adviser to the White House said on Friday that the President had selected a Washington lawyer, Charles F. C. Ruff, to be Deputy Attorney General.
He has also settled on an Arkansas friend, Webster L. Hubbell, to be Associate Attorney General.


Corrections
A report in the Business Diary column on Jan. 10, about the Honda Motor Company's plans to build a V-8 engine for the Indianapolis 500, misstated the engine's capacity.
Its displacement is 2.65 liters, not 6.5.


In the Region: Connecticut; Office Market Marking Time Into the 90's
THE listless office market in Connecticut these days is generating such remarks as "Stay alive 'til '95" and "Make do 'til 2002." "The best news is no new construction," said Kevin M. Foley, vice president at the Rostenberg-Doern Company commercial real estate offices in Stamford.
Problems with move-outs and downsizing of corporations in Stamford and Greenwich, and the sagging weapons industry in New London, have produced only small differences in recovery rates.
In the major office markets of Fairfield, Hartford, New Haven and New London Counties vacancies hover for a second year around 25 percent.


A NATION DUMPS ITS WRITERS
Katie Hafner's article "A Nation of Readers Dumps Its Writers" (Jan. 10) brought back memories of a visit I made to Stefan Heym in 1973, when I was president of the American Center of P.E.N.
The American delegation was in Berlin for an international conference.
I heard that Heym had been silenced by the East German Government for being too independent and decided to visit him as a show of support.
Accompanied by a friend, I crossed through Checkpoint Charlie, found a taxi and traveled for miles into the countryside.
Heym was living in an elegant villa.
He poured us generous amounts of Johnnie Walker Red Label Scotch and remarked that he bought it for 90 cents a bottle.
He introduced us to his blond, much younger German wife and boasted that he had stolen her from a film director.
Heym stunned us with statistics on the staggering numbers his books sold in East Germany and other Communist countries.
He dismissed his conflict with the Government as "bureaucratic nonsense" that eventually would be resolved.


Taikichiro Mori, Tokyo Developer Rated as Richest Man, Dies at 88
Taikichiro Mori, who became the richest man in the world after he quit his position as an economics professor at the age of 55 and built a real estate empire in downtown Tokyo, died yesterday at a hospital in Tokyo.
He was 88 years old.
He died of heart failure, a spokesman for his Mori Building Company, said.


Bills vs. Cowboys: 2 Teams, 1 Burden
It might take two to tango, but there will be a singular emphasis on Buffalo's burden when the Dallas Cowboys (15-3) tangle with the Bills (14-5) Sunday afternoon in Super Bowl XXVII at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, Calif.
Either Buffalo wins and washes away the specter of two consecutive defeats in the title game, or Buffalo loses and stakes an awful claim as the only team to lose three straight Super Bowls.


Corrections
A chart on Jan. 17 with an article headed "What's Doing in San Francisco" misstated the initial fare for a taxi.
It is $1.70, not $3.50.


Gays in Military Would Hurt Combat Efficiency; Chiefs Aren't Yes Men
To the Editor:
On Jan. 25, President Clinton invited Gen.
Colin Powell, myself and the other Joint Chiefs of Staff to the White House, where he asked to hear our views on lifting the ban on homosexuals in the military (front page, Jan. 26).
We expressed our opposition to lifting the ban candidly, clearly, and respectfully.


Corrections
The Dining Out column last Sunday about Ciaobella! in Old Greenwich referred incorrectly to an entree.
The serving was oven-roasted salmon, as stated on the menu, not tuna.


Ballet's Young Rebels With A Cause
Ballet dancers' brains are in their feet, the saying goes.
Everyone knows that dancers -- or "boys" and "girls," as they are called inside the theater and out -- will do anything to dance, from living lives of strict submission to just about everyone they face in the rehearsal studio or classroom to enduring long hours for less pay than the stagehands, designers and musicians who help get their show on the stage.
But times have changed.
Today's ballet dancers see themselves as valuable professionals with lives of their own.
No longer exotics who trail swan feathers wherever they go, dancers are standing up to management, demanding better wages, benefits and working conditions.
They are asking hard questions of the union that represents them.
And, while still as committed as ever to their careers in dance, they are going to college, marrying, raising children and buying cars and houses, just like the folks next door.


World Markets; Time to Play Foreign Oil Stocks?
AS he shuttled among the OPEC member states last week seeking a strategy for dealing with declining oil prices, the cartel's president, Alirio Parra of Venezuela, found the usually fractious organization remarkably united behind his argument that production would have to be cut.
Mr.
Parra, in fact, seemed to have won a commitment in advance of the OPEC meeting on Feb. 13 in Vienna to cut production by about 1 million barrels a day, to about 24 million barrels, news that some analysts said could underpin a rally in oil stocks.
Even though the members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries routinely cheat on their individual quotas, analysts said that all of the oil-producing nations appeared to be taking seriously the attempt to stabilize or push up prices and halt a slide in their revenues.


Ms. Gschwind, A. C. McCullough
Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Edward Gschwind of Summit, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Theresa Ann Gschwind to Andrew Cuyugan McCullough, a son of Lourdes F. McCullough of London and George M. McCullough of Jacksonboro, S.C.
A May wedding is planned.


On Bloody Day in Sarajevo, Relief at Halt in Talks
When the impasse in the Bosnian peace talks in Geneva became known here today, the common reaction was relief.
Few people appeared to want an end to the war on the terms put forward in Geneva, even if the price of failure in the peace talks is a continuation of the miseries that the fighting is inflicting.


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on page 4 of the Travel section today about the Van Cliburn International Piano Competition misstates the schedule of the preliminary competition.
It is May 22 (10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.), May 23 (2:30 to 10 P.M.) and May 24 to 26 (10 A.M. to 10 P.M.)


Stanching the Loss of Good Jobs
THE layoff announcements come with painful regularity.
Facing stiff competition and disappearing profits, corporate America has been throwing workers overboard, by the millions.
Last week alone, four corporate giants announced that nearly 100,000 jobs -- most of them "good" ones, meaning full-time work with health and pension benefits -- would soon disappear.
The Clinton Administration is debating measures that might slow the process.
But what is really needed, nearly everyone agrees, is a wholesale reorganization of the way Americans work.
The reorganization, emphasizing worker training, flexibility and initiative, is hardly new.
Some American companies have been trying for years to make the transformation.
But now, with the job cutbacks showing no sign of easing off, the need to change is becoming more urgent.
The hope among many public policy experts and executives is that jobs will somehow be saved if companies constantly train and retrain their workers, so that even the lowliest stock clerks learn new tasks while carrying out their old ones in an entrepreneurial and hustling spirit.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
WOMEN IN SPORTS
"New Jersey Celebrates National Girls and Women in Sports Day: Breaking Barriers, 1993" will be the theme for events at Montclair State College on Wednesday and Thursday.


BEST SELLERS: February 7, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
26
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
3
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) Two police detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer in southern California.
3
2
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $23.) The case of a woman journalist charged with killing an eminent novelist: was it self-defense or murder?
4
2
CLOSE COMBAT, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) In the sixth volume of the series "The Corps," there are new challenges for the Marines all over the Pacific in World War II.
5
2
DEVIL'S WALTZ, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware investigates the strange series of illnesses that befalls a small child.
6
3
10
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) After being accused of murdering her employer, a woman tells of killing her husband.
7
4
48
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
8
6
4
TERMINAL, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $21.95.) A medical researcher's pursuit of a treatment for cancer has extraordinary consequences.
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a psychopathic serial killer in Washington.
10
15
31
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
11
10
12
*MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.50.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
12
12
17
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
13
9
23
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
14
11
11
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) A vaquero's adventures.
15
8
12
*THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
21
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
2
26
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales.
3
5
12
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
4
4
34
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
5
3
18
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general.
6
6
20
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
7
8
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $20.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
8
11
3
*LIBERATION MANAGEMENT, by Tom Peters. (Knopf, $27.50.) How American industry is reorganizing to deal with the problems wrought by changing times.
9
10
3
NOBODY NOWHERE, by Donna Williams. (Times Books/Random House, $21.) The autobiography of an autistic woman.
10
8
14
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life of the physicist Richard Feynman.
11
7
34
*TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
12
9
23
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
MAKING THE MUMMIES DANCE, by Thomas Hoving. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The reminiscences of the former director of the Metropolitan Museum Art.
THE WIVES OF HENRY VIII, by Antonia Fraser. (Knopf, $25.) The lives of the six spouses of the 16th-century English monarch.
15
14
9
JFK: Reckless Youth, by Nigel Hamilton. (Random House, $30.) The first 29 years of the 35th President.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
3
EXCESS BAGGAGE, by Judith Sills. (Viking, $21.) A psychologist's counsel about conquering character traits that make one's life harder.
2
1
48
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
3
3
9
CREATING LOVE, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $23.) Ways to establish healthy relationships with other people.
4
4
30
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
5
1
TOUCHPOINTS, by T. Berry Brazelton. (Lawrence/Addison-Wesley, $22.95.) A pediatrician's counsel to parents about their children's emotional and behavioral development.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States.
*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
ANTHONY TROLLOPE, by Victoria Glendinning. (Knopf, $30.) A smart and winning biography, stuffed with details that come from knowing all Trollope's work and taking the Victorians seriously.
THE MAN WHO WAS LATE, by Louis Begley. (Knopf, $21.) Mr.
Begley's icy second novel, thematically a sequel to his "Wartime Lies," deals with a refugee fromc entral Europe, maimed by his experiences, who is driven to self-destruction by a sense of irremediable estrangement and inner contamination.
THE SECREAT OF CARTWHEELS, by Patricia Henley. (Graywolf, paper, $11.) The author's second collection of short stories presents brave and life-worn characters, unsettled, cast loose; but when they are brave enough, they manage to land on their feet.
A TASTE OF POWER: A Black Woman's Story, by Elaine Brown. (Pantheon, $25.) In 1974, Ms.
Brown was appointed leader of the Black Panther Party; hence this chilling, entertaining account of a woman in a movement rich in nihilism, sexism and misogyny.
HIGH NOON IN SOUTHERN AFRICA: Making Peace in a Rough Neighborhood, by Chester A. Crocker. (Norton, $29.95.) A history and defense of his conduct by Ronald Reagan's top diplomat for African affairs, highly circumstantial and highly instructive for those who agree with his policies and those who don't.
FABLES OF THE IRISH INTELLIGENTSIA, By Nina FitzPatrick. (Penguin, paper, $9.) Thirteen bright, vigorous stories, featuring, mostly, poets priests and academics, set in Ireland or whatever the Irish are.
There is lots of drinking and even more talk.
MUSORGSKY: Eight Essays and an Epilogue, by Richard Taruskin. (Princeton University, $35.) Illuminating studies of the composer whose operas are the living stuff of a continuing Russian tragedy.


Cheerleaders Add Hoopla to Girls' Basketball
GIRLS' high school basketball games in the state nowadays bear little resemblance to those of yesteryear when players were restricted to specific zones on the court unlike their male counterparts.
Today, the girls' games often are as fast-paced as those of the boys.
And some of the players are good enough to play on many boys' teams.
Crowds also are bigger, and media coverage has increased.


POSTINGS: Venuses Under Wraps; A Mystery On Sixth Solved
The artist in question is Jim Dine.
But anyone who has walked by the Credit Lyonnais Building in the last month would be excused for thinking Christo was having a show on the Avenue of the Americas.
Mr.
Dine's monumental sculptures, which flank the building at 52d and 53d Streets, disappeared under tarpaulins in late December.
Instead of three bronze versions of the Venus de Milo, passers-by beheld giant, lumpy salamis.


A Network's Shortsightedness?
To the Editor:
Is it possible that ABC is wrong about "Home Improvement" being a male-oriented show, as reported in the article about "Laurie Hill"?
In various episodes, Tim Allen of "Home Improvement" installs a motorized walk-in closet for his wife, flies up to the second-floor window for a kiss and an apology, and is always around for his children to talk to.
Clearly, in spite of (or even because of) being clumsy and power-tool obsessed, this is a woman's man.
CAROL SILVERMAN SAUNDERS Livingston, N. J.


Sartorial Celebrations
At 3 parties, the theme was men's fashion.


Carol Grayson, Richard Hamilton
Carol Patricia Grayson, a daughter of Leslie and Olivia Grayson of Charlottesville, Va., was married yesterday to Richard G. Hamilton, the son of Richard W. and Adele Hamilton of Livingston, N.J.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
Mrs.
Hamilton, 33, is the North American director of marketing and recruiting, in New York, for Insead, the business school in Fontainebleau, France.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father is a professor of international business economics at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville.
Her mother is a former consultant, in Charlottesville, on international business customs.


Auckland
To the Editor: The hospitality and kindness of the Kiwis was illustrated while we stayed at Aspen House in Auckland.
My husband developed a serious arm and neck problem.
Paul, the owner, went out of his way to find a physical therapist and to manifest his concern in many other ways.


The Wine and Dine Congress
Just when Americans thought they had voted for campaign-finance reform, the Democratic Congressional leadership is warming to its old stalls and dodges.
House Speaker Thomas Foley, who promised prompt action to clean up the system that robs voters of competitive elections and binds lawmakers to big money, now wants to delay the effective date of any new laws until January 1995.
Handy timing for the Capitol gang on both sides of the aisle.
It would allow yet another Congressional election run under the current corrupt rules.
That's a gift for incumbents.
But for average citizens, it would be a betrayal.


Panoramic Cameras For the Amateur
PANORAMIC photography will be 150 years old next year, but the format has never been more alive and more accessible than it is today.
For $20 or less, anyone can buy a one-time-use panoramic camera preloaded with film.
A well-made panoramic photograph is an experience that is not just different, but unforgettable.
It is the difference between looking at the world through a porthole and then seeing it outdoors from the bow of the ship.


Foreign Affairs; Euro-Bosnia Games
After a week of travel in Western Europe, one point leaps out: the experienced and sophisticated leaders of these countries are waiting for a man who has been Governor of Arkansas for the last decade to tell them what to do about a place in their backyard called Bosnia and Herzegovina.
No one is more aware of the stench of "ethnic cleansing" in Bosnia and the dangers of a wider Balkan war than Britain, France and the other members of NATO.
But none of them will throw more military chips into the Balkan pot unless President Clinton first orders U.S. air and ground forces to fight by their side.


Smarter but Older Dokes Faces His Last Chance
The child is finally a man.
He is wiser, more grounded, less vulnerable.
He is centered, and by his own method of measuring his life, he is smarter.


Too Many Plastic Pots, Too Few Uses
PLASTIC pots, how they accumulate.
If it is not a pile in the toolshed, it is a stack in the cellar or garage.
Nurseries favor plastic pots because they are lightweight and can be easily packed for shipping.
Their use also makes plants lighter to tote around.
Wholesalers and greenhouse managers like plastic pots, too, for the same reasons, that they can be stored and handled easily.


Jennifer Guterl, Robert Minicucci
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Guterl of Mendham, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Lynne Guterl to Robert Anthony Minicucci Jr., a son of Mr.
Minicucci of Weston, Conn., and Virginia Minicucci of Mount Kisco, N.Y.
A May wedding is planned.


Making Use of Dried Fruit in a Variety of Desserts
DRIED fruits aren't just for fruitcake.
They make great desserts, especially during winter when imported fresh fruit can be at a premium.
The other night I had a remarkably moist, rich cake at Follonico, a new Italian restaurant at 6 West 24th Street in Manhattan.
It was made with dried figs.
Alan Tardi, the chef, sent me the recipe, which he said was developed by his pastry chef, Chris Smreker.
The cake can be eaten as a dessert or a snack at any time of day (and it goes very well with a glass of sweet white wine at the end of a meal).


From Nissan, a New Name, a New Car
LET'S get the bad stuff out of the way first: Nissan's new Altima is like a man who wears suspenders with a belt.
Not content with an air bag in the hub of its steering wheel, the new mid-sized sedan also incorporates those Rube Goldberg mechanical seatbelts that, mercifully, are being phased out everywhere.


History Gives Hibernian Order No Deed to St. Patrick's Parade
To the Editor:
Re "St. Patrick's Parade: It Gets Worse" (editorial, Jan. 12):
The first St.
Patrick's Day procession in New York was held March 17, 1762, 14 years before the American Revolution.
It predated the first such parade in Ireland by nearly 150 years.


Defending Izzy
To the Editor:
I loved Izzy and I treasure the memory of him.
I'm his kid brother.
That's why, though I have not yet read Robert Cottrell's biography, I must take to task this Mr.
Judis, who has written what to me is not a review but just another right-wing attack on I. F. Stone.


It's 1993, and Europe Still Has Borders
SO often carried away by its dreams of regional unity, the European Community had at least agreed on one thing: on Jan. 1, 1993, immigration controls inside the 12-nation zone would be removed.
People entering the perimeter of the community from, say, New York or Lagos would still be checked.
But, once inside, travelers -- community citizens or not -- could hop from London to Athens or drive from Berlin to Lisbon without ever showing a passport.
That was the plan -- and it may still happen.
In fact, it may even begin to happen later this year.
But it certainly did not happen on Jan. 1.
The simplest explanation is that everything is complicated in Europe these days.
But Europeans have good reason to feel disappointed.
The community is now a customs-free market in which goods, services and capital can move freely.
People cannot.


Prague's Jewish Heritage
THE rooftop of Prague's Jewish Town Hall is dominated by a large clock; on its face are Hebrew letters instead of numbers, and hands that run backward.
The building itself, which has a bright pink, stylized Baroque facade and a cupola-topped tower, dates to the 16th century, but is still the center of community life for the 2,000 or so Jews who live in Prague today -- with a kosher restaurant on its ground floor, offices and function rooms upstairs and bulletin boards fluttering with notices of events.
Other historic buildings nearby, including several ancient synagogues, were incorporated into the Jewish Museum, originally founded in 1906, after the Holocaust.
The buildings are exhibitions in themselves, but also house the museum's extraordinary collection of precious textiles, gold and silver ritual objects, manuscripts and artwork that bear breathtaking yet painful witness to the splendor of the Jewish past.
The museum owes its unparalleled collection -- parts of which toured the United States in the 1980's as the "Precious Legacy" exhibition -- to a cruel twist of history.
The bulk of the exhibits are treasures and artifacts looted by the Nazis from 153 destroyed Czech Jewish communities and brought to Prague for what they planned as a "museum of an extinct race." The city was home to more than 35,000 Jews at the outbreak of the war; most of them perished.


BENEFITS
Ella Fitzgerald Celebration
TUESDAY -- Ella Fitzgerald is 75, and a black-tie celebration in her honor will reverberate through three of the city's landmarks.
The evening, which will benefit the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, of the New York Public Library, starts at 6:30 P.M. with cocktails at the Museum of Modern Art.
A performance by Harry Belafonte, Nancy Wilson and others in tribute to Miss Fitzgerald , will begins at 7:30 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
Dinner and dancing will follow at the Roseland Ballroom, starting at 9 P.M.
The singer is unable to attend the tribute.
Tickets, $500, or $100 for reception and performance, or $35 for the performance alone, from (212) 491-2259.


From Well-Known Givers, Help for Neediest Fund
New York Mets fans may remember it as a nasty episode in a particularly demoralizing fifth-place season.
During a game last September, the outfielder Vince Coleman became so incensed after striking out that he began arguing with an umpire and then got into a shoving match with his manager, Jeff Torborg.
When the Mets punished Mr.
Coleman by suspending him for two days without pay, he filed a grievance with the players' union and the two sides went to arbitration.
But after the season, the dispute was settled.
The winner was The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Diana J. Lafer, Eric Mendelsohn
Fred and Dr.
Barbara Lafer of Wayne, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Diana Joan Lafer to Eric Janvrin Mendelsohn, the son of Louis and Kathleen Mendelsohn of Bloomfield, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.
Dr.
Lafer, 28, is a veterinarian in Simsbury, Conn.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received a doctor of veterinary medicine degree from Cornell University.
Her father is a senior vice president and corporate secretary of Automatic Data Processing Inc., a payroll service company in Roseland, N.J.
Her mother is a psychotherapist in Wayne.


Who Killed Privacy?
I DON'T KNOW ABOUT YOU, BUT MY LIFE HAS not been significantly improved by watching any of the three versions of the Amy Fisher story (one version fewer than the story of Jesus), or by learning of the doings of "Dallas" in the palace, or by seeing Fergie topless or Woody humorless, or even -- hard as this may be to swallow -- by photographs surreptitiously taken of Chelsea Clinton's cat, Socks.
I could, if need be, spend the rest of my days without learning one more fact about Socks or any of those other subjects. (I guess the royals aren't subjects.) I am out of things, of course.
This is the age where everything is known, everything told.
"If I had to choose my place of birth," Rousseau exclaimed in a fit of nonsense, "I would have chosen a state in which everyone knew everyone else, so that neither the obscure tactics of vice nor the modesty of virtue could have escaped public scrutiny and judgment." Jean-Jacques, say bonjour to Ron Galella.


The Burton Snowboard
WHAT: A curious, cross-pollination of surfboard, ski and skateboard.
A wood-core, fiberglass-wrapped board that is 5 to 6 feet long and 6 to 11 inches wide.
Bindings strap the feet in, one foot in front of the other, toes turned inward.
Cost: $375 to $600.
WHO'S DOING IT: Industry estimates vary, but the majority of snowboarders are teen-agers or in their 20's.
Thirty-eight percent of snowboarders are between 6 and 18, said Lee Crane, managing editor of "Transworld Snowboard Magazine," in Oceanside, Calif.
"It's like rock 'n' roll: kids are in the vanguard." Of late, it's been taken up by those in their fourth decade.


In Sound, a Little Bit Can Mean a Lot
By and large an alert and curious lot, audiophiles are the sort of people who look under the hood.
They want to understand the machinery.
But digital technology is growing ever more complex.
And at last month's Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, where the latest gadgetry was trotted out for its official debut in the trade, even seasoned audio merchants admitted they no longer really understood some of their products.
It was a lot easier in the days of Edison.
From the tip of the needle to the mouth of the tin horn, the path of the sound was plain and plausible.
In fact, the early phonograph was little more than a glorified speaking tube -- the kind used before the invention of the telephone.


From Russia To Serbia, A Current Of Sympathy
THE Balkans may not be quite so burning an issue for the Russians as in czarist days, when the stirrings of the south Slavs drew Russia into two major wars.
But even with a surfeit of its own problems, Moscow has been drawn into the fray.
It joined, reluctantly, in international sanctions against the Serbs, and Russian soldiers have donned blue United Nations peacekeeping berets.
But almost from the outset, right-wing Russian nationalists pounced on the Government's action as another humiliating submission to the West and as a betrayal of Russia's traditional responsibility for fellow Orthodox Slavs in the Balkans.
Last week, President Boris N. Yeltsin himself expressed irritation over Washington's tendency to "dictate terms" in the Balkans and Iraq, and his Foreign Ministry warned that it might use its permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council to seek sanctions also against the Croatians.


How the Neuberger Is Bidding for More Attention
THE little captain rows his wooden boat through waves of foam; three friends are caught in a moment of conversation, and Marilyn Monroe -- in her Abstract Expressionist incarnation -- beckons from a quiet corner.
An eclectic group inhabits the galleries of the Neuberger Museum of Art on the campus of the State University of New York here.
In addition to the figures above, painted by the American masters Philip Evergood, Milton Avery and Willem de Kooning, respectively, there are also Romare Bearden's melon eaters, Ben Shahn's accordion player, Jacob Lawrence's evangelists and many other subjects vying for the visitor's eye.


POSTINGS: Yacht Club Restoration; Back to the Brows
It may be true that what goes up must come down, but sometimes what comes down will go up again.
At the New York Yacht Club, on 44th Street west of Fifth Avenue, an ornamental wooden pergola that was part of the original turn-of-the-century design was removed several decades ago, perhaps in the 50's.
Now it is returning, via a faithful reproduction of the original.
"It's part of restoring the building to its original 1905 condition," said Geoff Grout, head of the club's house committee.
"The pergola really represents the eyebrows on the building."


Susan Scanlon, Mark Wilding
Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew J. Scanlon of Williamsburg, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Naomi Scanlon to Mark Edward Wilding, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph W. Wilding of Columbia, Md.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Scanlon, 23, is a teacher at the Calvert County Middle School in Prince Frederick, Md.
She graduated from the College of Notre Dame of Maryland.
Her father, now retired, was a senior vice president and treasurer of the Coca-Cola Bottling Company of New York, in Greenwich, Conn.


Death Row Ruling Mocks Marshall's Memory
To the Editor:
It is a sad irony that the Supreme Court's death penalty decision holding that evidence of innocence need not be evaluated in post-trial appeals (front page, Jan. 26) comes as we remember a man who would have found this ruling abhorrent.


Amy D. Sibeud, Alfred Morgan 4th
Mr. and Mrs.
Jacques P. Sibeud of Water Mill, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Amy Dominique Sibeud to Alfred Young Morgan 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morgan 3d of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Sibeud is an associate in the investor relations department of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, the investment banking company, in New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father, now retired, was a vice president of Rhone-Poulenc Inc., a manker of chemicals and textiles in Princeton, N.J.


Mencken Unsealed
MY LIFE AS AUTHOR AND EDITOR
By H. L. Mencken. Edited by Jonathan Yardley. 450 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $30.


The Justice With the Stories That Moved the World
LAST August, in one of his final public appearances, retired Justice Thurgood Marshall was in a familiar, favorite posture: He was among friends, telling stories about his early days in practice.
His story this night took place in a pool room in the black section of Little Rock, at a time he described only as "way back."
"This young man, he was in his twenties, Negro, in his overalls," Justice Marshall recalled.
"And he came up to me, and he said, 'Lawyer, do you know about this coming-back after you die?' And I said, 'Reincarnation?' And he said, 'I don't know what the name is, but do you know anything about it?' And I said, 'Nope. I heard about it.' He says, 'Well, if ever you find anything about it, tell 'em for me, when I come back in the next world, I don't care whether it's a man or woman, human or goat, animal or what.
Just let it be white.
' "


Making Use of Dried Fruit in a Variety of Desserts
DRIED fruits aren't just for fruitcake.
They make great desserts, especially during winter when imported fresh fruit can be at a premium.
The other night I had a remarkably moist, rich cake at Follonico, a new Italian restaurant at 6 West 24th Street in Manhattan.
It was made with dried figs.
Alan Tardi, the chef, sent me the recipe, which he said was developed by his pastry chef, Chris Smreker.
The cake can be eaten as a dessert or a snack at any time of day (and it goes very well with a glass of sweet white wine at the end of a meal).


India Appeals for Help to Clean Up Major Oil Spill
India today called for international assistance to fight large oil slicks from a leaking Danish supertanker that threaten a rich reserve of marine life in the Bay of Bengal.
"I needed a response yesterday and I need it urgently in the next hours and days," said Environment Minister Kamal Nath, who surveyed the slicks on Friday.
He said Coast Guard planes were spraying dispersants.


Compromise Dampens Republican Hopes on Ban
Efforts by Republicans in the Senate to retain a ban on homosexuals in the military have apparently lost momentum since President Clinton announced a compromise Friday that delays a final resolution of the issue for six months.
Saying they have a winning political issue, Senate Republicans said they still hope to add an amendment codifying the current ban to legislation providing family and medical leave.
But they acknowledged that they lost crucial votes for such an effort when Mr.
Clinton and Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia, reached an agreement in which the armed forces will stop asking recruits about sexual orientation while continuing discharge proceedings for homosexuals until the Pentagon drafts a new policy in six months.


County's Data Systems At Yonkers's Fingertips
YONKERS joined the high-technology world last week as city and county officials announced an agreement to share Westchester County's advanced computer technologies and electronic systems in White Plains.
Access to the system will allow city employees to analyze census data, tax statistics and other information on computerized "smart maps"; permit city engineers to instantly redraft drawings and blueprints; institute desktop publishing, and store information electronically.


Scoffing at Its Skeptics, Buffalo Prepares for University Games
The last time this city held a major international event, the 1901 Pan-American Exposition, it ended in a catastrophe: President William McKinley was assassinated.
Now Buffalo is trying again.
It is scrambling to prepare for the July 8 opening of the World University Games, the largest athletic event in the world this year.
And there are predictions of a disaster, once again.


NOTES
Bianca Jagger, whose political activism has focused mostly on her native Nicaragua, is considering traveling to Bosnia and Herzegovina to call attention to the plight of women raped by Serbian soldiers.
Ms.
Jagger would make the trip under the auspices of Equality Now, a human-rights organization in New York, said a person who has spoken to her.
"The group is designed to take up human rights violations that have disproportionate impact on women," said Jessica Neuwirth, the director of Equality Now.
"We are very concerned about the mass rape and forced pregnancy that has taken place over the past year."


Wintry Scenes and Looking-Glass Worlds
THE ideal time for taking in a Sylvia Plimack Mangold show is when the weather is clear and cold and trees congregate into taupe-color masses.
At the moment, those visiting the Neuberger Museum on the State University of New York campus here, will likely do so under such conditions; they will certainly find them duplicated in Mrs.
Mangold's retrospective of works on paper, done in the last 20 years or so.


Political Memo; G.O.P. Seeks Identity and a Message
Intent on erasing the bad memories from the Houston convention and the November election, the Republican Party met here in search of its identity.
But instead of departing today with new resolve, party leaders found themselves as balkanized by ideological disputes as the Democrats were after Jimmy Carter lost the White House in 1980.


Discombobulating Callas
To the Editor:
In his review of Michael Scott's "Maria Mene ghini Callas" (Dec. 27), William Weaver states that for the most important period of her life "the famous soprano was Signora Meneghini," and that Mr.
Scott rightly included her married name in the title of his book.
Both gentlemen may be interested in the following story:


How the Hat From Southport Went to the Inaugural
SO how did the First Lady-to-be in Little Rock, Ark., connect with a young hat designer from Southport, Conn.?
Hillary Rodham Clinton's inaugural hat, the cadet blue one that nearly everybody had an opinion about, was designed by 30-year-old Darcy Creech, who still cannot believe hers was the chosen one.


Funny or Dour, It's Depression All Right
ADMONITIONS, ADMONITIONS.
In "The Last Yankee," Arthur Miller suggests that our fabled optimism is all but moribund, the country is going catatonic and we'd better get control of ourselves fast.
At the same time, here is Paul Rudnick in "Jeffrey," urging us to remember that even in an age of AIDS, life is for living.


JAN. 24-30: A Quick Study; A Diplomat's Diplomat Goes to Russia
Thomas R. Pickering, one of only three Foreign Service officers with the rank of career ambassador -- the diplomatic equivalent of a four-star general -- was chosen Ambassador to Russia last week.
Mr.
Pickering, fluent in French, Spanish, Swahili, Arabic and Hebrew, speaks no Russian and has no experience in Russian affairs.
But he is expected to make up in enthusiasm and brilliance what he lacks in experience.


Recent Sales
Bethany, Conn.  $149,000
207 Schaffer Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 50-year-old ranch; paneled living room, country kitchen, new roof, 0.50 acre; taxes $2,156.
Deep River, Conn.  $115,000
39 Union Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 67-year-old bungalow; front porch, 1-car garage, 50- by 154-foot lot;taxes $1,673.
Old Lyme Conn.  $105,000
281 Mile Creek Road  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 73-year-old Cape Cod; circular drive, h/w floors, eat-in kitchen, 1.5 acres; taxes $1,500.
Mount Kisco, N.Y.  $505,000
1 Peck Road 4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 31-year-old ranch; fireplace, dining room, family room, playroom, workshop, barn, 1.4 acres; taxes $9,262.
Pleasantville, N.Y.  $345,000
141 Old Farm Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 36-year-old split-level; den, family room, 2 fireplaces, atrium, 1.2 acres; taxes $6,325.
White Plains, N.Y.  $279,000
116 Grandview Avenue  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 66-year-old Norman Tudor; den, fireplace, dining room, pantry, family room; taxes $2,767.
OTHER AREAS East Northport, L.I.  $175,000
44 Circle Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 2-car garage, pool; taxes $3,800.
Hauppauge, L.I.  $325.000
3 Barnaby Court  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, skylights, 1 acre, 2-car garage; taxes $5,200.
Jackson, N.J.  $117,000
56 Woodland Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 14-year-old bi-level; c/a, w/w carpeting, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,155.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
ALASKAN COMEDY-DRAMA
"Brilliant Traces," a comedy-drama by Cindy Lou Johnson set in the wilds of Alaska, is the first work to be presented by Extremity Productions at the newly reopened Wildcliff Center for the Arts in New Rochelle.
It will run from Thursday through Feb. 13.


Comparing School Spending and Taxes
TWO researchers who studied schools in Nassau County find that with few exceptions the smaller the school districts, the whiter and wealthier they are and the more money they spend per student, with less tax effort.
The researchers, Drs.
Walter Mathews, university dean of academic affairs at Long Island University, and Donald Weinstein, associate professor of educational leadership and administration at C. W. Post College, conducted their study, "A Closer Look at Long Island's Public Schools," as an outgrowth of their interest in the consolidation of school districts and equity in financing, two issues that have received widespread attention.


When a Crisis Sets In, Nicholls Puts Family First
Sometimes, the baby opens his eyes and stares up at his father.
At least, it seems that way.
Unlike his brother and sister, Jack has blue eyes and when he opens them, Bernie Nicholls feels, for a moment, like he hasn't lost his youngest son.
It is false hope.
Baby Jack cannot see his father.
He cannot feel.
He cannot hear.
He will never walk or talk.
Born with Down's syndrome, a genetic affliction resulting from one too many chromosomes, Jack Nicholls was only three and a half pounds at birth.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday with an article about the Presidents' places in history illustrated the 1992 approval ratings of two former Presidents incorrectly.
The numbers, a 50 percent approval rating for Jimmy Carter and 48 percent for Ronald Reagan, were correct, but the bars showing the values were not proportioned correctly.


Spanish Premier Joins Fray as Party Slumps
With the popularity of his Socialist Party badly eroded by corruption scandals, rising unemployment and an economic slump, Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez has uncharacteristically joined the political fray in preparation for general elections this fall.
Given his reputation for reclusion, his decision to assume direct control of the party this week was the clearest sign to date that after 10 years in power, the Socialists are in trouble, plagued as much by internal squabbles as by waning public confidence.


Mr. Chicken's Lean Pay Scales
To the Editor:
I was very impressed with Don Tyson and his accomplishments after reading "Mr. Chicken Goes to Washington" (Jan. 17).
However, pay his laborers an average of $8 an hour including fringe benefits?
It is fantastic that he provides so many jobs in such a poor area, but please don't ask us to believe that this is a generous rate of pay.
If I am not mistaken it would work out to somewhere above minimum wage and below the poverty line when the cost of all "fringe benefits" is excluded from the $8 an hour rate.


Cheerleaders Add Hoopla to Girls' Basketball
GIRLS' high school basketball games in the state nowadays bear little resemblance to those of yesteryear when players were restricted to specific zones on the court unlike their male counterparts.
Today, the girls' games often are as fast-paced as those of the boys.
And some of the players are good enough to play on many boys' teams.
Crowds also are bigger, and media coverage has increased.


THE MORNING-AFTER PILL
Jan Hoffman clearly framed the complex problems associated with the so-called morning-after pill.


Ellen O'Toole, J. C. Hoeffel
Mr. and Mrs.
John E. O'Toole of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Ellen Treadway O'Toole to J. Christopher Hoeffel, the son of Jan C. Hoeffel of San Francisco and Martina Y. Hoeffel of Huntington, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss O'Toole is the store communications coordinator for Ann Taylor Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father is president of the American Association of Advertising Agencies, the trade association in New York.


Teen-Age Gangs Are Inflicting Lethal Violence on Small Cities
Around the intersection of 15th and Oak in the center of the town that just gave the country a President, the streets are lined with trees and small wooden houses with yards, the picture of an older Southern neighborhood.
On a cold winter's day the sidewalks are empty except for a cluster of teen-agers who melt away as two strangers cruise by slowly.
The placid-looking corner is the city's most violent spot.
With three killings there in four months last year, all in broad daylight, and six there or nearby in two years, it may be as dangerous as any place in America.
Those disappearing teen-agers, it turns out, are gang members selling crack, and this is territory where rival gangs cross paths.


Q and A
Chateaus by Wheelchair
Q.
Of the chateaus in the Loire Valley, are some accessible for wheelchair users? -- Steve Gregory, Birmingham, Ala.


Scince Fiction
The novels and short stories of Kim Stanley Robinson constitute one of the most impressive bodies of work in modern science fiction.
In books like "The Gold Coast" (1988) and "Pacific Edge" (1990) he virtually invented a new kind of science fiction, in which characters as richly drawn as any in conventional fiction inhabit near-future worlds evoked with as much verisimilitude as the contemporary settings of any conventional novel.
This is even more difficult than it sounds.
Just how difficult can be seen in Mr.
Robinson's RED MARS (Spectra/Bantam, cloth, $22.95; paper, $11.95).
As always, Mr.
Robinson is admirably ambitious; this 519-page novel is the first of a projected trilogy about the colonization of Mars.
In the last decade or so, space probes and other forms of scientific surveillance have greatly extended our knowledge of Earth's second-nearest neighbor in the solar system.
The Mars of earlier science fiction -- the Mars of H. G. Wells or Edgar Rice Burroughs or Ray Bradbury -- has been relegated to myth and fantasy.
Without having set foot on Mars, we know a great deal about the atmosphere and surface of the planet.
Mr.
Robinson has thoroughly digested this material and woven it into the fabric of his narrative, which deals with the settlement of Mars by a hundred carefully chosen scientists who fight among themselves over the future of the planet, only to see all their visions overwhelmed by the needs and greed of later settlers.


On the Farm, Stress Grows Like a Weed
OLD M'DONALD had the farm, Mrs.
McDonald had the stress.
Here a farm stand to run.
There a tax form to fill out.
Everywhere a freshly baked meal to make.
Eee-i, eee-i . . .
Yikes.
It's enough to send a farmer's wife to a stress-management workshop.
"Besides running the farm stand and cooking, I do all the bookkeeping," said Lolly Rottkamp of Calverton, a farmer's wife "forever." No wonder that Mrs.
Rottkamp was at a stress workshop at the Long Island Agricultural Forum in Riverhead.
"All those legal papers," she said.
"That's where the stress comes in. You get some tax form from New York State, and the anxiety builds up."


Workbench From Ordinary Lumber and Basic Tools
A STURDY workbench need not be expensive or hard to build.
The one shown here consists of ordinary construction-grade lumber and can be made with basic carpentry tools.
If you do not have a power circular saw for cutting the sheet materials required, have them cut at the lumberyard.
The cost is about $1 a cut.
Workbench dimensions can be altered to suit individual tastes, although the length and width used in the example permit making the bench with a single 4 x 8-foot sheet of plywood.
The height, which is just under 34 inches, should be comfortable for most people, but increase the length of the legs by one or two inches if you are taller than six feet.


INSIDE
Officer's Shot Killed Woman
The New York City Police Commissioner said a bullet fired by a police officer killed a hostage Friday after a Manhattan bank robbery.
Page 35.
Expensive Change of Map
The Government is redefining the New York metropolitan area, which could cost hospitals in New York City $121 million a year.
Page 35. 2 Israelis Killed in Ambush
Two soldiers were killed in the Gaza Strip, and officials said this should remind the world why Israel deported over 400 Palestinians.
Page 7.
Richest Man Dies in Japan
Taikichiro Mori, who became the world's richest man by resigning as an economics professor to develop real estate in Tokyo, was 88.
Page 44.
American Express Surprise
After a week of corporate turmoil, James D. Robinson 3d resigned as chairman of American Express and also gave up posts at its Shearson Lehman Brothers affiliate.
Page 32.


Death of a Gay Sailor: A Lethal Beating Overseas Brings Questions and Fear
Six days before the U.S.S.
Belleau Wood arrived at this sleepy American naval base last Sept. 30, Allen R. Schindler, a 22-year-old radioman, ended months of inner turmoil and told his commander that he was homosexual.
As expected, he was informed that he would be discharged, but he wrote in his diary of his relief at finally showing his "true self."
After being confined to ship for a month, Mr.
Schindler was allowed to go ashore in late October, and he quickly made his way to the knot of pubs known here as Sailor Town.
There, he met several American entertainers, some gay, who were singers and dancers at a nearby theme park.
He spoke of his homosexuality and the harassment he was enduring from other sailors as word of his sexual orientation spread.


Bridge and Tunnel Tolls Go Up


Making Use of Dried Fruit in a Variety of Desserts
DRIED fruits aren't just for fruitcake.
They make great desserts, especially during winter when imported fresh fruit can be at a premium.
The other night I had a remarkably moist, rich cake at Follonico, a new Italian restaurant at 6 West 24th Street in Manhattan.
It was made with dried figs.
Alan Tardi, the chef, sent me the recipe, which he said was developed by his pastry chef, Chris Smreker.
The cake can be eaten as a dessert or a snack at any time of day (and it goes very well with a glass of sweet white wine at the end of a meal).


Amtrak Begins High-Speed Shuttle Run Tomorrow
Amtrak's new high-speed train will begin commercial service on Monday between New York and Washington, making a single round trip every weekday.
But though the train can go 30 miles an hour faster than the Metroliner it replaces, it will not arrive any sooner.
Passengers who leave Washington's Union Station on the noon run will board a Swedish-built X-2000, whose special steering and suspension enable it to take curves at high speeds.


Preseason Pick Is Vindicated
To the Sports Editor:
George Vecsey and Malcolm Moran were much too modest in their articles on Alabama's winning the national college football championship appearing in The Times on Jan. 3.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Congregation Genesis-Agudas Achim in Tuckahoe misstated the number of female rabbis in Westchester who lead their own congregations.
Besides Susan Grossman, of Tuckahoe, Helene Ferris leads Temple Israel of Northern Westchester in Croton-on-Hudson.


Linda Harris, Michael Paolillo
LINDA HARRIS, 41, and Michael Paolillo, 33, call themselves "finish-line people." Volunteers for the New York Road Runners Club, they are among those who time, corral and congratulate runners at the end of races that are organized by the club.
They met two years ago while working at the finish line of the Chemical Bank Corporate Challenge Championship race on Park Avenue.
The most faithful and hard-core Road Runners Club volunteers, including Ms.
Harris and Mr.
Paolillo, are a close-knit group of people who regularly congregate at the Jackson Hole Restaurant on Madison Avenue and East 91st Street after races in Central Park.
They also take camping, canoeing and apple-picking trips together, and occasionally two will become yet another "Road Runners couple." One woman in the group, Keelin Smith, described the romantic scene among volunteers.


School Helps Children With Children
TANYA G. is 14 years old and she's pregnant.
She waited two months for an appointment at a prenatal clinic.
Now her history teacher is giving the class a midterm examination the same afternoon.
Does Tanya cut class or skip the doctor? (To protect Tanya from ostracism, her story was related on condition that her last name not be used.)
In Port Chester, some pregnant teen-agers and those with small children have a third option, thanks to a collaborative effort by the local high school and a group of social service agencies.
Advocates for the population known to social workers as "children with children" will help them negotiate workable solutions to what seem like insurmountable problems.


Friends, Romans . . .
To the Sports Editor:
III cheers for Ira Berkow's quiet rebellion against the increasingly idiotic persistence of Roman numeralizing Super Bowls.


Concertina Program for Pelham
LOTS of pop musicians have their fan clubs, so why not a group dedicated to a classical composer, guitarist and master of the English concertina?
This accordion-like instrument, now used primarily for folk music, was a favorite at salons and even serious concerts through much of the 19th century.
Giulio Regondi introduced the instrument to London audiences in 1837 and wrote many pieces for it over the next three decades and more (he died in 1872); his modern admirers are the concertina virtuoso Douglas Rogers, the guitarist David Starobin and the baritone Patrick Mason -- or, collectively, the Giulio Regondi Guild.
The guild's program next Sunday at 4 P.M. at the Pelham Art Center will offer various works by Regondi, including several etudes for guitar and two extended pieces for the concertina, "Les Oiseaux" and "Hexameron." More information can be obtained by calling 738-2525.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ALL ABOUT THE SOUND
The state of Long Island Sound and prospects for its future will be examined on Saturday and Sunday in Stamford during a conference organized by the Long Island Sound Watershed Alliance and the National Audubon Society.


Streetscapes: The Grand Hotel; A Landmark Painted Without Permission
TO irretrievably damage a landmark and then get away with it -- you'd have to call that a perfect crime.
But that's just what may happen at the 1868 Grand Hotel at the southeast corner of 31st Street and Broadway.
The building was designated a landmark in 1979, in large part because of its imposing marble facade and distinctive slate mansard roof -- both of which the owner painted, without permission, three years ago.
The Landmarks Preservation Commission has already given up on requiring the removal of the paint on the mansard roof to avoid damage to the slate and it may well have to do the same with the marble facade.


Ready-Made Collections For a Hefty Price
Traditionally, dealers in ancient and medieval art maintain a low profile.
But as Torkom Demirjian has proved many times at Ariadne Galleries, there is another way.
As a fledgling dealer in 1979, he opened Ariadne with an address in one of the busiest areas of the art trade (970 Madison Avenue, at 76th Street).
His exhibitions, documented by lavish catalogues, are among the more ambitious and heavily advertised in the antiquities field.
And he has sold some controversial material amid much publicity.
Last week, for example, an out-of-court settlement was reached in the case of the Roman bronzes that the dealer had handled in 1988, about six years after they weresurreptitiously excavated from an ancient site in Suffolk, England.
"The settlement is a victory," said John Browning, the Icklingham farmer who, with his mother, Rosemary, sued for the return of the antiquities, which they claimed were stolen from their property.
"The bronzes will be eventually returned to this country where they belong."


THE MORNING-AFTER PILL
As a high-school teacher and the mother of two daughters, I am deeply concerned about the pressures brought to bear on young teen-age girls to have sex before they are ready to take responsibility for preventing pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases.
I try to keep informed about these issues, but until I read Jan Hoffman's article "The Morning-After Pill: A Well-Kept Secret" (Jan. 10), I was unaware of this method of preventing pregnancy.
I will pass this invaluable information on to as many people as I can: word of mouth may be able to help counteract the enforced silence of Title X clinics.


Tory Robinson, W. S. Macklowe
Mr. and Mrs.
I.
E.
Robinson of Valley Forge, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Tory Ann Robinson, to William S. Macklowe, the son of Harry Macklowe, the real-estate developer, and Linda Macklowe of New York.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Robinson is an associate in the special projects advertising division of Polo Ralph Lauren in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is an investor in Philadelphia.
Her mother, Reva Robinson, is the founder and president of Capers, a special-events planning concern in Philadelphia.


Cauthen Steps In
STEVE CAUTHEN was back in the winner's circle in Kentucky, where his career as a jockey started in the 1970's.
Moregombo, owned by Cauthen's mother, MYRA, won the 10th race at Turfway Park on Friday night, paying $62.20 for $2 to win.


Workbench From Ordinary Lumber and Basic Tools
A STURDY workbench need not be expensive or hard to build.
The one shown here consists of ordinary construction-grade lumber and can be made with basic carpentry tools.
If you do not have a power circular saw for cutting the sheet materials required, have them cut at the lumberyard.
The cost is about $1 a cut.
Workbench dimensions can be altered to suit individual tastes, although the length and width used in the example permit making the bench with a single 4 x 8-foot sheet of plywood.
The height, which is just under 34 inches, should be comfortable for most people, but increase the length of the legs by one or two inches if you are taller than six feet.


U.N. Weapons Inspectors End Iraqi Mission
United Nations nuclear weapons inspectors completed a weeklong mission today in an exercise that was seen as a test of Baghdad's intentions toward compliance with terms of the cease-fire that ended the Persian Gulf war.
"They are providing us all the necessary assistance," said Maurizio Zifferero, an Italian who heads the United Nations team.
"And the arrangements are efficient and effective."


Midweek Deals At Ski Lodges
Midweek skiers generally find the slopes less crowded and prices lower.
This winter, some resorts are offering lodging and skiing packages at particularly low prices with two-night minimum stays required.
In COLORADO, for the rest of the season, the Tamarron at Durango Lodge, (800) 678-1000 or (303) 259-2000, offers accommodations and daily lift tickets at the Purgatory-Durango ski area for $75 a person a night, double occupancy.
The rate also includes breakfast, use of the fitness center and swimming pool and free shuttle to the slopes.
Children aged 17 and under can stay free in a room with adults.


Maria Pedemonti, Nicholas Clifford
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Pedemonti of Wethersfield, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Maria Lisa Pedemonti to Nicholas B. Clifford Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clifford of Ladue, Mo.
Miss Pedemonti is an assistant buyer for G. Fox, a division of May Department Stores in Hartford, Conn.
She and her fiance both graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is the vice president of finance at Trinity.


The Executive Computer; Paradox for Windows: Worth the Wait?
BORLAND International Inc. is finally ready to begin selling Paradox for Windows, its long-awaited data-base management program.
As an introductory offer for at least the next 90 days, Borland is charging $139.95 for Paradox for Windows, more than 80 percent off its list price of $795.
Paradox for Windows was expected to be delivered last year, but businesses that have been waiting for a powerful and elegant Windows data base may well find the wait worth it.
Initial testers say the program appears to be superior to other Windows data bases for ease of use, the ability to work with other data-base formats on a network and for application development.


A Nyanga in the House
WHITE WOMAN WITCHDOCTOR
Tales of the African Life of Rae Graham.
As told to Taffy Gould McCallum.
Illustrated. 247 pp.
Tulsa, Okla.: Council Oak Books. $22.95.


Mutual Funds; A Fizzle in the Overseas Sizzle
THE good, albeit short, track record of Acorn International flies in the face of the recent experience of most overseas investors.
The Morgan Stanley Capital EAFE Index, a proxy for the stock markets in Europe, Asia and the Far East, has gained just 1.3 percent a year, on average, in the last five years compared with 16 percent jumps in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index.
The EAFE index is heavily skewed toward Europe and Japan, and the disappointing results mainly reflect the recessions in those regions.
But many analysts assert that economic cycles in those regions lag the United States and so should soon be ready to turn.


The Sidelines Never Looked So Good
FIND OF THE WEEK
You can stop the show even before halftime of the Super Bowl with a sequined football jersey proclaiming allegiance to the Dallas Cowboys, the Buffalo Bills or any other National Football League team.
St.
Martin, a clothing manufacturer at 498 Seventh Avenue (near West 36th Street), replicates team logos in sequins and caviar-size beads on silk chiffon.
The jerseys come in official team colors, and one size fits all.
At St.
Martin they are $125; in stores they are as much as $450.
For information from St.
Martin: (212) 279-2211.


On Sunday; Uphill Fight: Raking Muck On Campus
ERIC COPPOLINO, stringer for the weekly Huguenot Herald, was busy doing freelance investigative reporting on PCB's.
"I wouldn't walk in that mud," he advised, rushing around the state university here.
Everywhere, students were happily and calmly traipsing by.
"Could be PCB's. You never know."
At Scudder dormitory, where decontamination crews have been working a year, he took pictures of spools of wire.
Workers looked mystified.
"Seems boring," he said.
"But when you study the pictures over time, you see changes." Outside Parker Theater, he stepped on a manhole cover and got excited.
"Test well No. 1! That's where it is. I've never had a story before where you could walk around and find clues."


Shultz Describes Bush as Backing Iran Arms Sales
In a new book, former Secretary of State George P. Shultz disputes assertions by George Bush that Mr.
Bush had only vague knowledge of the arms-for-hostages episode in the mid-1980's.
Mr.
Shultz contends that he argued the issue directly with Mr.
Bush, who was Vice President at the time, and was "astonished" on one occasion when Mr.
Bush said he had no knowledge of the affair.


The Fiscal Fictions of Winter
The $31.9 billion budget proposed by Mayor David N. Dinkins on Friday is known informally as the preliminary budget, and rightly so.
In some years the Mayor's initial spending plan is somewhat preliminary, in other years more so.
This year, it appears to be extremely tentative.
The arcane, highly political ritual by which New York City moves from an initial budget proposal in January to an adopted plan in June has its own peculiar rhythms and strategies.
It amounts to an elaborate game of poker, with the Mayor unwilling, at least at the outset, to show all or even most of his cards.
The Mayor's initial proposal is but the first step in a long, intricate process.


A Super Alternative
They're back!
No, not Larry King and Ross Perot.
There's an even more tedious tribe -- grown-ups who think it matters who wins today's Super Bowl.
Of course, it is just another television program and they are within their rights to watch it.
But do they have to share?
Tim Russert, the otherwise levelheaded host of "Meet the Press," has been running amok all week.
A Buffalo native, he tried last Sunday to enlist a startled, but properly loyal Daniel Patrick Moynihan and a clearly appalled Mary McGrory in a television crusade for his hometown team.


Point of View: Multicultural Education
I refer to your front page article "Japanese School Helps Americans Bridge Their Own Gaps" (Jan. 10).
I have dedicated the last 15 years to multicultural education so do not think that I am against the concept; however, it is very difficult for me to fathom the reason for picking Japan as the focus country instead of a Spanish-speaking country.


DOWN AND OUT
Kevin Phillips's article "Down and Out" (Jan. 10) is timely.
The euphoria evident during this past Christmas shopping season bears out the hope the middle class has for the success of the campaign promises.
But, of course, politics is one thing; government is another.
Many things have happened since the campaign (Somalia, Bosnia, Iraq, etc.) to derail, or curtail, the amount of time and money President Clinton will be able to spend on his domestic programs.
Although I'm in the lowest of income-tax groups, I pay well over 35 percent of my income in Federal, State, City and FICA taxes (I'm self-employed), and I don't really expect this to go down, no matter what has been promised.
Nor do I expect my income to return to what it was in the mid-1970's, when I could afford vacations and the theater.
I've been doing without these for a long time.
But if my standard of living were to go down further, I'd have to resort to food stamps.
The jobs lost in my field (publishing) are not coming back, or, at least, not in the quantity or at the salaries they were 15 years ago.


Presidents, Money And the National Mood


Pentagon Aides to Study Option of Segregation for Gay Soldiers
Defense Secretary Les Aspin has directed top Pentagon aides to review the practical aspects of dealing with avowed homosexuals in the armed forces, including whether to bar them from combat or give them separate barracks and showers, Administration officials said today.
A preliminary list of about 30 issues, including overseas deployments andsegregation of homosexual and heterosexual troops, is circulating among senior policy planners at the Pentagon, the officials said.
Anger in Gay Groups
Administration officials emphasized that no final decisions had been made.
They said the list was simply a starting point for a discussion that Congress, the military and senior Defense Department officials would join over the next six months before President Clinton issues any executive order allowing homosexuals in the military.


Just Say Gnocchi
Unlike my italian friend Lidia Bastianich, who grew up in Istria and owns the Felidia restaurant in Manhattan, I don't have fond memories of making gnocchi as a child, which might account for my recent infatuation with them.
I
love
gnocchi.
I love making them, cooking them, eating them and reinventing them.
While I was playing with Play-Doh, Lydia was expressing herself with semolina.
Now, I do the same.
I came to these little potato dumplings rather late in life, falling for the gnocchi al pesto that my Italian grocery sells at lunch.
I moved on to packages of frozen gnocchi, and then, with the wages of heavy sauces weighing heavily on my soul, I began to take liberties, using broth, light vegetable purees, shellfish melanges, even vegetable compotes, to sauce my tender tidbits.


Working Weekend at Camp David


Reports of New Andrew Cuomo Post Praised
Advocates for the homeless and Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday reacted enthusiastically to reports that Andrew M. Cuomo, a champion of housing for the homeless and the son of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, will be named to a key Clinton Administration post in charge of homelessless and other urban problems.
"I can't tell you how pleased I am," said George McDonald, president and founder of the Doe Fund, which aids the homeless.
"No one in America is more qualified than Andrew Cuomo. He's a man of great character and love for people. He has accomplished things when he could have been lying on the beach."


Making Use of Dried Fruit in a Variety of Desserts
DRIED fruits aren't just for fruitcake.
They make great desserts, especially during winter when imported fresh fruit can be at a premium.
The other night I had a remarkably moist, rich cake at Follonico, a new Italian restaurant at 6 West 24th Street in Manhattan.
It was made with dried figs.
Alan Tardi, the chef, sent me the recipe, which he said was developed by his pastry chef, Chris Smreker.
The cake can be eaten as a dessert or a snack at any time of day (and it goes very well with a glass of sweet white wine at the end of a meal).


Bangkok
Thailand's tourism industry is still struggling, eight months after a political crisis dealt a blow to a business worth billions of dollars a year to the nation's economy.
Large numbers of foreign travelers canceled vacations in Thailand after seeing the news coverage last May, when troops in Bangkok opened fire on Thai demonstrators demanding a more democratic government.


Nobody With a Gun
LET ME TAKE YOU DOWN
Inside the Mind of Mark David Chapman, the Man Who Killed John Lennon.
By Jack Jones.
Illustrated. 281 pp.
New York:  Villard Books.


A New President Finds the Trade Combatants Acting Up
AFTER several years watching China dump raw materials for steel-making on the market at unfairly low prices, the Government decided to get tough last week.
It imposed import duties on the product, ferrosilicon manganese, and made it clear that such predatory practices would not be tolerated.
The story may sound familiar, but the venue was not Washington. It was here in Tokyo.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
124.65
125.04
125.70
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6115
1.5900
1.6125
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2679
1.2809
1.1745
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4865
1.5305
1.7858
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close





Charles Segal, Lawyer And Fund Trustee, 94
Charles Segal, a lawyer and foundation trustee, died on Wednesday in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 94 and lived in Palm Beach.
Mr.
Segal was born in Turkey, and his family moved to New York City during his infancy.
He attended DeWitt Clinton High School and received a bachelor's degree at City College in 1920 and a law degree at Columbia University in 1923.
Mr.
Segal was a lawyer in private practice until he became counsel to the Manhattan law firm of Schapiro, Wisan &amp; Krassner in the late 1970's.


Sound Of Style
BY 8 A.M. on a recent Saturday, 41 people had crowded into Hume's Beauty and Style, a Los Angeles hair salon several blocks east of Hollywood Boulevard's last sidewalk star.
In the center were four women wearing second-hand 1950's dresses, grandmotherly hairdos and high-heeled shoes with extremely pointy toes.
You wouldn't know it to look at them, but these were the same women most recently seen on stage with President Clinton's brother, Roger, at MTV's inaugural ball, dressed in elegant, body-baring black tie.
But this morning, the members of the R &amp; B/ soul quartet En Vogue -- Maxine Jones, Terry Ellis, Dawn Robinson and Cindy Herron -- were demanding non-Evian water and better coffee in an approximation of a lower-middle-class Harlem hair salon -- the set for their new video "Give It Up, Turn It Loose" -- the latest single from En Vogue's double-platinum "Funky Divas" album.


Confining Dogs Suspected of Rabies
This is in response to the letter to the New Jersey editor from Arthur W. Perry, M.D., on Dec. 13.
Dr.
Perry said New Jersey citizens were not being adequately protected against rabies by the state's policy of allowing 10-day confinement periods for dogs that have bitten humans, to be carried out at the home of the dog owner.
Dr.
Perry suggests that dogs should be impounded and confined at another site to insure compliance with the confinement period.
I would like to explain the rationale for the state's policy on this issue and clarify certain other issues about rabies.


Ready or Not, Clinton Is Rattling the Country
IN his inaugural address, President Clinton recalled Thomas Jefferson's belief "that to preserve the very foundations of our nation we would need dramatic change from time to time. Well, my fellow Americans," Mr.
Clinton said, "this is our time. Let us embrace it." Not everyone was in such an embracing mood last week, but few doubted any longer that the season of change was here.
From Capitol Hill to the Pentagon to the radio call-in shows, the message heard across the land was: My fellow Americans, fasten your seat belts.
Mr.
Clinton, who was known for a rather messy but nevertheless effective style of governing in Arkansas, insisted that he was not distracted by the frenzy surrounding his decision to lift the ban on homosexuals in the military.
The truth be told, Clinton aides say, it was distracting everybody.
It was a cacophony, though, that people probably had better get used to, for it could be the theme music for the early Clinton Administration -- a symphony inherent in its very diverse agenda and the personality traits of the boss himself.


There Comes a Time To Control the Borders
In response to the letter by Patrick Young  [ Jan. 3 ]  in which he claims that my comments concerning illegal aliens are xenophobic and wrong.
If the comment "Why do American citizens, who joyfully help those who come here legally, have obligations to those who criminally entered this country?" is xenophobic, so be it.
While he states El Salvadorans who come to this country are not criminals due to their status as war refugees, he does not comment on the illegal aliens from other countries, too numerous to mention.
He does not mention that having a fake Social Security card to illegally get a job is a crime.
We are not told of the costs through increased taxes to take care of these people's need for special education, bilingual teachers and health care.
He states, "The Statue of Liberty is more than a monument it is an ideal." I agree.
As I stated, "The United States admits more legal immigrants than any other country." Unfortunately the time when the United States was an unexplored wilderness with the space for any and all is over.
In the past the immigrants who came here were mostly on their own to sink or swim.
Now however a vast "safety net" has been mandated in which we pay for those who have entered this country illegally.
While I am proud of our country's status as a nation of immigrants, there comes a time which our resources become limited and we cannot expect to receive all of those driven by economics and population pressures out of their countries.
Any country must retain some control of its borders.
ROBERT F. LA PORTA Dix Hills


Getting the Giggles From 'Forbidden Broadway'
WHEN a revue, presumably of limited appeal, gets to run more than a decade, it must be doing something popularly correct.
Look at "Forbidden Broadway," the show that twits other shows.
Without a theater buff's grasp of a season's trends, a performer's idiosyncrasies or what's just out, a member of the audience may expect to feel like a gate crasher.
Especially since Gerard Alessandrini, "Forbidden Broadway's" wicked mastermind, aims at new targets every year -- a gambit that has made the show an on-going Off Broadway institution.
Shrewdly though, Mr.
Alessandrini has perennial -- call it mainstream -- material to spare, so that Broadway ephemera (innocuous leads in "Crazy for You") alternates with enduring substance (the intricate word play of Stephen Sondheim).


Business Diary/January 24-29
COMPANIES American Express Stands By Its Man


Jeremy Weithas, M. J. Minnetian
Jeremy Anne Weithas, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William V. Weithas Jr. of Rumson, N.J., was married yesterday to Matthew James Minnetian, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Aram Minnetian of Westwood, N.J.
The Rev.
Joseph Hughes performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University in New York.
Mrs.
Minnetian, 29, was until recently an associate at Kekst &amp; Company, an investor relations concern in New York.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father, who is retired, was the chairman and chief executive of Lintas Worldwide, an advertising agency in New York.


More Than Just Trendy
To the Editor:
Celia McGee's article on Marcia Tucker, "High Priestess of Trendiness"  [ Jan. 17 ] , stated that the AIDS activist slogan "Silence = Death" was introduced five years ago at the New Museum in a window installation by Act Up/Gran Fury.
In fact, the slogan was spotted on a street poster by the New Museum curator William Olander (who has since died of AIDS), who responded by offering Act Up use of the museum's front window for a more expanded forum.


At Work; Is Maternity Really Mayhem?
AS any boss will tell you, pregnant workers are a problem.
They keep their pregnancies and maternity-leave plans secret as long as possible.
Their productivity drops during the pregnancy.
They change their minds about going back to work.
Even if they return when promised, they aren't as productive as before.
Even worse, accommodations made to pregnant workers cause a negative reaction among co-workers and supervisors.
Ellen Galinsky and colleagues at the Families and Work Institute in New York had heard these alleged truisms lobbed around for years.
When the institute decided to apply some science to the supervisors' attitudes, it was obvious what assumptions needed testing.
"We just wrote down all of the things executives said to us," Ms.
Galinsky said.
It turns out virtually none of the pregnancy lamentations enumerated earlier resemble reality as supervisors generally experience it.


A Song For the Maestro
Friends of Skitch Henderson feted his 75th birthday at the Peninsula Hotel, Jan. 27.


10 Years of Making Ailing Children's Wishes Come True
LAST September, Theresa Beauchamp of Union made a call to the Make-A-Wish Foundation in Elizabeth.
Mrs.
Beauchamp, who had just been told that her 3-year-old son had leukemia, called to find out how he could make a wish.
The person who answered said it was simple: put the boy on the phone.
"I want a tree house," said Christopher (Kiki) Beauchamp.


Puppy Counselor Advises Owners to Be Part of the Pack
THE black and tan Doberman pinscher puppy, with his characteristically floppy pre-docked ears enhancing his already endearing expression, sat attentively on a sun-dappled rug as he practiced his owners' commands to come and stay.
As Ann Serra crooned, "Come, Izzi," Leslie A. Hochberg, a dog trainer, stood next to her and called out in an excited voice, "Come!" And after Izzi had successfully executed a "Sit, boy," with graceful speed, Mrs.
Serra and Miss Hochberg hugged him while Victor Serra proferred a handful of dog biscuits.


Elise Packard, Bryan Jones
Sandra Packard and Thomas Packard, both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter Elise Barry Packard to Bryan David Jones, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry Jones of Knoxville, Tenn.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Packard, 26, is a clerk for Chief Judge Judith Rogers of the District of Columbia Court of Appeals.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
Her father is an executive vice president at Kemper Securities, an investment brokerage company, and her mother is a saleswoman with the Ambrose-Mar Elia Company, a real-estate sales concern, both in New York.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER United States and Denmark Tie Joe-Max Moore scored his first international goal with three minutes remaining yesterday, giving the United States national soccer team a 2-2 tie with European champion Denmark in Tempe, Ariz.
Moore, who played for the United States Olympic team at the Barcelona Games, was playing just his second game with the American team.
He got the tying goal off a give-and-go with Jean Harbor and Mike Sorber.
Mark Strudal had put the Danes ahead in the 29th minute off a mixup by United States defenders and goalkeeper Tony Meola, but Bruce Murray tied the score 14 minutes into the second half with his 20th international goal, the most in United States history.
Strudal's goal came when he beat two United States defenders, then caught Meola off his line and lobbed the ball over him from about 10 yards out. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD Powell Matches His Own Indoor Best Mike Powell produced his best indoor long jumps and Henry Neal upstaged Dennis Mitchell in the 60-meter dash as Americans muscled in on a Britain-Russia meet yesterday in Glasgow, Scotland.
Roger Kingdom, whose 1992 season was wrecked by injury, cruised to victory in the 60-meter hurdles, and Michael Johnson rallied to win his first 400-meter race of the season.
Powell, the world outdoor record-holder but a rare performer indoors, matched his personal best indoors with a leap of 26 feet, 5 3/4 inches on his third attempt.
He improved that to 26-8 1/2 on his fifth jump, then sailed 27-5 1/4 on his final attempt.
Only world indoor record-holder Carl Lewis, Robert Emmiyan and Larry Myricks have jumped farther indoors. (AP) HORSE RACING Big Jewel Wins Coaltown Breeders' Cup Big Jewel scored a front-running victory in the $100,000-added Coaltown Breeders' Cup yesterday at Aqueduct, beating Track Rebel by a half-length.
Mineral Wells was another four lengths back in third in the field of four, which was reduced by the late scratch of the Robert Perez entry of Senor Speedy, Burn Fair and Fast Turn.
The winner, a 5-year-old gelding trained by Juan Serey, posted his 15th victory in 53 starts and earned $50,850 for owner Outlawbiker Stable.
Big Jewel covered six furlongs in 1:103/5 over a fast track.
Big Jewel returned $7.20 and $3.40. (AP) GOLF Wrenn Finishes Strongly and Takes Lead Robert Wrenn finished with a flourish, shaving three shots in the last six holes to take the lead of the Phoenix Open in Scottsdale, Arizona.
Wrenn, one of seven leaders after the first round, finished with his second straight three-under-par 68 and a 54-hole total of 202.
Andrew Magee, who had 10 birdies in a round of 64, and David Frost were a shot behind at 203. (AP) Senior Takes 3-Stroke Lead: Peter Senior fired a five-under-par 67 and held to a three-stroke lead with a 203 total after three rounds of the Vines Classic in Perth, Australia.
Scottish Open champion Peter O'Malley shot a 68 and was the closest to Senior, who has been atop the leaderboard after each round. (AP) Palmer Gets $50,000 Birdie: Defending champion Arnold Palmer dropped a 10-foot birdie putt worth $50,000 on the ninth hole in the Senior Skins Game in Mauna Lani, Hawaii.
Palmer's heroics on the last hole of the day insured there would be no shutouts among the four legends from the over-50 tour.
Ray Floyd won a total of four skins worth $60,000, Jack Nicklaus dropped long birdie putts for two skins and $30,000 and Chi Chi Rodriguez interrupted the flow of one-liners long enough to birdie the seventh hole for $25,000. (AP) SPEED SKATING Canadian Sets World Record in 500 Nathalie Lambert capped an outstanding day for the Canadian short-track speed skaters by setting a world record in the women's 500 meters at a 16-country meet in Hamar, Norway.
Canadians also set world marks in the qualifying heats for the men's and women's 3,000-meter relays.
Lambert, 1991 overall world champion and a member of the Olympic champion relay team, clocked 46.44 seconds in winning the women's 500.
The old mark was 46.72. (AP)


A New Way to Put a Novel on the Stage
THE Crossroads Theater Company has put Rosa Guy's 1979 novel, "The Disappearance," on the stage.
Plainly, the program lists credits for adaptation (Ruby Dee) and direction (Harold Scott) -- even for music, movement, costume and set and multimedia design.
But the effect is that Ms.
Guy's words -- virtually all of them, it seems -- have simply been
put
there, with surface embellishments, but without shaping the material for the stage, while Ms.
Dee and Carl Lumbly stand by, or walk about, as narrators.


Don't Fight 'Em, Join 'Em
To the Editor:
Arthur Miller's lament, which seems to blame movies and television for some of the woes of the Broadway theater, including the empty seats, fails to grasp the opportunity presented to the theater by the global growth of the electronic media  [ " 'We're Probably in an Art That Is -- Not Dying,' " Jan. 17 ] .
I believe that the public here and abroad crave the shows of Broadway and would watch them on pay-per-view and/or advertiser-supported television in sufficient numbers to make the effort profitable.


How the Hat From Southport Went to the Inaugural
SO how did the First Lady-to-be in Little Rock, Ark., connect with a young hat designer from Southport, Conn.?
Hillary Rodham Clinton's inaugural hat, the cadet blue one that nearly everybody had an opinion about, was designed by 30-year-old Darcy Creech, who still cannot believe hers was the chosen one.


Data Bank/January 31, 1993


Beth C. Stern, Steven Kornblau
Helen and David A. Mintz of Livingston, N.J., have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Mintz's daughter, Beth C. Stern, to Steven M. Kornblau, the son of Esther and Seymour Kornblau of New York.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Stern, 30, is the director of market research for the Sunshine Group Ltd., a real estate marketing and consulting company in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University and received an M.B.A. degree from Fordham University.
Her mother is the manager of Miriam Apartments II, a housing complex for the elderly in Clifton, N.J.
The prospective bride's stepfather is the president of David A. Mintz Inc., a lighting consulting company in New York.


Helping the Homeless Believe in Tomorrow
THE homeless men in the shelter joked and bragged at the kitchen counter while dinner was being prepared.
Talk was about the future.
It had been a long time since this group had some real successes to boast about, much less futures to look forward to.
The men were former addicts, derelicts who once roamed the streets at night looking for crack and alcohol -- who no longer have "to duck the light, or duck anything or anybody," as one of them said.


The Brightest Moment in Super Bowl History?
What's the greatest moment in Super Bowl history?
Many people quickly reply that there have been far too few great moments provided by pro football's game of games.
But as the Buffalo Bills and the Dallas Cowboys prepared to play today in No.
XXVII, at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, Calif., a variety of the sport's faithful spoke up amid last week's clamor.
The greatest Super Bowl moment?
Here's a sampling of answers: Pete Rozelle,
former National Football League commissioner:


Later Love


Hawaii Expects Tourism Slump To Continue
Hawaii's tourism industry is expected to struggle again this year, with the number of visitors forecast to grow only slightly at best, or perhaps even to drop, according to predictions from two sources.
A possible slight increase in eastbound visitors, primarily Japanese, may not be enough to offset the expected drop in visitors from the west, mostly the mainland United States, predicts the Hawaii Visitors Bureau, a tourism agency that is primarily financed by the state.
Its forecast for this year includes a drop of 3 to 6 percent among mainland visitors and a zero to 3 percent increase in visitors from Japan.


Young Innovators Become Old Masters
WHO is the G.O.M.?
He is The Grand Old Man of bridge, and he needs some qualifications.
He must be an active octogenarian, spreading knowledge of the game by writing, and must have at least one other credential, as player, theorist, teacher, lawmaker or administrator.
The first G.O.M. is sometimes thought to have been Milton C. Work, who had all the qualifications except that he was not quite 70 when he died in 1934.
The title really belonged to Robert Frederick Foster, a Scot who eventually settled in New York City and died in 1945 at 92.
He wrote many books, devised the Rule of Eleven, and continued to lecture and organize up to the age of 85.
He was succeeded by Sidney Lenz, who had a famous match with Ely Culbertson, wrote many books on both auction and contract, and died in 1960 at 86.


Katherine Deming, John Brodie
Mr. and Mrs.
Rust M. Deming of Bethesda, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Katherine Mikkelsen Deming to John Mitchell Brodie 2d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John G. Brodie of Peterboro, N.H.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Deming is a paralegal in the Washington office of Fitzpartick, Cella, Harper &amp; Scinto, a New York law firm.
She graduated from Bowdoin College.
Her father is the director of the office of Japanese Affairs at the State Department in Washington.


Too Many Plastic Pots, Too Few Uses
PLASTIC pots, how they accumulate.
If it is not a pile in the toolshed, it is a stack in the cellar or garage.
Nurseries favor plastic pots because they are lightweight and can be easily packed for shipping.
Their use also makes plants lighter to tote around.
Wholesalers and greenhouse managers like plastic pots, too, for the same reasons, that they can be stored and handled easily.


Snow Blankets (Part of) New York City


Getting the Giggles From 'Forbidden Broadway'
WHEN a revue, presumably of limited appeal, gets to run more than a decade, it must be doing something popularly correct.
Look at "Forbidden Broadway," the show that twits other shows.
Without a theater buff's grasp of a season's trends, a performer's idiosyncrasies or what's just out, a member of the audience may expect to feel like a gate crasher.
Especially since Gerard Alessandrini, "Forbidden Broadway's" wicked mastermind, aims at new targets every year -- a gambit that has made the show an on-going Off Broadway institution.
Shrewdly though, Mr.
Alessandrini has perennial -- call it mainstream -- material to spare, so that Broadway ephemera (innocuous leads in "Crazy for You") alternates with enduring substance (the intricate word play of Stephen Sondheim).


Of Fresh Fish And Trends
LAST Tuesday, there were only two places in Manhattan where you could have bought a piece of fresh line-caught Alaskan king salmon -- Balducci's market in Greenwich Village or Docks, a seafood restaurant on the Upper West Side.
Jonah DeCola, a bearded 22-year-old Manhattan adventurer with sincere blue eyes, was the connection between those salmon and the fjords of Glacier Bay National Park, where they were caught -- and not with nets.
At Dock's, which was bustling on Tuesday night, Mr.
DeCola was scrutinizing a piece of the white salmon on his plate ($23.50).
"This doesn't have any fishiness to it," he said, touching the flesh with a fork as if he were taking a reading on a geiger counter.
"That's how I know I did my job right. And look at how flaky it is. See the distinct layers? That's because the fish are wild, not farmed in pens. The muscles get to really develop and form correctly. Most of the salmon you get here is farmed or frozen."


Auckland
To the Editor: Carole van Grondelle's article brought back some fond memories.
I do think, however, that your readers should be advised that Auckland closes down from Saturday around noon through Sunday.
Nothing is open except perhaps restaurants in hotels.


Call of Land Lures Refugees to Khmer Rouge Zone
The only immediate sign of who controls this scrub-covered village in western Cambodia is a calendar hanging in the open-air dispensary that is illustrated with a photograph of a group of Cambodian farmers seated on bamboo mats who appear to be listening intently to the words of a uniformed soldier.
The soldier wears a red-checkered scarf around his neck.
Above the photo are the Khmer words for "Party of Democratic Kampuchea," the formal name of the Khmer Rouge.


From Suds To Romania And Back: Hey, It's Work
Michael DellaFemina's acting career has taken him far from the California coffeehouses where he got his start.
Almost three years ago in Los Angeles, Mr.
DellaFemina -- who uses no space in his last name, unlike his father, the adman Jerry Della Femina -- helped found a small theater and film group called Scrap Productions, performing in alleyways, coffeehouses and self-service laundries.


Wood-Grilled Dishes in Tranquil Setting
WOODS, a new restaurant just north of the railroad bridge in Old Greenwich, inhabits space formerly occupied by another restaurant (Tracks), now handsomely transformed.
Gone is the high decibel level of the bar, which is now separate.
The dining room itself is a tranquil blend of stippled pink and gray walls and one entire mirrored wall.
Rattan chairs, well-spaced tables and bouquets of dried and cloth flowers create a pleasant atmosphere for a menu that is focused on grilled foods; the name Woods signifies the use of wood in cooking.
Most appetizers and entrees have some components that are wood grilled.


A Word of Praise
To the Editor: The last phone call I made on Friday, Dec. 11, as the flood waters were rapidly rising and the homes in my neighborhood were being evacuated, was to Delta Airlines.
I explained my situation and that there was no possibility my husband and I would be able to make our flight to Florida the next day.


Christopher Smith, Jessica Goldman
Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Goldman of Carmel, N.Y., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Jessica Goldman and Christopher George Smith, lawyers in Washington.
Mr.
Smith is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George B. Smith of Darien, Conn.
Ms.
Goldman, 27, is an associate at the firm of Covington &amp; Burling.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, from which her fiance graduated summa cum laude.
The couple also received law degrees from Penn.


4 Upstart Carriers Find Niche at Newark Airport
INSPIRED in part by the economic woes of the major airlines, four new carriers have suddenly made an appearance at Newark International Airport in the last four months.
Most of the newcomers -- three of which are already operating daily jet flights, with the fourth set to begin in March -- offer cheap fares but few frills; some even charge a fee for checking bags and encourage customers to take their own food aboard.
And many of the new entries' employees once worked for airlines that no longer exist.


Filming Inside Clinton's Camp
When R. J. Cutler and Wendy Ettinger showed up last June at D. A. Pennebaker's cluttered Manhattan office, they had in mind two goals.
One was to document the people guiding Bill Clinton's Presidential campaign; the other was to persuade the 67-year-old pioneer of cinema verite to help them.
Never mind that neither of the pair had produced a film.
But Mr.
Cutler, a 30-year-old Peabody Award-winning radio producer and theater director, and Ms.
Ettinger, a Manhattan casting director in her 30's, both knew about Mr.
Pennebaker.


Less Power, More Focus for Reeves?
Despite the fishbowl setting, and a mandate to restore glory to a team tarnished by a 6-10 season, Dan Reeves may actually be able to focus better when he settles into his head coach's office at Giants Stadium tomorrow than he ever did at Denver.
True, the ambience of Giant office life will be new to Reeves.
Reeves made, or instigated, or approved every trade at Denver, every free-agent signing, every collegian coming through the draft.
And he did it for 12 years.


Texas Has a Lone Star and It's Not the Rangers
Three years after they staggered to a 1-15 record, the Dallas Cowboys play in the Super Bowl today.
They are in the Super Bowl for a sixth time.
The Texas Rangers have never played in the World Series.
One problem is that the Rangers have never fulfilled the first prerequisite for reaching the World Series: winning a division championship.
In the 21 years the Rangers have played in the Dallas-Fort Worth area of Texas, the Cowboys have won seven division championships.


Stalking the Wild Bugle Bead
PRISCILLA PRESLEY, Dinah Shore and Julie Andrews have bought outfits at St.
Martin, a Seventh Avenue manufacturer of lavishly embellished evening wear.
On a recent Wednesday, 14 less famous women, part of Sara Gardner's wholesale shopping tour, had their turn.
Ms.
Gardner, 4 feet 9 inches tall, stood on tiptoe in the hallway outside St.
Martin's 20th-floor showroom and gave a little speech about the tour's second stop of the morning.


His Life as a Panther
THIS SIDE OF GLORY
The Autobiography of David Hilliard and the Story of the Black Panther Party.
By David Hilliard and Lewis Cole.
Illustrated. 450 pp.
Boston:  Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95.


Stop the Presses! Movies Blast Media. Viewers Cheer.
When the presidential candidates accused "the media" of maltreatment, they had good reason to expect a certain amount of sympathy.
All one has to do is go to the movies -- or switch on the television -- to recognize what Americans think of those who purvey the news.
A decade and a half after Alan J. Pakula's "All the President's Men" lionized the Washington Post reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein for their dogged pursuit of the Watergate story, movies and television are disgorging a generation of fictional journalists whose flaws far outweigh their meager virtues.
The message of recent movies like "Hero" and "Bob Roberts" and television series like "Murphy Brown," "Love and War" and "Hearts Afire" is that journalists are not the grass-roots crusaders they used to be -- that "the media," in fact, have become a single, monolithic institution, an aristocratic fortress whose highborn members are not simply aloof: they eat the common people for dinner.
The old-time press stood up for the "little guy"; the "media" are likely to exploit him.


Wood-Grilled Dishes in Tranquil Setting
WOODS, a new restaurant just north of the railroad bridge in Old Greenwich, inhabits space formerly occupied by another restaurant (Tracks), now handsomely transformed.
Gone is the high decibel level of the bar, which is now separate.
The dining room itself is a tranquil blend of stippled pink and gray walls and one entire mirrored wall.
Rattan chairs, well-spaced tables and bouquets of dried and cloth flowers create a pleasant atmosphere for a menu that is focused on grilled foods; the name Woods signifies the use of wood in cooking.
Most appetizers and entrees have some components that are wood grilled.


The Mystery Was In the Loving
ANTHONY TROLLOPE
By Victoria Glendinning. Illustrated. 551 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $30.


CLINTON PLANNING A SHIFT OF FOCUS
Anxious to move beyond a fight over homosexuals in the military that President Clinton felt was forced on him prematurely, the Administration plans an aggressive campaign in February to focus on the middle-class issues, like health care, that helped Mr.
Clinton win election.
The President has acknowledged that he fell short of his goal when he accepted a compromise on Friday allowing the ban on homosexuals to remain largely in place for six months.
But in the wake of the agreement, White House officials made it clear that they considered the gay ban a peripheral issue and now plan to turn the discussion to health care, the economy and restructuring the welfare system.


JAN. 24-30: Generals Defiant; A Familiar Cycle Of Diplomacy in Haiti
Since the coup in Haiti 16 months ago, the pattern has been much the same.
Moved by the specter of boat people fleeing toward Florida's shores from a climate of violence and want, diplomats travel to Port-au-Prince to negotiate a return to democratic rule.
After intense discussions, solutions are announced.
But soon after, discord emerges.
In the latest round of diplomacy last week, a United Nations envoy, Dante Caputo, came away with assurances from the Haitian Army and the civilian Government it controls that as many as 500 human-rights monitors could be quickly deployed to curb political violence.


Talks in Geneva On Bosnia War Hit an Impasse
Two of the three parties locked in combat in Bosnia and Herzegovina failed today to meet a deadline set by the co-chairmen of peace talks here.
The co-chairmen immediately announced that the negotiations would move to United Nations headquarters in New York.
There, the co-chairmen said, they hoped that pressure from the Security Council would lead the Muslims, Serbs and Croats to reach a final agreement on a three-part peace settlement for Bosnia, which has been torn by civil war over the last 10 months.


National Parks' Budget Shrinks
VISITORS to the national park system may not find everything they expect this summer.
The system's budget is almost the same as last year's, and the number of visitors is continuing upward.
Cutbacks have been made with an eye to minimizing the effect on visitors, but people planning trips should check the park office or regional headquarters first.
As an example, at Acadia National Park in Maine, one official said, the ranger's sunset talk atop Cadillac Mountain might be given only four nights a week instead of seven.
In various parks, many of the campfire ranger talks are being reduced, and in some cases visitor centers are being shut on holidays.
The 50 national parks estimate that they logged a record attendance in 1992, probably a rise of 4 percent over the 57.4 million visitors in 1991, which was an increase over 1990.
The whole system of 350 units administered by the park service -- parks, national seashores, monuments, historic sites and the like -- estimates a 2 percent rise in attendance for 1992.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about Georgette Mosbacher and her cosmetics infomercial misstated the date when her husband, Robert A. Mosbacher, became Secretary of Commerce and the President who appointed him.
Mr.
Mosbacher was appointed in 1989, under the Bush Administration.


County's Data Systems At Yonkers's Fingertips
YONKERS joined the high-technology world last week as city and county officials announced an agreement to share Westchester County's advanced computer technologies and electronic systems in White Plains.
Access to the system will allow city employees to analyze census data, tax statistics and other information on computerized "smart maps"; permit city engineers to instantly redraft drawings and blueprints; institute desktop publishing, and store information electronically.


Dining Out In Morris County
Re: "Summing Up the Restaurant Hits of 1992" (Jan. 3): It's a shame that this article casually dismisses our "area of Morris County" as "devoid of good restaurants," because there are a number of establishments that we consider real gems.
In fact, we have business associates who intentionally schedule meetings late in the day in order to dine with us after hours.


Tica Simpson, Tad La Fountain
Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Simpson of Houston have announced the engagement of Mr.
Simpson's daughter Elizabeth Bartlett Simpson to Alfred A. La Fountain 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
La Fountain Jr. of Medford, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Simpson, who is 36, is known as Tica.
She was until recently an English and history teacher at the Heathwood Hall Episcopal School in Columbia, S.C.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in English education from New York University.


Debra Feinseth and Andrew Bodner
Miriam B. Feinseth of Fort Lee, N.J., and Melvin Feinseth of South Orange, N.J., have announced the engagement of ther daughter, Debra Abbe Feinseth, to Andrew Ross Bodner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Bodner of Livingston, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Feinseth, 27, is an account executive at the Gillian Group, a dress manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father, who is retired, owned the Advanced Leasing Company, an auto-leasing concern in Summit, N.J.
Her mother is the director of advertising and communications for North America at Hunter Douglas N.V. in Upper Saddle River, N.J., makers of window coverings.


Gordon Out to Prove He's No Flash in Pan
Things haven't gone so well for TOM GORDON since 1989, the year the right-hander turned in a 17-9 record with the Kansas City Royals and was named the American League's rookie of the year by three publications.
Last year, after declining to 12-11 in 1990 and 9-14 in 1991, Gordon lost nine of his first 10 decisions, was demoted to the bullpen and finished with a 6-10 record and a 4.59 earned run average.
Now, after signing a one-year contract, Gordon sees 1993 as a year of recovery.
"My goal starting this year is to get back into the starting rotation and establish myself as a starter," he said


Berry Nelson, John Ravitz
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward S. Nelson of Norwich, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Berry Nelson, to John Ravitz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Ravitz of New York.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Nelson is an executive assistant to the New York State Assembly in New York.
She graduated from Colgate University.


The Critic And County Museum
Helen A. Harrison  [ "The Revolutions of the Russians," Jan. 10 ]  finally broke the last straw of my tolerance for her unrelentingly unfair reviews of exhibitions at the Nassau County Museum of Art.
During the last decade my family and I have found this museum to be a source of great delight.
We have often invited friends from other areas to visit the magnificent special exhibitions and permanent collection of new and traditional masterpieces.
Many of our non-Long Island friends have been as happily surprised as we at the high quality of the art and the sophisticated presentation of diverse works and styles exhibited.
These range from great masters such as Manet, Monet, Renoir and Chagall to outstanding modern and contemporary painters and sculptors, including Warhol, Rivers and Lichtenstein, just to name a very few.
Why is it, then, that the art critic of The Long Island Weekly invariably disparages this great institution, and always manages to find something hostile and irrelevant to say about its shows.
In her Jan. 10 review of the splendid current exhibition, "20th Century Russian Art: The Avant-Garde Years/The Glasnost Years," she opines:


Failings but No Solutions for Hartford Schools
IN six weeks of testimony in State Superior Court in West Hartford, civil rights lawyers have presented a compelling case that something is deeply wrong in Hartford's public schools.
In a state that prides itself on the quality of its public education, the capital's schools are failing to educate large numbers of children.
The lawyers do not blame Hartford.
In a suit known as Sheff v.
O'Neill, they name the state as defendant because it, not individual towns or cities, is responsible for public education under Connecticut's Constitution.
And the state, they say, has not protected children in Hartford from the consequences of racial and economic segregation so extreme that 90 percent of the city's enrollment is black or Hispanic, and 63 percent is poor.


Weakened Croatian Dam Endangers Villages Downstream


Evan Freehill, James Clark
Evan Marie Freehill, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George B. Freehill of New York, was married yesterday to James Frederic Clark, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Chapman Clark of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Frank Boyle, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Thomas More Church in New York.
The Rev.
Hugh Lichti, a Dutch Reformed minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Clark, 27, is an assistant vice president and an institutional bond saleswoman at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Freehill, Hogan &amp; Mahar.
Her mother, Barbara Freehill, is a saleswoman at the Corcoran Group, a real-estate agency in New York.


A RIVER OF ONE'S OWN
Let me add my voice to the howls that must have been evoked by Marjorie Sandor's Hers column "A River of One's Own" (Jan. 3).
There is a need to conserve.
"Catch and release" is not some harebrained substitute for religion, but a practical management technique designed to preserve and, perhaps, increase the number of trout available for all to enjoy.


Child Care Makes a Mark in Office Parks
IN 1989, when Sandra Beetner was looking to relocate her computer graphics company, she had a 5-month old girl.
As a result, she viewed child care as an important amenity, not only for herself but for her employees, many of whom were also young parents.
"We were moving from Manhattan, and were used to lots of conveniences and services, like pick-up and delivery and printing services," she said.
"I can't say that child care was the top priority, but its availablily unquestionably influenced my decision."


Point of View: Multicultural Education
I refer to your front page article "Japanese School Helps Americans Bridge Their Own Gaps" (Jan. 10).
I have dedicated the last 15 years to multicultural education so do not think that I am against the concept; however, it is very difficult for me to fathom the reason for picking Japan as the focus country instead of a Spanish-speaking country.


England's Overture to Spring
NOT many visitors seek out English gardens in early spring.
Although the flaming colors of rhododendron and azaleas will light up hillsides everywhere by mid-May, in March they are only beginning to glow.
Roses remain bare thorny branches, and those traditional herbaceous borders of massed perennials like delphiniums, day lilies, geranium and lupin are many weeks away from their glory.
Lacking such spectacular displays, most gardens that invite the public do not open until about April 1.
Yet the hardy visitor who finds the few gardens open in early spring will be amply rewarded.
By mid-March, drifts of daffodils cascade down banks and valleys.
Camellias have burst into profligate flower, and magnolia trees splash huge white blossoms across a network of black branches.
Countless purple, yellow and white crocuses sparkle in the grass.
For a winter-weary American whose home landscape in March is still brown and dry, even the rippling flow of bright green grass in an English garden is balm.


All About/Commercial Real Estate; It's the Business Tenant Who's Calling the Shots
LOTS of people are talking about an uptick in business these days.
Those people are not in commercial real estate.
The industry's motto of the early 90's -- "stay alive 'til '95" -- has deteriorated to "find something to do 'til 2002."


Too Many Plastic Pots, Too Few Uses
PLASTIC pots, how they accumulate.
If it is not a pile in the toolshed, it is a stack in the cellar or garage.
Nurseries favor plastic pots because they are lightweight and can be easily packed for shipping.
Their use also makes plants lighter to tote around.
Wholesalers and greenhouse managers like plastic pots, too, for the same reasons, that they can be stored and handled easily.


The Tale of a Chimney That Turned Into an Oasis
Think of parks and it's natural to visualize vegetation: lawns, groves and flower beds organized in space.
But the light that nurtures trees and grass is also part of nature, as artists from Turner to James Turrell have shown.
And in a city of tall buildings, a piece of sky is as precious as a patch of green.
For New Yorkers, the Hudson River waterfront is an unplanned park of light.
Even without one blade of grass, a single bench or a cast-iron lamppost, the city's scrappy strip of shoreline is a ribbon park where people come to soak up the incandescent air of light reflected over water.
Manhattan's newest park is a neat little bow stitched into this tattered ribbon.
New Yorkers are familiar with look-in parks, those fenced-in plots of green that people can peer into but not enter.
Morton Street Park is a look-out park, a place for gazing at the sky.
It is also a vantage point for peering into the future.
The park's designers, Stan Eckstut of Ehrenkrantz &amp; Eckstut and Lee Weintraub of Weintraub &amp; di Domenico, offer a preview of the ways civic amenities can be integrated into urban infrastructure.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 17 advocating Italian cuisine, paired with one about French cuisine, misidentified the dish compared by the writer with gnocchi al pesto.
It is quenelles de brochet.


Making a Difference; Up Against Icahn's Muscle
THE chairman and chief executive of E-II Holdings Inc., Steven J. Green, says there is no challenge too daunting, but he's certainly being put to the test now.
First, E-II, the parent company of Samsonite luggage, Culligan water treatment equipment and McGregor men's wear, has been operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection since July 1992.
Those subsidiaries operate independently and are not directly affected by the bankruptcy.


The Numbers Game
Where have all the numbers gone?
To the rafters, of course.
Now it's time to scratch a 2, a 4 and a 27.
The No. 2 jersey worn by ALEX ENGLISH, the Nuggets' career scoring leader, will be retired at Denver's game with the Los Angeles Lakers on March 2.
Jacksonville University has retired the No. 4 jersey worn by guard DEE BROWN before he joined the Boston Celtics, and the University of Cincinnati is retiring the No. 27 worn by JACK TWYMAN before he went on to become a six-time N.B.A.
All-Star. (AP)


CLINTON WEIGHING FREEZE OR NEW TAX ON SOCIAL SECURITY
President Clinton's economic advisers and Democratic Congressional leaders have concluded that retirees receiving Social Security benefits and Government pensions should pay a significant part of the price of deficit reduction, officials in the White House and Congress said this week.
But the advisers and the top lawmakers disagree over how they should pay: whether through limiting cost-of-living increases in benefits or by increasing taxes on benefits.
President Clinton has not come down on either side, the officials said in interviews, but they added that Senate leaders had warned him that any attempt to freeze benefits would be rejected by the Senate.
Political Dangers Ahead
Over the years, cuts in Social Security have been thought to represent political suicide.
But Administration officials and Democratic lawmakers seem to agree that they cannot exempt the elderly when asking all Americans to make equal sacrifices to reduce the budget deficit.


Victory Puts Redmen In Improbable Position
St.
John's is alone in first place in the Big East.
That situation, deemed so implausible when the season began, became a reality last night when the Redmen played well once again in defeating Connecticut, 72-59, at Madison Square Garden before a crowd of 18,935.
A three-way tie for first was broken because Georgetown lost to Boston College and Seton Hall, which plays at Syracuse today, was idle.
So the Redmen are on top with a 6-2 conference record and an 11-5 mark over all.


Something Has to Give As Hustle Tests Shuffle
The Dallas defense likes to huddle up.
The Buffalo offense wouldn't think of it.
According to the Cowboys' defensive mastermind, Dave Wannstedt, "The Super Bowl could become somewhat of a fire drill."
The most important runs Sunday in Super Bowl XXVII might be to and from the sidelines.
When Buffalo has the ball, it sends 11 players on the field and instructs them to stay put.
After each play, quarterback Jim Kelly cups his hands to his mouth like a megaphone and gives an audible.
The bonus for the Bills in this game will be that Dallas will have minimal time to situation-substitute its 18 interchangeable defenders.


Usually, the Illegality in Domestic Work Is Benefits Denied
FAMILIES who do not pay Social Security and unemployment taxes for their maids and nannies are not just breaking the law.
They are denying their household help the pensions and protection against disability and joblessness to which the workers are entitled.
The practice is even more pervasive in affluent communities than the hiring of illegal aliens, which was the focus of most of the attention this month surrounding Zoe Baird and the withdrawal of her nomination to be Attorney General.


Russian Major Caught Seeking to Kill Yeltsin
A Russian Army major who was arrested hiding in a garret of a Government building has said he was seeking to assassinate President Boris N. Yeltsin, the Itar-Tass news agency reported today.
The report said the major, whose name was not given, had told investigators that he wanted to kill the President because his election had been rigged and he was acting against the interests of the people.


An Italianate Spirit Infuses the Week
ON Thursday the 15 dancers, singers and musicians of the Jose Greco Company -- including the dancer's four children -- evoke the spirit of Spain in performances in New London.
For information about the company's 10:30 A.M.
"School-Time Matinee," or the open concert that evening at 7:30, call the Garde box office at 444-7373.
At 8:30 P.M.
Thursday, the Center for Chamber Music in Greenwich presents the Arcadian Academy, an early-instrument ensemble founded and conducted by Nicholas McGegan.
Named for the Accademia del'Arcadia of Rome, a society of artists, musicians and writers founded in 1690, the Arcadian Academy is dedicated to the performance of the repertory composed by the masters of the original academy and their contemporaries; among those whose works will be performed are Marco Uccellini and Salamone Rossi as well as Scarlatti and Vivaldi (661-6626).


Lottery Winners Years Later
ON St.
Patrick's Day in 1971, Edward Henry of Morristown became the first member of an elite club -- New Jersey lottery millionaires.
Since then, the lottery has bestowed individual jackpots of $1 million or more on dozens of people.
Most winners spend their first hours riding high on a wave of euphoria and publicity.
After that, anything goes.
The windfall can become an asset or a liability or something in between, depending on the personality of the winner.


House Party
A benefit for the Morris-Jumel Mansion and museum, at Christie's, Jan. 27.


Mystery Man


Down but Not Out Off Greenwich:


American Express Chairman Quits After Days of Corporate Turmoil
James D. Robinson 3d said yesterday that he was resigning as chairman of the American Express Company.
His ouster has been sought by major shareholders who protested the board of directors' decision last week to retain him.
Mr.
Robinson's dramatic change of course came only five days after he had won a board-room battle to remain as chairman while having his chosen successor, Harvey Golub, become the company's chief executive.
Mr.
Robinson also became chairman and chief executive of Shearson Lehman Brothers, American Express's brokerage subsidiary.


Violence Translates at Home
If Super Bowl tradition holds, more women than usual will be battered today in their homes by the men in their lives; it seems an inevitable part of the post-game show.
A big football game on television invariably becomes the Abuse Bowl for men conditioned by the sports culture to act out their rage on someone smaller.
Why not?
After L. T. wrecked Joe Theismann's leg, his price went up, drugs, dumb talk and all.
That's the name of the game, hit hard.
Didn't Charles Barkley once say, "This is the kind of game that if you lose, you go home and beat your wife and kids." Can't you take a little joke?
What about Jose Conseco?
Just a little family feud, in separate cars.
Hey, strong men have strong appetites.


4 Upstart Carriers Find Niche at Newark Airport
INSPIRED in part by the economic woes of the major airlines, four new carriers have suddenly made an appearance at Newark International Airport in the last four months.
Most of the newcomers -- three of which are already operating daily jet flights, with the fourth set to begin in March -- offer cheap fares but few frills; some even charge a fee for checking bags and encourage customers to take their own food aboard.
And many of the new entries' employees once worked for airlines that no longer exist.


Brutality Case in Rochester Embroils Police on 2 Fronts
The first full week of testimony in a major civil rights case here revealed a city Police Department on trial on two fronts.
Not only are five former narcotics officers facing charges, but also their accusers in the department are being painted as turncoats trying to save themselves.
"You keep giving them stuff until you give them something they want to hear," said a defense lawyer, John F. Speranza, after pointing out what he considered inconsistencies in the testimony of a prosecution witness, Officer Daniel Gleason.
Accused of Abusing Powers
Officer Gleason testified that he was present in a house being raided for drugs in 1988 when three fellow officers openly discussed who wanted a television set they found in a suspect's bedroom.


Imam Ali Rashid, Muslim Leader, 62
Imam Ali Rashid, the leader of the Malcolm Shabazz Mosque in Harlem, died on Wednesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 62 and lived in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Imam Rashid died of cancer, said Imam Nurridin of the mosque.


Vandy's Fans Turned Away, and Then the Team Is
At the end of an evening that managed to exceed expectations, the undefeated record of Vanderbilt University's No. 1-ranked women came to an end when uncharacteristically poor foul shooting and Tennessee's decisive rebounding advantage pushed the second-ranked Lady Volunteers to an emotional 73-68 victory.
Fifteen days after the game was declared a sellout, which is believed to make it the most successful over-the-counter ticket sale in the brief history of the major-college game for women, a crowd of 15,317 watched Tennessee outscore the Commodores by 12-3, in the final 3 minutes 44 seconds.


Into the Abyss: Nice Tuck!
NAME: Bob Holman.
IDENTITY: Poet; co-director of the Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street.


Elsie Watkins, James Patrick
April wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick D. Watkins of West Hartford, Conn., for their daughter Elsie Katherine Watkins and James McLaughlin Patrick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James S. Patrick of New Philadelphia, Ohio.
Miss Watkins, 38, is a legal administrator in the Stamford, Conn., office of Day, Berry &amp; Howard, the Hartford law firm.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father is the chairman of the Terra Nova Insurance Company, a London-based reinsurance concern.


Flower Shows: Pick of the Bunch
I'M a flower show addict.
I confess without shame.
Hearth and household must wait while I tiptoe through the forced tulips of as many shows as I can find, savoring perfumed hyacinths, coveting kaleidoscopes of orchids (and stroking soft rosemaries when the exhibitor looks away).
Icy pockets may dot the landscape, and storms may still howl at the door, but within the flower show halls I revel in a garden's fragrant air.


Rail Pass Links Ireland, Britain
A pass introduced this month by Britrail allows unlimited travel on trains in the Republic of Ireland as well as Britain (England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) and ferry crossings of the Irish Sea.
The BritIreland Pass comes in two forms: allowing 5 days of travel in a 15-day period or 10 days of travel within a month.
The 15-day pass costs $269 in standard class and $399 in first class.
The one-month pass is $419, standard, and $629, first.
The sea crossings are on the Stena Sealink Line, which operates daily between Holyhead, Wales, and Dun Laoghaire, near Dublin; Fishguard, England; Rosslare, near Wexford; Stranraer, Scotland, and Larne in Northern Ireland.
The Brit Ireland Pass must be purchased in the United States.
Information: from travel agents or BritRail, (212) 575-2667 or (800) 677-8585.


Too Many Plastic Pots, Too Few Uses
PLASTIC pots, how they accumulate.
If it is not a pile in the toolshed, it is a stack in the cellar or garage.
Nurseries favor plastic pots because they are lightweight and can be easily packed for shipping.
Their use also makes plants lighter to tote around.
Wholesalers and greenhouse managers like plastic pots, too, for the same reasons, that they can be stored and handled easily.


Failings but No Solutions for Hartford Schools
IN six weeks of testimony in State Superior Court in West Hartford, civil rights lawyers have presented a compelling case that something is deeply wrong in Hartford's public schools.
In a state that prides itself on the quality of its public education, the capital's schools are failing to educate large numbers of children.
The lawyers do not blame Hartford.
In a suit known as Sheff v.
O'Neill, they name the state as defendant because it, not individual towns or cities, is responsible for public education under Connecticut's Constitution.
And the state, they say, has not protected children in Hartford from the consequences of racial and economic segregation so extreme that 90 percent of the city's enrollment is black or Hispanic, and 63 percent is poor.


Gays in Military Would Hurt Combat Efficiency; Values or Prejudices?
To the Editor:
In "Gays in the Military: Let Congress Decide" (Op-Ed, Jan. 14), John O. Marsh Jr., former Army Secretary, argues: "Morale is grounded in bonding among members of small units. The mutual trust and camaraderie of the troops, built over time, sustains them in battle. Known homosexuals threaten established values and create tensions that can undermine a unit's spirit and confidence."


The Word Police
THIS month's inaugural festivities, with their celebration, in Maya Angelou's words, of "humankind" -- "the Asian, the Hispanic, the Jew/ The African, the Native American, the Sioux,/ The Catholic, the Muslim, the French, the Greek/ The Irish, the Rabbi, the Priest, the Sheik,/ The Gay, the Straight, the Preacher,/ The privileged, the homeless, the Teacher" -- constituted a kind of official embrace of multiculturalism and a new politics of inclusion.
The mood of political correctness, however, has already made firm inroads into popular culture.
Washington boasts a store called Politically Correct that sells pro-whale, anti-meat, ban-the-bomb T-shirts, bumper stickers and buttons, as well as a local cable television show called "Politically Correct Cooking" that features interviews in the kitchen with representatives from groups like People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals.


Reinventing the Photograph
Two decades ago, when photography was still scorned by many in the art world as simply mechanical and a dubious art at best, photographers took comfort in an anecdote from the earliest days of the medium.
Paul Delaroche, an important painter and teacher in Paris in the 1830's, supposedly exclaimed, upon first seeing the silvery images of the daguerreotype, "From today painting is dead!"
The story is apocryphal, but its sentiments warmed the hearts of photographers at a time when many critics proclaimed painting the only valid medium.
In 1972 Delaroche's exclamation was even used as the title of a pioneering show of historical photographs.


Puppy Counselor Advises Owners to Be Part of the Pack
THE black and tan Doberman pinscher puppy, with his characteristically floppy pre-docked ears enhancing his already endearing expression, sat attentively on a sun-dappled rug as he practiced his owners' commands to come and stay.
As Ann Serra crooned, "Come, Izzi," Leslie A. Hochberg, a dog trainer, stood next to her and called out in an excited voice, "Come!" And after Izzi had successfully executed a "Sit, boy," with graceful speed, Mrs.
Serra and Miss Hochberg hugged him while Victor Serra proferred a handful of dog biscuits.


Robin Henning, Albino Rocchi
Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore W. Henning of Plandome, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Robin Gail Henning to Albino Michael Rocchi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Antonio G. Rocchi of the Bronx.


A NATION DUMPS ITS WRITERS
Hafner conveys the impression that most of the books being discarded in the former East Germany are those of fiction writers.
KAREN HONEYCUTT
New York, N.Y.


Municipalities Are Moving Forward On Housing
WHEN an Irvington resident offered to donate an acre of land for affordable housing recently, village officials were delighted -- and relieved.
A project sponsored by the community, they agreed, is far better than one imposed on it.
"The county has already developed a target list and a suggested quota," the Irvington Village Administrator, Stephen McCabe, said last week.
"This donation puts us in a proactive position of determining a suitable affordable-housing project for Irvington on our own terms," he said, "rather than waiting for the county to tell us we must."


Dress Rehearsal
Isn't it romantic the way bridal magazines pose betrothed women staring languidly out the window?
Sure, it's easy for these lovelies to relax.
They don't have to pick out the dress.


Susan Gulliver, Peter Carlson Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Bryce Blynn Jr., of Vero Beach, Fla., have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Blynn's stepdaughter Susan Gulliver to Peter E. Carlson Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carlson of Vero Beach and Riverside, Conn.
Ms.
Gulliver, 30, is an instructor of gemology at the Gemological Institute of America in New York.
She graduated from Brown University.
She is a daughter of the late Alan D. Gulliver, who was a senior partner and an executive vice president of Merrill Lynch in New York, and the late Jeanne H. Gulliver.


Christine Pittel, Joseph Giovannini
Christine Janet Pittel, a freelance journalist, was married Dec. 24 to Joseph Benjamin Giovannini, an architectural designer and critic, both of New York.
Gelsomina Fuccillo, a magistrate for the City of Venice, performed the ceremony at the Palazzo Cavalli, a municipal building in Venice.
Ms.
Pittel, who is keeping her name, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Irene Pittel of Grosse Pointe Farms, Mich., and the late Anthony J. Pittel.


Scoop? Boola, Boola, Boo
"Extra! Extra!" proclaimed the front-page, banner headline of The Columbia Daily Spectator that hit the stands Friday evening during a Columbia-Yale basketball game: "Benno Schmidt, Former Dean of Law School, Will Become the 18th President of Columbia."
This exercise in journalistic enterprise, tacked to trees and taped to dormitory doors around Columbia University's Morningside Heights campus, provoked puzzlement among students and professors.
And it sent reporters and editors at the college newspaper -- and even at The New York Times -- scurrying.


POSTINGS: Yacht Club Restoration; Back to the Brows
It may be true that what goes up must come down, but sometimes what comes down will go up again.
At the New York Yacht Club, on 44th Street west of Fifth Avenue, an ornamental wooden pergola that was part of the original turn-of-the-century design was removed several decades ago, perhaps in the 50's.
Now it is returning, via a faithful reproduction of the original.
"It's part of restoring the building to its original 1905 condition," said Geoff Grout, head of the club's house committee.
"The pergola really represents the eyebrows on the building."


Science Fiction
The novels and short stories of Kim Stanley Robinson constitute one of the most impressive bodies of work in modern science fiction.
In books like "The Gold Coast" (1988) and "Pacific Edge" (1990) he virtually invented a new kind of science fiction, in which characters as richly drawn as any in conventional fiction inhabit near-future worlds evoked with as much verisimilitude as the contemporary settings of any conventional novel.
This is even more difficult than it sounds.
Just how difficult can be seen in Mr.
Robinson's RED MARS (Spectra/Bantam, cloth, $22.95; paper, $11.95).
As always, Mr.
Robinson is admirably ambitious; this 519-page novel is the first of a projected trilogy about the colonization of Mars.
In the last decade or so, space probes and other forms of scientific surveillance have greatly extended our knowledge of Earth's second-nearest neighbor in the solar system.
The Mars of earlier science fiction -- the Mars of H. G. Wells or Edgar Rice Burroughs or Ray Bradbury -- has been relegated to myth and fantasy.
Without having set foot on Mars, we know a great deal about the atmosphere and surface of the planet.
Mr.
Robinson has thoroughly digested this material and woven it into the fabric of his narrative, which deals with the settlement of Mars by a hundred carefully chosen scientists who fight among themselves over the future of the planet, only to see all their visions overwhelmed by the needs and greed of later settlers.


Paris Opens Park On Citroen Site
The Andre Citroen Park, at 34.6 acres, is the largest park to open in Paris in more than a century.
Occupying the site of a former Citroen car factory, the city-owned park opened in September on the Left Bank in the 15th arrondissement, near the Seine and a half-mile from the Eiffel Tower.
The park, viewed from above, could be compared to a human body with extended arms and legs, the torso being a huge lawn, each of the arms and legs a garden and the eyes, two immense greenhouses.
The grass is open for play, an unusual concession in Paris where many public lawns are off-limits.
There are about 2,000 trees in the park, which cost about $62 million.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  BOSNIA TALKS SET FOR NEW YORK


JAN. 24-30: Deportation Upheld; Israel's Latest Decision Forces U.S. to Decide
At a meeting last week to introduce himself to State Department employees, Secretary of State Warrren M. Christopher gave the impression the Clinton Administration would be much more fastidious in pursuing a legalistic foreign policy.
But the Israeli Supreme Court decision upholding the deportation of more than 400 Palestinians has caught the new Administration between its staunch allegiance to Israel and its promise to adhere to the rule of international law.


Shaw, the Eternal Schoolmaster, Can Still Be Wise
This season, two of George Bernard Shaw's plays will open on Broadway within weeks of each other -- not a common phenomenon.
A revival of "St. Joan" by the National Actors Theater opens this afternoon at the Lyceum Theater, directed by Michael Langham and starring Maryann Plunkett.
In March, the Roundabout Theater Company will mount Shaw's romance "Candida," directed by Gloria Muzio, with Mary Steenburgen in the title role.
In this article, the playwright A. R. Gurney, who has two new plays opening this spring, "The Fourth Wall" in Chicago and "Later Life" at Playwrights Horizons in New York, reminisces about the Shaw he has known for a lifetime.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about proposed designs for the East Hampton Airport misidentified the rendering and its architects.
The plan was prepared by Smith &amp; Thompson of Manhattan in 1989 and was rejected.
Robert Lund &amp; Associates of Wainscott and Minneapolis, in association with Rapp &amp; Byrne of Manhattan, will design the building.


Workbench From Ordinary Lumber and Basic Tools
A STURDY workbench need not be expensive or hard to build.
The one shown here consists of ordinary construction-grade lumber and can be made with basic carpentry tools.
If you do not have a power circular saw for cutting the sheet materials required, have them cut at the lumberyard.
The cost is about $1 a cut.
Workbench dimensions can be altered to suit individual tastes, although the length and width used in the example permit making the bench with a single 4 x 8-foot sheet of plywood.
The height, which is just under 34 inches, should be comfortable for most people, but increase the length of the legs by one or two inches if you are taller than six feet.


Give Vent to the Public And Watch the Weal
I found John Hurley's letter of Dec. 26 an informative and interesting statement of the problems arising from a lack of citizen involvement in overseeing the public purse strings.
Though his focus was on energy and utility matters, there are several areas in the public sphere, especially here in the suburbs, where Mr.
Hurley's approach would raise interesting questions for discussions.
Commendations for giving him the space for an important and interesting viewpoint.
Citizen involvement may be an old and familiar idea, but it appears to be more honored in its breach than observance.
Informed involvement in monitoring the purse strings seems like a tedious and time-consuming undertaking.
However, in relieving "we the people" of responsibility, all levels of government seem to be raising our taxes in proportion as the "burden" of informed consent is lightened.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Blow Them Away
HELP WANTED: Full-time bugler to play one tune, nine times a day.
Must be comfortable around four-legged winners and two-legged losers.


Nassau Site Wins Out
NANCY HOGSHEAD, the president of the Women's Sports Foundation, announced that after an 18-month search, Eisenhower Park in Nassau County had been chosen as the new site for the foundation's executive offices and a projected International Women's Sports Hall of Fame.
In winning out over four other finalists -- Colorado Springs, Dallas, Kansas City, Mo., and Washington -- Nassau County pulled out all the stops.
Among other things, it pledged 20 years of free rent, free office equipment and free architectural planning and construction of the hall of fame.


Stacy Miller, Todd Gorelick
Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth J. Miller of Greensboro, N.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Stacy Lynn Miller, to Todd Andrew Gorelick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Gorelick of Charlotte, N.C.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Miller, 24, is a manager at Home Mortgage Company in Charlotte.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a vice president in the private-client group of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in Greensboro.


Lone Shot Keeps Wild-Game Tradition Alive for Another Year
In the not-so-distant past, my freezer would be packed with upland birds, waterfowl and venison at this time of year, the provender from hunting.
At the moment, save for some smoked bluefish and an Atlantic salmon, all of the meat in the freezer came from a grocery store.
I am still a hunter and have been one for six decades, albeit taking part in the endeavor with reduced fervor in recent years.
When one is only a few months away from his 70th birthday, one does not scamper through forest and fen with the dedication and abandon of a youngster of 50.


BEST SELLERS: January 31, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
25
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
1
2
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) Two police detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer in southern California.
3
3
9
DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) After being accused of murdering her employer, a woman tells of killing her husband.
4
5
47
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
5 *
1
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $23.) The case of a woman journalist charged with killing an eminent novelist: was it self-defense or murder?
6
8
3
TERMINAL, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $21.95.) A medical researcher's pursuit of a treatment for cancer has extraordinary consequences.
7
1
CLOSE COMBAT, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) In the sixth volume of the series "The Corps," there are new challenges for the Marines all over the Pacific in World War II.
8
7
11
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter.
9
4
22
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through cards and letters.
10
6
11
MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.50.) Three couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.
11
15
10
ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) A vaquero's adventures.
12
9
16
SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
13 *
11
13
MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) A journalist learns about Mexico. (LP)
14
1
DEVIL'S WALTZ, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware investigates the strange series of illnesses that befalls a small child.
15
12
30
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
16 *
10
15
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $24.) Lestat embarks on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
20
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
2
25
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and folk tales.
3
3
17
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the general.
4
6
33
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
5
7
11
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.
6
4
19
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
7
5
33
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A biography of the 33d President.
8
12
13
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life of the physicist Richard Feynman.
9
8
22
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
10
9
2
NOBODY NOWHERE, by Donna Williams. (Times Books/Random House, $21.) The autobiography of an autistic woman.
11
13
2
LIBERATION MANAGEMENT, by Tom Peters. (Knopf, $27.50.) How American industry is reorganizing to deal with the problems wrought by changing times.
12 *
7
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $20.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
13
11
15
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the television talk show host.
14 *
10
8
JFK: Reckless Youth, by Nigel Hamilton. (Random House, $30.) The first 29 years of the 35th President.
15
2
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE . . .
AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Random House, $25.) The war in Vietnam as experienced during a three-day battle in 1965.
16 *
15
10
MY LIFE, by Earvin (Magic) Johnson with William Novak. (Random House, $22.) The autobiography of the retired basketball player.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
47
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
2
4
2
EXCESS BAGGAGE, by Judith Sills. (Viking, $21.) A psychologist's counsel about conquering character traits that make one's life harder.
3
3
8
CREATING LOVE, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $23.) Ways to establish healthy relationships with other people.
4
2
29
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf, by a legendary teacher.
5
5
4
YOUR MONEY OR YOUR LIFE, by Joe Dominguez and Vicki Robin. (Viking, $20.) How to adapt your financial situation to a more frugal, satisfying style of living.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
GENIUS IN THE SHADOWS.
A Biography of Leo Szilard: The Man Behind the Bomb, by William Lanouette with Bela Silard. (Robert Stewart/Scribners, $35.) A delightful, anecdote-rich biography of the Hungarian physicist who knew everybody and everything but got no credit because his best friends could barely stand him.
FREUD, JUNG, AND HALL THE KING-MAKER: The Historic Expedition to America (1909), by Saul Rosenzweig. (Hogrefe &amp; Huber, $27.50.) Freud, 53, got an honorary degree from Clark University.
What an occasion!
Mr.
Rosenzweig re-creates it.
THE GULF CONFLICT 1990-1991: Diplomacy and War in the New World Order, by Lawrence Freedman and Efraim Karsh. (Princeton University, $29.95.) The fullest history yet of George Bush's famous victory, by two accomplished military scholars.
MYSTERY RIDE, by Robert Boswell. (Knopf, $22.) An irresistible novel about a family (she given to causes, he ineffectual, their daughter a rotten kid) who try to puzzle out their own history.
OUTERCOURSE: The Be-Dazzling Voyage, by Mary Daly. (HarperSanFrancisco, $24.) More radical cheek from the philosopher, theologian, mythologist, explorer, pirate, warrior, witch, fairy and leprechaun who gave us "Gyn/Ecology."
CHANCELLORSVILLE 1863: The Souls of the Brave, by Ernest B. Furgurson. (Knopf, $25.) An account of Lee's victory in the only great Civil War battle in which the day was carried by mobility and maneuver instead of the attrition of men by metal.
TO THE GATES OF RICHMOND: The Peninsula Campaign, by Stephen W. Sears. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $24.95.) How George B. McClellan, the general whom nobody loves, lost the largest single campaign of the Civil War because he was unwilling to fight.


Q and A
Buying an Adjoining Unit Question: I am a rent-stabilized tenant living in a converted co-op building.
The studio apartment next to mine is now up for sale.
Can I buy the studio apartment and continue to live in my apartment as a rent-stabilized tenant?
And if so, can I then break through and join the studio apartment with my apartment? . . .
E.
Melendez, Manhattan Answer: Yes, and probably no.
According to Michael Finder, a Manhattan lawyer, as long as the rent-stabilized apartment continues to be the primary residence of the tenant, buying the apartment next door does not jeopardize the tenant's rent-stabilized status.
It does not even matter if the purchased unit is rented out as an investment property or is used as a secondary apartment, as long as the rent-stabilized unit is the primary home.


Corrections
A report on Jan. 10 about the marriage of Renie Costello and Henri Schelfhout included erroneous references to the celebration, supplied by family members.
A reception was held for the couple on Jan. 9, but the wedding took place last Feb. 29 at the Church of the Holy Family in New York.


Hilary Trotman, C. S. Garland 3d
Hilary Millard Trotman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur E. Trotman of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to Charles Stedman Garland 3d, the son of Joan Garland of Baltimore and the late Mr.
Garland Jr.
The Rev.
T.
Guthrie Speers, a cousin of the bride, performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Garland, 25, was until recently an assistant account executive at Wunderman Cato Johnson, a marketing concern in New York.
She and her husband graduated cum laude from Yale University.
Her father is a general manager at General Foods U.S.A. in White Plains.
Her maternal grandfather, Thomas T. Richmond of Lake Wales, Fla., was a partner at the New York law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton.


Where the Roman Numerals Dance With the Dollar Signs
When Super Bowl XXVII, between the Dallas Cowboys and the Buffalo Bills, kicks off this evening it will renew an American rite of sports and marketing that was born in relative modesty but has grown to be the undisputed champion of sports extravaganzas and a testament to cash and cachet.
"It's almost anti-American not to be a viewer of the Super Bowl," said Dick Enberg, who will announce the game for NBC-TV.
One Big Living Room
At least 100 million viewers across the country (worldwide estimate: 750 million) will tune in the Super Bowl, with an expected kickoff at 6:18 P.M., Eastern time.
Diehard fans will start the ritual with what amounts to a two-and-one-half-hour television tailgate party.


Point of View: Style of Warfare
Capt.
John Mason and his English did not massacre the Pequots (Nov. 29).
In a massacre a defeated and helpless foe is rounded up and killed en masse.
In the 1637 battle the English chased the Pequots into their fortified village, and rather than go in after them and take heavy losses, they burned the village.
Because of the fire and as the Pequots came out, men, women and children were killed.


Workbench From Ordinary Lumber and Basic Tools
A STURDY workbench need not be expensive or hard to build.
The one shown here consists of ordinary construction-grade lumber and can be made with basic carpentry tools.
If you do not have a power circular saw for cutting the sheet materials required, have them cut at the lumberyard.
The cost is about $1 a cut.
Workbench dimensions can be altered to suit individual tastes, although the length and width used in the example permit making the bench with a single 4 x 8-foot sheet of plywood.
The height, which is just under 34 inches, should be comfortable for most people, but increase the length of the legs by one or two inches if you are taller than six feet.


Wolf-Killing Project in Alaska Is Dropped
Alaska's wolf-killing project, suspended before it even began because of intense pressure from conservationists, was officially abandoned by the State Board of Game this week.
The project, authorized by the board in November, would have benefited hunters of caribou and moose by using state-hired marksmen to kill as many as 400 wolves this year and hundreds more in succeeding years.
The aim was to reduce the numbers of the game herds' leading predator, the Alaska gray wolf.


Jennifer Gawler, James Gelb
Jennifer Grace Gawler, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan W. Gawler of Masterson, New Zealand, was married on Friday to James Matthew Gelb, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Gelb of New York.
Hilary M. A. Hudson, a Justice of the Peace, performed the ceremony at the Hotel Raffaele in Wellington, New Zealand.
Mrs.
Gelb is a student at the Parsons School of Design in New York.
Her father is a graphics and design teacher at Wairarapa College, a secondary school in Masterson where her mother, Ann Gawler, is a teachers' assistant in special education.


Hot Nights in Pixieland
SNOW WHITE, BLOOD RED
Edited by Ellen Datlow and Terri Windling. 411 pp.
New York:  An Avonova Book/William Morrow &amp; Company. $22.


Conversations/Walt Whitman Rostow; A Vietnam Hawk's Battle Plan For a City's Mean Streets
WALT WHITMAN ROSTOW recalls coming home at 3 A.M. from the White House during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis to find his wife, Elspeth, a history professor, sitting cross-legged in bed, grading papers.
He remembers exactly what she said: "You haven't been so cheerful since the Second World War."
Now, some 30 years later, Mr.
Rostow, who was a foreign policy adviser to Presidents Kennedy and Johnson, is experiencing a not dissimilar good cheer, born of clear purpose and a sense of optimism about overcoming an ominous threat.


Vance-Owen Bosnia Move Is Surprise for Washington
The Clinton Administration was caught by surprise by the decision by Cyrus R. Vance and Lord Owen to get the Security Council to impose a solution to end the war in Bosnia, senior Administration officials said today.
The decision, announced today by the two mediators in Geneva, puts the Administration in an awkward position by forcing it to decide whether to support what senior officials have called a flawed plan.


Stop the Spaceship, I Want to Get Off
THE LEAST WE CAN EXPECT OF science fiction, which focuses so assiduously on the future, is that it be up to date.
According to this criterion, the science-fiction series that have proliferated on television this season -- "Star Trek: Deep Space Nine," "Space Rangers" and "Time Trax" -- fall short.
Instead of representing an evolutionary step forward from the "Star Trek" era, which began 26 years ago with the first voyage of the starship Enterprise and is still going strong with "Star Trek: The Next Generation," the new shows prompt a sense of deja vu.
Inside their futuristic packaging they offer familiar premises and plots mostly borrowed from past television shows and movies.
For all its public resolve to be grittier and sexier than its forebears, "Deep Space Nine," launched this month with a two-hour special (its regular time slot is 7 P.M. Sundays on Channel 11 in New York), comes across as no more than a "Star Trek" spinoff, set in a seedy 24th-century space station instead of a spotless starship.
"Space Rangers," which began on CBS this month and is seen at 8 P.M.
Wednesdays, offers 22d-century space cops in a higher-tech, lower-brow "Mission: Impossible" laced with secondhand "Aliens." "Babylon 5," a syndicated movie to be broadcast in late February, features yet another space station filled with touchy humans and nonhumans with funny faces and hairdos.
"Time Trax, " a syndicated hourlong series (8 P.M. Wednesdays on Channel 9), apes a different model: by setting 22d-century villains loose in 1993 to be chased by a 22d-century policeman, it promises to be an interminable "Terminator."


High School Offers Inmates a Future
WITH its carpeted floor, banks of computers, walls decorated with maps, posters and diagrams of human anatomy and bookshelves stacked with encyclopedias, social studies texts and math workbooks, this could be any high school classroom.
As their instructor sketches out the afternoon's project on an easel -- to design and draw a time-line portrait of their lives from childhood to the present -- the students, dressed in sweatshirts, T-shirts, loose pants and sneakers, pay close attention.
There are few sounds other than the soft scratching of pencil on paper or a quiet question to clarify the assignment.
To a visitor at the Sprain Brook Academy, the rambunctious horseplay that often pervades so many high schools is refreshingly absent.
But perhaps it is not so surprising that the students are so serious -- and so silent -- as they bend their heads over their papers or search a computer screen for an answer.


The Need to Accord Nurses Respect
To the Editor:
My one disappointment with "Pushing Nurses to a Breaking Point" (At Work, Jan. 10) was that it didn't follow through on the concept of lack of respect as being a contributory factor to nurses' dissatisfaction.


Country Just Ain't What It Used to Be
Time was when listeners tuning into a country radio station had a pretty good idea what kind of music they were likely to find.
For decades, country songs meant stories of rabble-rousing, working-class everymen loving, cheating on and/or crawling back to strong, understanding girlfriends, wives or mistresses.
Throw in an undercurrent of alcohol-soaked, moralistic ruminations about a fixed set of mandatory topics (prison, religion, mom) and certain basic sociopolitical tenets (when in doubt, wave the flag), and there, with few exceptions, was the genre in a shot glass.
Lately, however, country has been redefining itself, particularly when it comes to the relationship between the sexes, and even its supposedly firmest cliches have been dropping off lyric sheets faster than an unsecured payload falling off the back end of an 18-wheeler on the interstate.


Reed's Left-Out Feeling A Sour Note for Buffalo
Andre Reed is the unhappy Buffalo Bill.
Every year, the Bills have one dissatisfied Super Bowl player.
Thurman Thomas said he wasn't respected.
Bruce Smith said he was the target of racism.
Every year, there is somebody complaining.
This year, that man is Reed.


Learning to Lead by Sweat of the Brow
IMAGINE, if you will, 30 executives in their mid-40's to mid-60's, scaling a 14-foot wooden wall.
Or visualize the same group swinging like Tarzan, one by one, on a rope in order to reach a 3-by-3-foot platform, which has deliberately been made too small to accommodate all of them.
Such exertions are all part of Project Excel, an outdoor program designed to improve participants' risk-taking, problem-solving and team skills.
The program, conducted at Doral Arrowwood in Rye Brook, is geared mainly toward corporate clients but is open to all. (Several college groups have recently attended.)


Beethoven, as He Passed Down Through the Centuries
Now that Mozart mania has subsided, Beethoven has reasserted himself at the center of the symphonic canon.
Beethoven's orchestral music defines the very idea of what the orchestral concert experience can be.
And his historical place at the dawn of the Romantic era makes the stylistic evolution in Beethoven performance a key to our understanding of the Western performance tradition as a whole.
Styles in Beethoven interpretation changed with the styles of composition, from Schumann and Berlioz to Wagner to Mahler to Boulez.
Today, what is doing the most to recast the image of Beethoven is an obsession with history -- a determination to find innovation in a return to the past.
Five new CD releases illuminate the wildly diverse possibilities under the banner of historicism.


Timman Fights Back In Bid for Title Match
JAN TIMMAN fought back stubbornly on Wednesday to decrease the gap that separates him and Nigel Short in their final world championship candidates match in San Lorenzo de El Escorial, Spain.
The 41-year-old Dutchman won Game 11 to trail his 28-year-old English opponent by just one point, 5-6.
Despite the loss, Short was left needing only 1 1/2 points more -- either a victory and a draw, or three draws -- to capture the $124,000 prize in the 14-game series and gain the right to challenge Gary Kasparov of Russia in the title match in August.
The loser gets $76,000.


New York, Laggard on Gays
Saul Weprin, Speaker of the New York State Assembly, thinks he now has enough votes to pass legislation guaranteeing the civil rights of homosexuals.
He plans to put the bill to a vote tomorrow.
It's taken more than 20 years to reach this moment.
The bill, which bars discrimination in employment, credit applications, housing, public accommodations and education, was first introduced in 1971.
Neither chamber has ever passed it.
New York now lags behind seven other states, including Connecticut and New Jersey, that grant gays protection.
In addition, 13 localities, including New York City, have enacted gay-rights ordinances.


With Blind Faith And a Six-Pack, America Tunes In
Call it the Charlie Brown complex.
Every autumn, with infinitely resilient faith in the ultimate goodness of the human spirit, Charlie Brown throws his all into the kickoff, convinced that
this
time his sadistic playmate, Lucy Van Pelt, will not snatch the football away at the last minute.
Suckered again, Charlie Brown.
And every year, in late January, an entire nation seemingly gripped by self-delusion tunes in to the Super Bowl hoping to see a contest worthy of the name.
Unlike Charlie Brown, these viewers have actually been rewarded with a few decent games and one excellent one, two years ago in Super Bowl XXV, when the New York Giants methodically overtook the Buffalo Bills but managed to hang on only because of a missed Buffalo field goal attempt.
So it seems reasonable to hope that another genuine thriller will occur -- along about Super Bowl L, in 2016.


Terie Whittaker, Jon M. Diat
Richard L. Whittaker of Stoneham, Mass., has announced the engagement of his daughter Terie Lynne Whittaker to Jon M. Diat, the son of Jeanne Alexandrovich of Old Brookville, L.I., and the late Valentine M. Diat.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Whittaker, 32, is a financial manager at the Colgate-Palmolive Company in New York.
She graduated from Westfield State College and received a master's degree in accounting from Bentley College.
Her father retired as an engineer for the Stone &amp; Webster Corporation, a Boston engineering company.
The prospective bride is also a daughter of the late Pauline Whittaker.


Karen Jacobowitz, Jeffrey Mayerson
Dr. and Mrs.
Walter E. Jacobowitz of Convent Station, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Leslie Jacobowitz to Jeffrey Craig Mayerson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor Mayerson of Livingston, N.J.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Jacobowitz, 25, is a sales representative for William Kasper Cashmere, a manufacturer of cashmere sweaters in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in Morristown, N.J.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 31, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
ALL AROUND THE TOWN, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) The plight of a college student accused of killing her professor.
2
6
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The death of a woman leads to an investigation involving the American-Japanese rivalry.
3
2
THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of the state of Nebraska on behalf of an Indian tribe.
4
53
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
5
5
MCNALLY'S SECRET, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) A sleuth's pursuit of a stolen block of priceless stamps uncovers scandals.
6
28
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
7
42
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during a trial.
8
1
BLINDSIGHT, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $5.99.) A woman physician seeks to find the cause of a series of strange deaths of Manhattan yuppies.
9
3
BEYOND EDEN, by Catherine Coulter. (Onyx, $5.99.) A young woman trying to escape menaces from her past is aided by a private investigator.
10
2
LINE OF FIRE, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $5.99.) The fifth volume of the series "The Corps" tells of an attempt to rescue two marines on an island in the Solomons during World War II.
11
19
A THOUSAND ACRES, by Jane Smiley. (Fawcett, $12.) The fortunes of a farming family.
12
11
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) An American probes a mysterious balloon accident in the Alps.
13
5
COMPELLING EVIDENCE, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A woman charged with murdering her husband is defended by her former lover.
14
1
GUARDIAN ANGEL, by Sara Paretsky. (Dell, $5.99.) The private eye V. I. Warshawski probes a case involving pet dogs and Chicago scandals.
15 *
14
A RIVER RUNS THROUGH IT, by Norman Maclean. (Pocket, $4.99.) Three tales of the outdoors in western Montana.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
14
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MALCOLM X, with the assistance of Alex Haley. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The life story of the black leader, originally published in 1965.
2
5
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President discusses factors affecting the environment and what must be done to save the earth.
3
482
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
4
89
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
5 *
3
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on the struggle to achieve self-esteem.
6
10
DIANA: Her True Story, by Andrew Morton. (Pocket, $5.99.) A biography of the Princess of Wales.
7 *
16
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
8 *
1
THE PRIZE, by Daniel Yergin. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $16.) The role that oil has played in world history from the mid-19th century to the present.
9
75
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
10
13
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Vintage, $11.) Essays about the recent political and cultural scene.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
119
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
77
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
102
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
4
8
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1993. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
5
1
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1993 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Los Angeles Underground
Older Angelenos remember the days when the Los Angeles region had one of the finest public transit systems in the country.
The Pacific Electric Red Cars rumbled along 1,000 miles of trolley track connecting Los Angeles to cities as far away as Riverside and Newport Beach.
There was even a mile-long subway downtown, the Hollywood Subway.
But by 1961, with fast- growing Los Angeles rushing into the automobile age, the last of the tracks were paved over for freeways.
Now Los Angeles is rushing back to the future.
Its arteries choked with traffic, its air with smog, the city yesterday opened the first segment of -- of all things -- a subway system.
Sleek stainless-steel cars began carrying passengers to five stations along a 4.4-mile route through downtown.
It was the first leg of a planned 22.7-mile underground system, the backbone of a 400-mile region-wide rail network to be completed over 30 years and serving the four counties within the Los Angeles orbit.


No, Mr. Texaco, We Are Not Duplicitous
To the Editor:
In "Sticker Shock at the Clean-Gas Pump" (Viewpoints, Jan. 10), Texaco's chief executive officer, James W. Kinnear, unfairly accuses "politicians" and "environmentalists" of duplicity concerning the higher cost of cleaner-burning gasoline.


Making Use of Dried Fruit in a Variety of Desserts
DRIED fruits aren't just for fruitcake.
They make great desserts, especially during winter when imported fresh fruit can be at a premium.
The other night I had a remarkably moist, rich cake at Follonico, a new Italian restaurant at 6 West 24th Street in Manhattan.
It was made with dried figs.
Alan Tardi, the chef, sent me the recipe, which he said was developed by his pastry chef, Chris Smreker.
The cake can be eaten as a dessert or a snack at any time of day (and it goes very well with a glass of sweet white wine at the end of a meal).


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Nov. 92
Nov. 91
Change
Starts
1,242
1,085
+14.5%
Completions
1,229
1,021
+20.4%
Sales
565
578
- 2.2%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.21
8.22
8.77
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.28
5.31
5.99
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.06
8.10
8.62
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.11
5.15
5.81
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.08
8.12
8.61
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.82
4.84
5.88
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.33
8.29
8.91
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.81
5.85
6.54
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.47
3.50
4.14
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.49
7.49
8.25
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Katharine McClinton, Antiques Writer, 94
Katharine Morrison McClinton, the author of more than 30 books on antiques, died on Wednesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 94.
She died of heart failure, said her daughter, Julianna A. Mortensen, of Darien, Conn.


Pavement Clock
To the Editor:
For those of us interested in public clocks, it was cheering to read "Fixed in Cement, Not in Time" on Jan. 10 about the 70-year-old clock embedded in the sidewalk at the corner of Broadway and Maiden Lane.


Sound Bytes; Meeting Challenges With Inward-Looking Focus
AST Research Inc. originally made memory and multifunction expansion boards for early I.B.M. personal computers.
Now, it clearly has momentum in a fiercely competitive market.
As president and chief executive, Safi Qureshey (pronounced KRESH-ee) has presided over such innovations as upgradable PC's, 24-hour computer bulletin board and facsimile customer support, and a segmented product line, ideas that have since been adopted by I.B.M., Apple, Compaq, Dell and others.
Question: Your company is in the top 10 in PC makers and is gaining market share.
Why are you successful when so many others have slipped?


POSTINGS: Recruitment and Training; Filling Trade Center Jobs
The World Trade Center's 350 corporate tenants may soon find it easier to fill vacant jobs.
On Thursday, the four-building complex opened a recruitment and employee training center that will serve as a clearinghouse for applicants funneled in through personnel agencies, colleges, government offices and industry councils, as well as individuals who come in on their own.


Workbench From Ordinary Lumber and Basic Tools
A STURDY workbench need not be expensive or hard to build.
The one shown here consists of ordinary construction-grade lumber and can be made with basic carpentry tools.
If you do not have a power circular saw for cutting the sheet materials required, have them cut at the lumberyard.
The cost is about $1 a cut.
Workbench dimensions can be altered to suit individual tastes, although the length and width used in the example permit making the bench with a single 4 x 8-foot sheet of plywood.
The height, which is just under 34 inches, should be comfortable for most people, but increase the length of the legs by one or two inches if you are taller than six feet.


After Just 11 Days, TV Issues Verdict on Clinton
If all honeymoons were like this, heart-shaped pools might never have been invented.
Just 10 days ago, Bill Clinton took the oath of office in a warm, exuberant burst of television coverage complete with blue skies, fluttering flags and gauzy shots of the Capitol dome.
But no sooner had the President hung up his formal wear than the glow of the inauguration gave way to cold assessments of his first 100 hours.


Hitler's Rise Recalled With Sorrow
Hundreds of thousands of Germans turned out for candlelight vigils and other antiracist observances today on the 60th anniversary of the day Hitler became Chancellor.
The anniversary came as Germans were asking themselves disturbing questions about their future.
Violence against foreigners and acts of anti-Semitism have darkened the political landscape, and today's demonstrations were quiet and reflective.


The Emperor's New Clothes Dept.
To the Editor:
As an artist who has done site-specific installations for years, I want to thank Roberta Smith for verbalizing what I've been feeling  [ "In Installation Art, a Bit of the Spoiled Brat," Jan. 3 ] .
I am relieved that someone has finally blown the whistle on so much bad (mediocre, uninteresting) work.
I find myself saying, "Oh, great -- another pile of (fill in the blank): body fluids, rubber products, dead leaves and branches, recycled media."


James Mellin, Kim Abrahamson
Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Abrahamson of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kim Kathleen Abrahamson, to James Nicholas Mellin, a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
John O. Mellin of Orleans, Mass.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Abrahamson, 29, graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in art history at American University.
Her father is the president of Key Filters, a manufacturer of recycling products in Worcester, Mass.
Her mother, Kathleen Abrahamson, is a reading specialist at the Windward School in White Plains.


'Pearl Harbor: Final Judgement'
To the Editor:
Henry C. Clausen and I, the authors of "Pearl Harbor: Final Judgement," regretted that Stanley Weintraub, in his letter to the editor (Nov. 29), said we base one of our claims -- that the 14th part of the Japanese message concerning the breaking of relations with the United States was available to Washington nine hours earlier than previously assumed -- "upon the admittedly fuzzy memory of an admittedly incompetent colonel, rather than check out what he actually received" on the night of Dec. 6, 1941.


Hunt for Highway Killer Is Undiminished
Along the Grand Central Parkway, where it crosses from Nassau County into Queens, the police have combed the grassy shoulders, set up a roadblock and handed out 2,000 fliers -- all in an increasingly desperate effort to catch a highway killer.
"It's like finding a needle in a haystack at this moment -- until we catch a break," said Sgt.
John Russell, commander of the 111th Precinct Detective Squad in Bayside, Queens.


Approaching The Exotic Rationally
Samuel Johnson described opera as "an exotic and irrational entertainment." Sometimes writing about opera has that character as well.
But the recently published New Grove Dictionary of Opera (four volumes, $850) is, in this respect, thoroughly nonoperatic.
It is sober, rational, conservative, careful and complete.
Edited by Stanley Sadie, this unique encyclopedia may first be measured by statistics: more than 5,000 pages and 10,000 articles including entries on 2,500 singers, 2,900 composers, 550 librettists and 2,000 operas.
Some of the 1,300 authors are ideally matched with their subjects: D. Kern Holoman on Berlioz, William Ashbrook on Donizetti, John Tyrrell on Janacek, Ellen Rosand on Monteverdi, Barry Millington on Wagner, Richard Taruskin on Russian opera.


Where the Young Are Stranded in Poverty, a Good Samaritan Stops His Van
The police warn strangers to stay out of this city's thickest concentration of public housing, on the south side, without an escort.
Mothers cajole children as old as 18 to get home the moment school lets out.
One day in mid-January, while workers were in Booker T. Washington High School installing alarms, someone broke into their parked vans.
But there is another van often seen in this district of two-story brick project buildings, one that is immune to such an assault.
It is an old silver-gray Ford van whose floor is littered with soda pop cans and whose driver, a blond, bearded man, often stops to chat with schoolchildren, reminding them to come in for tutoring or asking about a sick parent.


Recent Sales
Howell  $97,000
9 Brookside Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 25-year-old ranch; eat-in-kitchen, full basement, w/w carpeting; taxes $1,722.
Jackson  $117,000
56 Woodland Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 14-year-old bi-level; c/a, w/w carpeting, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,155.
Mahwah  $355,000
34 Deerhaven Road  4-bedroom, 2-full-, 2-half-bath, 13-year-old colonial; fireplace, 2-car garage, library; taxes $5,263.
Oradell  $165,000
441 Kinderkamack Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 51-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, den, front porch, full basement; $2,817.
Park Ridge  $183,000
126 Spring Valley Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 32-year-old split level; family room, 2-car garage, patio; taxes $3,842.
River Vale  $360,000
557 Faletti Way  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; fireplace, 2-car garage, c/a, cathedral ceiling; taxes $7,579.
OTHER AREAS White Plains, N.Y.  $279,000
116 Grandview Avenue  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 66-year-old Norman Tudor; den, fireplace, dining room, pantry, family room; taxes $2,767.
Deep River, Conn.  $115,000
39 Union Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 67-year-old bungalow; front porch, 1-car garage, 50- by 154-foot lot; taxes $1,673.
East Northport  $175,000
44 Circle Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 2-car garage, pool; taxes $3,800.1


Cross Endorsements and Mondello's Stance
The Nassau County Republican chairman, Joseph N. Mondello, claims that the November election of George Murphy to State Supreme Court is proof that his Republicans can win election without the support of other parties such as the Conservatives.
Mr.
Mondello's statement is misleading.
Since there were six vacancies last year on the State Supreme Court for the Nassau-Suffolk District, Mr.
Murphy was running in a race where the top six candidates would be elected.
While Mr.
Murphy did not have the Conservative line, he sought and obtained the Right to Life line.
Without the 53,791 votes he received on the Right to Life line, Mr.
Murphy would have finished in ninth place and been defeated.
Because of the Right to Life votes, however, Mr.
Murphy moved up, from ninth to fifth place, and was elected.


Sears Catalogue: To Shop, Perchance to Dream
IN 1958, I wanted a Tiny Tears doll more than anything else in the world.
"Tiny Tears cries tears, wets, blows bubbles," the Sears catalogue said.
"Squeeze her . . . see the big tears well up in her eyes. Hear her cry, too."
I suppose if I'd been worrying about my parents dying (the word divorce hadn't shown up in rural Maryland yet and certainly not in the Sears catalogue), I would have prayed for their lives, but as long as Mother was frying chicken in the kitchen, I could pray for a Tiny Tears.


THE MORNING-AFTER PILL
In her article, Jan Hoffman reminds us that there is an emergency postcoital contraceptive available in the United States, albeit only to those who know about it and can afford to pay their own way.


Surfacing
REVIVALS --
Hunter Thompson:
He was but a distant murmur in the heyday of the Reagan/Bush years.
But now we can't get enough of his fear and loathing. (Three biographies are due out this year alone.) The times they are a'changin'.
NOVELTIES --
Clinton wigs:
Since the Presidential election, these salt-and-pepper hairpieces (available with fake nose) have become a best seller at Hidden Identity, a Manhattan novelty shop.
Outsize Perot ears are a distant second.
No one requests the Bush mask anymore.
RELAXATION --
Spa kids:
Luxury spas (i.e. rest) and kids (i.e. exhaustion) are not supposed to mix.
But the Phoenician, in Scottsdale, Ariz., has found a compromise: a day camp for children 5 to 12.


Looking Back
A retrospective of Martin Munkacsi's photos, Jan. 26.


Payton Is Among Five Elected to Hall
Walter Payton, the National Football League's career rushing leader, was elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame today.
So were Chuck Noll and Bill Walsh, the coaches with more Super Bowl victories than any others; Dan Fouts, a marvelous passing quarterback for 15 years, and Larry Little, a prototype offensive guard for 14 seasons.
In voting by a panel of 34 pro football writers, the only finalists not elected were tight end Jackie Smith from the regular category and offensive guard Dick Stanfel from the seniors category.
Smith will become one of the final 14 nominees (plus one senior) next year.
The five who were elected will be inducted this summer at the Hall of Fame in Canton, Ohio.


Richard G. Holzinger, Sally E. Peters
Roy A. Peters and Doris Peters, both of St.
Clair Shores, Mich., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sally Elizabeth Peters to Richard George Holzinger, the son of Lucia Holzinger of Houston and the late Richard J. Holzinger.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Peters, 31, is a senior editor at Pocket Books in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father owns A. H. Peters Funeral Services in Grosse Pointe, Mich.
The future bride is a stepdaughter of Marcy Peters.


Striking Musicians and Orchestra Group Have Tentative Pact
After a 17-hour negotiating session that began Friday night, a tentative contract was reached yesterday between the striking freelance orchestra players represented by Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians, and the Orchestra Managers of New York, a consortium representing eight ensembles affected by a weeklong walkout.
The eight orchestras are the American Symphony Orchestra, the American Composers Orchestra, the New York Chamber Symphony of the 92d Street Y, the Little Orchestra Society, the Opera Orchestra of New York, the Riverside Symphony, the New York Pops and the New York City Symphony.
A ninth orchestra, the Brooklyn Philharmonic, settled separately last week.


Municipalities Are Moving Forward On Housing
WHEN an Irvington resident offered to donate an acre of land for affordable housing recently, village officials were delighted -- and relieved.
A project sponsored by the community, they agreed, is far better than one imposed on it.
"The county has already developed a target list and a suggested quota," the Irvington Village Administrator, Stephen McCabe, said last week.
"This donation puts us in a proactive position of determining a suitable affordable-housing project for Irvington on our own terms," he said, "rather than waiting for the county to tell us we must."


A Repeat: Courier Wins in Australia
Jim Courier beat six men to reach the final of the Australian Open.
To win he had to beat Stefan Edberg and the heat.
Courier's 6-2, 6-1, 2-6, 7-5 victory came in on-court temperatures that exceeded 150 degrees.
It gave him his fifth Grand Slam singles title and second straight in Melbourne.


Karen Wassong and Anton Hios
John and Ellen Mirtz of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of her daughter, Karen M. Wassong, to Anton T. Hios, a son of Themis and Elfriede Hios of Old Greenwich, Conn.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Wassong, 26, is an account executive at Alcone Sims O'Brien, a sales promotion agency in Elmsford, N.Y.
Her father, Laurence Wassong of Westport, Conn., is a consultant to CME-KHBB, an advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
The prospective bride's stepfather is the president of Mirtz Morice Inc., an executive-search and consulting company in Stamford, Conn.
She is also the stepdaughter of Natalie Wassong.


Croats Are Easing the Danger of Damaged Dam's Collapse
Croatian officials said today that they had succeeded in easing somewhat the water pressure on the damaged Peruca Dam, lessening the danger of an immediate collapse that could inundate thousands of residents below it.
The dam, 40 miles north of this city on the Dalamtian Coast, had been rigged with explosives by Serbs who controlled it in the war with Croatia in 1991.
On Thursday, in the fighting between Croats and Serbs in Croatia that resumed last week, explosions damaged the 200-foot-high dam.
It is still standing, but experts warn that the danger of eventual destruction is far from over.


Somalia Sweep Shows G.I. Role Shift
The 10th Mountain Division of the United States Army set out to plant a "big foot" in this farming village outside Mogadishu, launching an air assault to empty the town of the weapons that had terrorized it.
But leaflets and announcements blanketed the village the day before the division arrived, and the high-profile operation turned into an object lesson on good intentions gone awry.
Descending in 17 Blackhawk helicopters, 200 soldiers from Fort Drum, N.Y., fanned out over the dirt streets.
A second contingent of 500 cordoned off the village.
By evening's end, the fields of weapons that military spokesmen had said they would dig up proved barren.
One rifle was seized.


Casino Minds Image of Integrity in Hiring Executives
Mindful of the need to project an anti-corruption image in its marketing, the tribal council at the Foxwoods casino here hired J. Michael Brown, a high-profile figure from the world of gambling controls, as chief executive officer.
Mr.
Brown previously served in New Jersey as a state anti-gambling prosecutor and regulator.


Gays in Military Would Hurt Combat Efficiency; Not Truman's Situation
To the Editor:
"No Wavering on Gay Soldiers" (editorial, Jan. 20) implies that President Harry S. Truman with a stroke of his pen instantly eliminated segregation in the armed forces, and that President Clinton could and should do the same for the ban on gays and lesbians.
This is historically inaccurate and assumes that racial discrimination in the armed forces and an explicit military doctrine that bans homosexuals can be handled in the same manner.


De Klerk's Gorbachev Problem
THREE DAYS AFTER A ZULU HORDE SHOT AND SLASHED ITS WAY THROUGH THE BLACK South African township of Boipatong last June, President F. W. de Klerk climbed into the back seat of his presidential limousine and led a motorcade into the stricken settlement, where he expected to dismount and deliver his condolences to the bereaved.
However bitter the township's pain, whatever the political agitators said, de Klerk was confident that ordinary blacks did not hold him responsible.
He was wrong.
The townspeople, convinced that de Klerk's police had conspired in the slaughter, had to be fended off by machine-gun-toting security guards, as they chanted their fury at the white President until he abandoned his mission and fled.
Watching the feckless President chased from the township, I thought I recognized his expression, that forced smile tightening into a rigid grimace.
I had seen it on Mikhail Gorbachev's face two years earlier, when a fist-shaking column of Soviet citizens marched into Red Square on the heels of the May Day parade, screeching "Resign!" and "Shame!" at the Kremlin leadership.


High School Offers Inmates a Future
WITH its carpeted floor, banks of computers, walls decorated with maps, posters and diagrams of human anatomy and bookshelves stacked with encyclopedias, social studies texts and math workbooks, this could be any high school classroom.
As their instructor sketches out the afternoon's project on an easel -- to design and draw a time-line portrait of their lives from childhood to the present -- the students, dressed in sweatshirts, T-shirts, loose pants and sneakers, pay close attention.
There are few sounds other than the soft scratching of pencil on paper or a quiet question to clarify the assignment.
To a visitor at the Sprain Brook Academy, the rambunctious horseplay that often pervades so many high schools is refreshingly absent.
But perhaps it is not so surprising that the students are so serious -- and so silent -- as they bend their heads over their papers or search a computer screen for an answer.


Audrey Hepburn: Farewell to the Swan
"Everybody's definition of class: Academy Award-winner Audrey Hepburn!" exclaimed a breathless announcer at last year's Academy Awards show.
We may have rolled our eyes, but we certainly knew what he meant.
Audrey Hepburn, who died on Jan. 20 at the age of 63, was the embodiment of grace, generosity and kindness, a performer who filled the screen with entrancing light.
With her passing, the cinema lost more than a well-loved actress: it lost a swan.
There is a deeper than usual sadness associated with the death of this particular star.
Audrey Hepburn charmed audiences in unexpected ways, and she set a standard of beauty that touched an entire generation.
Like her contemporary, Grace Kelly, she radiated the sort of hothouse loveliness that could not have been manufactured by Hollywood's star-making apparatus.
What's more, she softened her regal manner with glacier-melting warmth.
"I myself was born with an enormous need for affection and a terrible need to give it," she told Alan Riding of The New York Times in 1991, on the eve of her being honored by the Film Society of Lincoln Center.
"That's what I'd like to think maybe has been the appeal."


Science Fiction
The novels and short stories of Kim Stanley Robinson constitute one of the most impressive bodies of work in modern science fiction.
In books like "The Gold Coast" (1988) and "Pacific Edge" (1990) he virtually invented a new kind of science fiction, in which characters as richly drawn as any in conventional fiction inhabit near-future worlds evoked with as much verisimilitude as the contemporary settings of any conventional novel.
This is even more difficult than it sounds.
Just how difficult can be seen in Mr.
Robinson's RED MARS (Spectra/Bantam, cloth, $22.95; paper, $11.95).
As always, Mr.
Robinson is admirably ambitious; this 519-page novel is the first of a projected trilogy about the colonization of Mars.
In the last decade or so, space probes and other forms of scientific surveillance have greatly extended our knowledge of Earth's second-nearest neighbor in the solar system.
The Mars of earlier science fiction -- the Mars of H. G. Wells or Edgar Rice Burroughs or Ray Bradbury -- has been relegated to myth and fantasy.
Without having set foot on Mars, we know a great deal about the atmosphere and surface of the planet.
Mr.
Robinson has thoroughly digested this material and woven it into the fabric of his narrative, which deals with the settlement of Mars by a hundred carefully chosen scientists who fight among themselves over the future of the planet, only to see all their visions overwhelmed by the needs and greed of later settlers.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 10 about film roles for women misstated the eligibility rules for Academy Award nominations.
A film must open by Dec. 31 in the Los Angeles area and run for one week.
"Passion Fish" qualified because it opened in Los Angeles.


Gone


Kristin Marting, Carl Skutsch
Leeda Marting of New York has announced the engagement of her daughter Kristin Marting to Carl Skutsch, the son of Gerhard Skutsch of San Francisco and Barbara Skutsch of Tuscon, Ariz.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Marting, 26, is a co-founder and co-artistic director of the Tiny Mythic Theater Company, a nonprofit, Off Off Broadway theater group in New York.
She graduated from New York University.


'The Crying Game' Wins at Gimmickry
The world is full of people who don't want to hear another overheated word about "The Crying Game," and I sympathize.
So, relax.
I have not come to praise a film that has already been overpraised and overhyped.
And I have not come to bury it, because it is far too intelligent, stylish and intriguing to deserve that.
This is a reality check: "The Crying Game" is not the greatest movie ever made.
It is not even the greatest movie Neil Jordan ever made (choose between "The Miracle" and "Mona Lisa").
But it
is
a fascinating example of how a smart, small film can get a huge amount of mileage out of a gimmick.
For anyone who has managed to escape the onslaught of publicity about the cult film of the moment, the critical fact is that "The Crying Game" contains a much talked-about secret, revealed halfway through.
In the first part of the film, an Irish Republican Army member named Fergus (Stephen Rea) guards and befriends a kidnapped prisoner named Jody (Forrest Whitaker).
In the second part, Fergus goes to London and looks up Jody's lover, Dil (Jaye Davidson).


The Nuclear Risk Shifts to Asia
After America and Russia agreed to radical arms reductions, the risk of nuclear war seemed to recede, to the relief of most ordinary mortals.
But the risk may just have been relocated -- to South Asia, where India and Pakistan are careering along on a nuclear collision course.
Turbulent politics in both countries may be accelerating the pace.
A standstill agreement between India and Pakistan, policed by mutual inspections, could arrest this dangerous development.
But there may be precious little time left for the Clinton Administration to help arrange it.


Let Us Now Praise A Compromising Man
THE United States Mint is issuing three new commemorative coins honoring James Madison and the Bill of Rights.
Two of them are silver and one is gold.
The silver coins are a half-dollar and a $1 piece, each with a different design.
The gold design is a $5 piece.


Police Protection
The status symbol among the black-leather-jacket crowd is the vintage double-breasted leather jacket worn by mounted police officers and highway patrol officers.
The authoritarian look contrasts with that of the biker's jacket, a symbol of rebellion since the 1950's and the movies of James Dean and Marlon Brando.
The policeman's uniform jacket, with silver or gold buttons (depending on the city it came from), suggests a movement from anarchy to order and control.


Shari Hyman, Daniel Horwitz
Steven and Miriam Hyman of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Shari Corinne Hyman, to Daniel James Horwitz, a son of Irwin Horwitz of Woodbury, L.I., and Inez Horwitz of Sayville, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hyman, 26, and her fiance, 32, are assistant district attorneys in the New York County District Attorney's office.
She graduated from Columbia University, as did her fiance, and received her law degree from Northwestern University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Leavy Rosensweig &amp; Hyman.
Her mother is a partner in the New York law firm of Robinson Silverman Pearce Aronsohn &amp; Berman.


Fashion's Night To Preen
TOMORROW's the night the fashion industry celebrates itself at its annual awards gala.
Against a background of flashing videos, silver statuettes will be handed out to designers and others who have made fashion news.
Among them are Donna Karan for her untraditional men's wear, Marc Jacobs for his foray into grunge, Chrome Hearts for its silver and black leather biker accessories and Steven Meisel for his arresting fashion photography.
Want more excitement?
The lineup of presenters includes Cher (in something outrageous, no doubt), Natasha Richardson and Elton John.
More than 2,000 guests will fill the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center for an event that has become a highlight on the calendar of anyone involved in fashion.


Learning to Lead by Sweat of the Brow
IMAGINE, if you will, 30 executives in their mid-40's to mid-60's, scaling a 14-foot wooden wall.
Or visualize the same group swinging like Tarzan, one by one, on a rope in order to reach a 3-by-3-foot platform, which has deliberately been made too small to accommodate all of them.
Such exertions are all part of Project Excel, an outdoor program designed to improve participants' risk-taking, problem-solving and team skills.
The program, conducted at Doral Arrowwood in Rye Brook, is geared mainly toward corporate clients but is open to all. (Several college groups have recently attended.)


Iran's Chief Faces Merchant Class's Challenge
President Hashemi Rafsanjani, who has had to contend with hard-line Islamic rivals to his Government, is facing a new challenge, this time from conservative political opponents demanding a greater share of power and less Government involvement in the economy.
The challenge comes from the Bazar, the traditional class of merchants and money-lenders who have been instrumental in the political successes of Mr.
Rafsanjani, himself a Bazari.
The economically liberal but culturally hard-line conservatives inside government are making the Bazari complaints heard.


Elisa Miller, Scott Gothe
Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Miller of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elisa Cole Miller, to Dr.
Scott Alan Gothe, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Gothe of Pittsburgh.
A May wedding is planned.


5 Goals Aren't Enough To Save 6-Game Streak
The era of collective competence had extended to six whole games.
But a madcap visit from the Boston Bruins brought the Islanders' finest streak in three years to an uncomfortable 6-5 conclusion tonight at Nassau Coliseum.
"The things we did early in this streak to make ourselves successful, we didn't do tonight," said goalie Glenn Healy, who was victimized three times by Boston on seven third-period shots.


Unknown Factors for Cowboys And Bills
The last time the Buffalo Bills played the Dallas Cowboys, Jim Kelly was a rookie quarterback for the Houston Gamblers of the United States Football League.
Frank Reich was the quarterback at the University of Maryland and still savoring a stunning, come-from-behind 42-40 victory over the University of Miami and its first-year head coach, Jimmy Johnson.
Just over eight years have passed since then.
Kelly is the Bills' starting quarterback, and Reich his backup, for the Buffalo Bills, who will meet Johnson's Cowboys in Super Bowl XVII Sunday at the Rose Bowl.
But there is very little track record between the teams to establish any sort of pattern.


Is the G.O.P. In Nassau in Disarray?
You have had laudatory articles about the Nassau County Republican Party while the county is drowning in a sea of fiscal red ink and debt.
There never seems to be a mention of the political infighting and turmoil, nor of the consequences of the actions of the Board of Supervisors in their handling of the county's fiscal affairs.
In "Conservative and Independent Votes Crucial"  [ Jan. 3 ]  you say "voters signal their disgust with politics as usual," but completely ignore the fact that it was the Democratic Party that has ended the stagnating one-party boss rule that has brought the county to its present crisis.


Wall Street; A Big Gamble on Mississippi Casinos
IT's only fitting that in a stock market criticized for its casino mentality, the shares of almost every gaming company are going through the roof.
And few of those stocks have moved as far and as fast as the small, relatively unknown companies running or planning riverboat casinos on Mississippi's Gulf Coast, which began to open for business just last August.
A number of these companies -- including Grand Casinos, Casino Magic, Casino America and President Riverboat Casinos -- have seen their stock prices more than double in recent months on enthusiasm about the revenue figures coming in from Mississippi.
The run-up has been so strong that some of these relative newcomers to the gambling scene are trading at prices near or above more established operators, such as Caesars World and MGM Grand Inc.


Helping the Homeless Believe in Tomorrow
THE homeless men in the shelter joked and bragged at the kitchen counter while dinner was being prepared.
Talk was about the future.
It had been a long time since this group had some real successes to boast about, much less futures to look forward to.
The men were former addicts, derelicts who once roamed the streets at night looking for crack and alcohol -- who no longer have "to duck the light, or duck anything or anybody," as one of them said.


Amy Underberg and David Applebaum
Mr. and Mrs.
Neil Underberg of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Amy Singer Underberg, to David Paul Applebaum, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Applebaum of Todt Hill, S.I.
A May wedding is planned.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
PIGS FROM 1 TO 10.
Written and illustrated by Arthur Geisert.
Houghton Mifflin. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 9) In this companion to the ingenious "Pigs From A to Z" the piglets go exploring again.
This time the 10 youngsters are searching for a lost place, and they and the hidden numerals from zero through nine appear on each double page of their quest.
There is a key to the illustrations at the end, which child readers may not need but adults probably will.


Treasures of African Ornamentation
AN awesome wooden headdress, carved from a tree trunk, stands at the entrance of the African Gallery of the Newark Museum.
The figure of a Nigerian chieftain on horseback is the centerpiece of the headdress.
Two rows of hand-carved warriors, a scholar with a book, drummers, women with babies and members of the chief's retinue surround him.
The great weight (about 80 pounds) and immense size (five feet tall) must have challenged the strength and grace of the dancer who supported it on his shoulders at an Epa festival.
This annual event celebrates the history and culture of the Yoruba people of southwest Nigeria.


Perspectives: Mixed-Income Housing; Finding a Way To Keep Building
"PEOPLE have a perception that New York City is suffering worse than it is," says Stephen M. Ross, president of The Related Companies, a development, management and financial services firm based in Manhattan.
"Actually, the rental market is strong."
When a developer says "people" he usually has lenders in mind.
Mr.
Ross has been busy of late trying to get lenders' perceptions to reflect his own experience lately in renting out apartments.
He has succeeded sufficiently, it seems, to win a financial commitment for his next Manhattan project from a pension fund he declined to identify, a 180-unit residential building on the southeast corner of First Avenue and 84th Street.
Groundbreaking is expected in late spring.


New &amp; Noteworthy
CELIA, A SLAVE, by Melton A. McLaurin. (Avon, $10.) For women, slavery often included sexual servitude.
Such was the case with Celia, who was purchased in Missouri in 1850 at about the age of 14, then forced to submit to her master's advances until she finally killed him five years later. (She was hanged for his murder.) "Mr. McLaurin succeeds admirably in using Celia's story to raise larger issues about the meaning of American slavery for both blacks and whites, for both women and men," Drew Gilpin Faust said here in 1991.
MISS MACINTOSH, MY DARLING, Volumes One and Two, by Marguerite Young. (Dalkey Archive, $15 each.) In a text that fills almost 1,200 pages, Marguerite Young explores the nature of Miss MacIntosh, a drowned elderly governess whose exterior was artifice (she wore a wig and a false breast) and whose interior world remains a mystery.
Vera Cartwheel, who was cared for by Miss MacIntosh in her childhood, narrates the novel, whose Joycean monologues and stream-of-consciousness prose created a literary sensation when it was first published in 1965.
Our reviewer, William Goyen, called the book "a mammoth epic, a massive fable, a picaresque journey, a Faustian quest and a work of stunning magnitude and beauty."


Recruit Pays Dividends As Eagles Sweep Hoyas
When Bill Curley signed a letter of intent with Boston College three years ago, Coach Jim O'Brien declared that Curley was the most important recruit during his tenure as head coach.
This afternoon, Curley demonstrated his value.
The 6-foot-9-inch junior forward scored a game-high 18 points, grabbed 11 rebounds, made 2 steals and even handed out 2 assists as the surging Eagles barreled past Georgetown, 71-61, before a delirious sellout crowd at Conte Arena.


