A New Look for an Old Church


Getting to Yes With North Korea
The latest round of nuclear negotiations with North Korea will pause briefly  this weekend after making little headway.
Both sides seem distracted -- Washington with the restoration of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide and Pyongyang with the inauguration of President Kim Jong Il.
If they are to make progress, they need to focus on what they can agree on.
Instead, both sides seem to be contemplating moves that could derail diplomacy.
The U.S. is discussing resumption of the provocative Team Spirit military exercises with South Korea.
The North is talking about refueling its nuclear reactor to generate more spent fuel for bomb-making.


JUDGE ORDERS $47.9 MILLION PAYMENT TO MOBIL
A Federal judge has ruled that the Amoco Chemicals Corporation must pay the Mobil Corporation $47.9 million, plus interest, for violating three Mobil patents related to the production of paraxylene, an ingredient of polyester.
The case was filed in 1983.
The ruling on damages by United States District Judge Joseph Longobardi in Wilmington, Del., was dated on Thursday.
In addition to the $47.9 million, Amoco must pay Mobil, which is based in Fairfax, Va., interest at the prime rate, compounded quarterly, from the time the lawsuit was filed.
Judge Longobardi found that Amoco infringed three patents, but did not infringe  them willfully, a finding that mitigates damage awards in patent cases.
In the case of willful infringement, a court can treble the amount of damages.


Shipyard Full of Worry in Quebec
Wooden sailing ships, steel steamships, destroyers, frigates, icebreakers, ferries, freighters and tankers have been launched at the MIL-Davie shipyard here since Allison Davie founded the company in 1829.
But now the future is uncertain for the last big shipyard in Quebec.
A Canadian Navy destroyer, the Huron, is getting an electronic overhaul, one of the yard's last big contracts.
When the Huron sails for sea trials at the end of November, employment will plummet to 300 from the current 1,200, already well below the 2,250 workers employed at the end of last year and the 3,200 at the end of 1992.
Without new work, shipbuilding here could go the way of buggy whip  making.


HERMAN'S EMERGES FROM BANKRUPTCY PROTECTION
Herman's Sporting Goods Inc., the sporting goods retailer, emerged from bankruptcy protection yesterday after getting a $60 million line of credit from  BankAmerica.
The company, based in Carteret, N.J., filed for court protection from its creditors in March 1993, shortly after it was acquired by a group of investors led by a unit of the New York merchant banks Whitman Heffernan, Rhein  &amp; Company and Carl Marks &amp; Company.
The management firm Taggart/Fasola Group, which specializes in revitalizing ailing companies, is also a part owner.
The company said it planned to add 40 stores in the Boston-to-Washington corridor in the next three years.
The company has 103 stores from Boston to Washington, with about 3,000 employees.


Shuttle Soars Into Space on Mission to Detect Environmental Changes onEarth
The space shuttle Endeavour began sweeping Earth with advanced radars today in an effort to detect and monitor both natural and human-induced environmental  changes that affect life on the planet.


The Auschwitz of Haiti for 3 Decades Gives Up the Secrets of its Dark Past
The young American second lieutenant said he had not been aware of an evil such as Fort Dimanche.
The torture and killing that went on for three decades in the crumbling old prison, and the mass grave that rises from the weeds outside the walls, eclipse anything he has ever known.
Now, Lieut.
Jeff Shuck, 24, of Memphis, is the master of one of the most foreboding, horrifying places in Haiti.


Grief and Anger in City Where Friends Are Gone
Right after hearing on Wednesday morning that a ferry had gone down en route  from Tallinn, Estonia, to Stockholm, Majlis Alm rushed down to the senior citizen's center here, fearing the worst.


Insurers Punish Some Drivers for Their Age
To the Editor:
I have asked the American Association of Retired Persons to reconsider its contractual relationship with ITT Hartford because the company's car insurance rates discriminate against older motorists.


Grief and Anger in City Where Friends Are Gone;'A Devastating Tragedy'
The waiting room for the ferry to Stockholm, until this week a happy and even exuberant meeting place for shoppers and party lovers, felt today like a morgue  without bodies.
On a bulletin board in one corner of the room hung the latest official list of suvivors from the disaster on Wednesday.
The list bore 140 names, too few for the numbed friends and relatives who waited in small knots, slowly losing hope that their loved ones would somehow reappear.


No Headline
The very people who want to keep this system that has brought Congress into  such disrepute are trying to be the beneficiaries of that disrepute." -- SENATOR GEORGE J. MITCHELL, the Democratic leader, blaming Repubicans for the death of a campaign finance bill. [1:2.]
"I make no apologies for killing this turkey of a bill." SENATOR MITCH MCCONNELL, the Kentucky Republican who led the filibuster against it. [1:2.]


POP
Testing the Sonic Limits Of the Tenor Saxophone Iridium


Justice for Hurley
A Sacramento, Calif., jury deliberated for about two hours yesterday without  reaching a verdict in the trial of a motorist involved in a near-fatal collision with Sacramento Kings guard BOBBY HURLEY.
It will convene again on Monday.
The prosecution argued during the four-day trial that DANIEL WIELAND had his headlights off the night of Dec. 12, 1993, when his station wagon slammed into the basketball player's four-wheel-drive vehicle near Arco Arena. (AP)


Meditations In Folk-Rock
The Canadian singer and songwriter Bruce Cockburn has created a body of work  (22 albums in more than two decades) that adds up to a carefully weighted balance sheet on the pros and cons of the human condition.
Mr.
Cockburn, who is  a Christian mystic of a very undogmatic sort, is continually finding intimations of divinity in the Canadian sky.
But he also cries out against human cruelty, greed and thoughtlessness in a voice that even when raised in righteous anger, usually sounds more saddened than enraged.
Very occasionally, as in his well-known song "If I Had a Rocket Launcher," Mr.
Cockburn (pronounced COH-burn) succumbs to his own frustration.
In that song, he fantasizes wiping out the forces of right-wing political oppression by  pushing a button.


Irvan Goes Home
Driver ERNIE IRVAN was released from a Charlotte, N.C., hospital yesterday, five weeks after he almost died following a wreck at Michigan International Speedway.
Irvan, 35, sustained life-threatening brain and lung injuries Aug. 20  in a crash during practice for the Goodwrench Dealer 400. (AP)


Lamoriello And Devils Both Want To Play
Lou Lamoriello and Bruce Driver are on opposing sides on the National Hockey  League labor dispute, but they agreed on one thing the day the owners postponed  the start of the season.
"I cringe at the idea that we're not playing the Rangers tomorrow night," Lamoriello, the president and general manager of the Devils, said tonight.
"I bleed for the people who are affected by this."


The Real Reason Mobil Opposes Ethanol Rules
To the Editor:
Mobil Oil claims in "When is a deal, a deal?" (advertisement, Sept. 22) that  Environmental Protection Agency rules governing the production and distribution  of reformulated gasoline have been derailed by, of all things, "politics."


Gary Bettman Becomes N.H.L.'s Lightning Rod
National Hockey League Commissioner Gary Bettman has become a symbol of yet another sport undergoing labor distress.
He has been excoriated by such players  as Chris Chelios, accused of not knowing enough about hockey and not recognizing various players at meetings.
He has been reviled for being a New York lawyer who is anti-Canadian.
He has even been mocked by one writer for wearing funny shoes.
After announcing yesterday that the league was postponing the start of the season until at least Oct. 15 to gain more time to negotiate a collective bargaining agreement with the players' union, Bettman bristled at the criticism  that has come his way recently, especially since an announcement last week threatening a lockout today if a labor agreement was not reached.


Ned Rorem's Eloquent Intrigue With the Operatic
Every musical gesture Ned Rorem has ever made has something of the human voice behind it.
Yet opera seems to make him shy.
The Boosey &amp; Hawkes catalogue  of his works is interesting reading: "an opera in one act," "five very short operas," "five scenes for four singers," "melodrama in one scene," "opera in three scenes." Mr.
Rorem keeps putting his foot in the operatic door but remains reluctant to pass through it.
How, for example, are we to describe "A Childhood Miracle" and "Three Sisters Who Are Not Sisters"?
The Magic Circle Opera Repertory Ensemble put on both in concert form at Merkin Concert Hall on Thursday night.
There were soloists on stage doing a minimal amount of acting, and behind them a sizable orchestra conducted by the company's director, Ray Evans Harrell.


New Schools Urged For Violent Students
Seeking to reverse two decades of policy on how to handle the most troubled children in New York City's schools, Chancellor Cortines wants to establish a new system of disciplinary academies, where attendance would be mandatory for students expelled from other schools for carrying guns or illegal knives.
Mayor  Giuliani and Governor Cuomo have endorsed the concept.
Article, page 25.


The Decision Not to Be The Police Backfires
The decision to assign the Haitian police the primary role in maintaining order in Port-au-Prince today came after lengthy talks reflecting the American military's reluctance to become directly involved in police duties, Administration officials said.
They said the options for keeping order during a march by supporters of Haiti's ousted leader were under review as late as Thursday evening, with the American military authorities in Port-au-Prince discussing the issue with White  House, State Department and Pentagon officials.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail;At Least One Ally for Cuomo on the Death Penalty
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has been hearing about the death penalty for so long, and from advocates so passionate, that his eyes glaze at the mention of the subject.
But during an appearance yesterday at the Jewish Home and Hospital for Aged on West 106th Street in Manhattan, the Governor heard something so different as to  be remarkable.
Anne Scott, an 83-year-old resident, told Mr.
Cuomo that she had always voted for him and intended to do so again because "You're against the electric chair, and you're right."


Joseph P. Blitz, 86, A Retired Builder
Joseph P. Blitz, retired president of J. P. Blitz Inc., a construction and real-estate company, died on Thursday at his home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He was 86.
He died of a stroke, said his wife, Barbara.


DANCE
Stillness, Concentration And Memories of a Father Japan Society


Race for Governor: Pataki Criticizes Cuomo's Tax Plan
CANDIDATE George E. Pataki


Hockey's Owners Decide to Postpone Opening of Season
On what was scheduled to be the first day of the hockey season and next-to-last day of the baseball season, professional sports will rest today.
Baseball is still shut down by a players' strike that today becomes the longest  work stoppage in professional sports history, and yesterday the National Hockey  League, against the wishes of its players, postponed the start of its season for at least two weeks.
Commissioner Gary Bettman of the N.H.L. announced yesterday that the season,  scheduled to begin with 12 games tonight, would be delayed so the league and the players could continue negotiating a collective bargaining agreement.


CHRONICLE
When BESS MYERSON developed ovarian cancer 21 years ago, she did not tell anyone, not even her family, until she was declared free of the disease.
Tomorrow she will lead a contingent of ovarian cancer survivors on a four-mile walk through Central Park and the Upper West Side of Manhattan to benefit Share, an organization that provides support services to women with breast or ovarian cancer.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY


Public &amp; Private;Don't Read This
Monday: Begin Banned Books Week by reading "Bridge to Terebithia" by Katherine Paterson, which parents in several school districts have tried to remove from required reading lists.
Weep copiously at realistic tale of friendship and loss among children.
Read account of attempts to have the book removed from school libraries in Mechanicsburg, Pa.
Clergyman says the book refers to church services as "boring." Shocked and amazed.


Howard Is Not Shy About Speaking Up As New Union Leader
Don't let Erik Howard fool you.
He is the team's union representative, but he makes it sound as if everyone took a step back and he was the only one standing  there to take the job.
The Giants' veteran defensive lineman is a smart and passionate player, and after being elected the team's player representative on Thursday night, he wasted no time in taking shots at the way the union does business.
He also had some words of advice to the striking baseball players and soon-to-be locked out hockey players -- hold your ground.


U.S.-Japan Talks Head To the Wire
Japanese and American negotiators swapped proposals late into the night in an 11th-hour push to reach agreements on opening Japanese markets after 15 months of acrimonious talks.
Both sides said the most likely result would be partial agreements and partial American sanctions on Japan.
A deal opening Japan's closed insurance market, officials said, is virtually certain, as well as an agreement on opening Japanese Government purchases of telecommunications and medical equipment.
The latter became possible when Japanese negotiators arrived late today with new language on how the two sides would measure whether Japan was following through on its promises to open these  markets.


Rodham to Get Sister's Aid
Stepping in at the 11th hour, Hillary Rodham Clinton will campaign in Florida on Saturday for her brother, Hugh Rodham, in his bid for a United States Senate  seat.
Mr.
Rodham, a former Dade County assistant public defender, faces a runoff election on Tuesday for the Democratic nomination to challenge the popular incumbent, Senator Connie Mack, a Republican.
Mrs.
Clinton and the President have stayed away from the race until now.


ARCO AND TEXACO SETTLE LONGSTANDING DISPUTES
The Atlantic Richfield unit Arco Alaska Inc. and Texaco Inc. have settled longstanding disputes with the State of Alaska over back income and oil-production taxes, Governor Walter Hickel said yesterday.
Arco agreed to pay  $92.4 million to settle disputes over 1979 and 1980 corporate income taxes for oil produced on the North Slope and 1986 production taxes for oil and gas produced on the North Slope, Mr.
Hickel said.
Texaco agreed to pay $6.7 million to settle disputes over production taxes for oil extracted in Alaska from 1982 to 1991, Mr.
Hickel said.


Roll Call on Filibuster
Following is the 52-to-46 roll-call vote by which the Senate today failed to  halt a filibuster against a bill that would have changed the way Congressional campaigns are financed.
The vote fell 8 short of the 60 votes needed to end the  filibuster.
A "yes" vote was a vote to end the filibuster and a "no" vote was a vote to continue it.
Fifty Democrats and 2 Republicans voted "yes"; 6 Democrats and 40 Republicans voted "no."
Alabama: Heflin (D) No; Shelby (D) No.
Alaska: Murkowski (R) No; Stevens (R) No.
Arizona: DeConcini (D) Yes; McCain (R) No.
Arkansas: Bumpers (D) Yes; Pryor (D) Yes.
California: Boxer (D) Yes; Feinstein (D) Yes.
Colorado: Brown (R) No; Campbell (D) No.
Connecticut: Dodd (D) Yes; Lieberman (D) Yes.
Delaware: Biden (D) Yes; Roth (R) No.
Florida: Graham (D) Yes; Mack (R) No.
Georgia: Coverdell (R) No; Nunn (D) Yes.
Hawaii: Akaka (D) Yes; Inouye (D) Yes.
Idaho: Craig (R) No; Kempthorne (R) No.
Illinois: Moseley-Braun (D) Yes; Simon (D) Yes.
Indiana: Coats (R) No; Lugar (R) No.
Iowa: Grassley (R) No; Harkin (D) Yes.
Kansas: Dole (R) No; Kassebaum (R) No.
Kentucky: Ford (D) Yes; McConnell (R) No.
Louisiana: Breaux (D) Yes; Johnston (D) No.
Maine: Cohen (R) No; Mitchell (D) Yes.
Maryland: Mikulski (D) Yes; Sarbanes (D) Yes.
Massachusetts: Kennedy (D) Yes; Kerry (D) Yes.
Michigan: Levin (D) Yes; Riegle (D) Yes.
Minnesota: Durenberger (R) No; Wellstone (D) Yes.
Mississippi: Cochran (R) No; Lott (R) No.
Missouri: Bond (R) No; Danforth (R) No.
Montana: Baucus (D) Yes; Burns (R) No.
Nebraska: Exon (D) Yes; Kerrey (D) No.
Nevada: Bryan (D) Yes; Reid (D) Yes.
New Hampshire: Gregg (R) No; Smith (R) No.
New Jersey: Bradley (D) Yes; Lautenberg (D) Yes.
New Mexico: Bingaman (D) Yes; Domenici (R) No.
New York: D'Amato (R) No; Moynihan (D) Yes.
North Carolina: Faircloth (R) No; Helms (R) No.
North Dakota: Conrad (D) Yes; Dorgan (D) Yes.
Ohio: Glenn (D) Yes; Metzenbaum (D) Yes.
Oklahoma: Boren (D) Yes; Nickles (R) Not Voting.
Oregon: Hatfield (R) No; Packwood (R) No.
Pennsylvania: Specter (R) No; Wofford (D) Yes.
Rhode Island: Chafee (R) Yes; Pell (D) Yes.
South Carolina: Hollings (D) Yes; Thurmond (R) No.
South Dakota: Daschle (D) Yes; Pressler (R) No.
Tennessee: Mathews (D) No; Sasser (D) Yes.
Texas: Gramm (R) No; Hutchison (R) No.
Utah: Bennett (R) Not Voting; Hatch (R) No.
Vermont: Jeffords (R) Yes; Leahy (D) Yes.
Virginia: Robb (D) Yes; Warner (R) No.
Washington: Gorton (R) No; Murray (D) Yes.
West Virginia: Byrd (D) Yes; Rockefeller (D) Yes.
Wisconsin: Feingold (D) Yes; Kohl (D) Yes.
Wyoming: Simpson (R) No; Wallop (R) No.


Navratilova's Banner Night
Four events away from retirement and two weeks shy of turning 38, fourth-ranked Martina Navratilova stopped by Madison Square Garden yesterday and confirmed that she will make her last-ever singles appearance here at the Virginia Slims Championships on Nov. 14-20.
Navratilova has reached the championships final 12 times and won it an unprecedented seven times.
To commemorate her farewell, on Nov. 15 a special banner carrying her name will be hoisted to the Garden rafters that makes Navratilova the only non-Knick or non-Ranger to be honored in that fashion.


Artist Returns to His Beloved Mural
He had been exquisitely reliable about it, turning up like an apparition every 13 or 14 years to inspect and, if necessary, retouch his cherished mural of mirthful children parading across the school walls.
But he would be old now,  if he were even still alive.
Was there a chance he would return again?
In 1939, Herman Simms, a 29-year-old artist kept off the bread lines by the Works Progress Administration, painted a mural in the entranceway of Public School 216 in Gravesend, Brooklyn.
It was his first mural, and he did only two more.
It took him eight months.
He was paid $20 a week.


CHRONICLE
ELIZA SHARP, who describes herself as "a hometown girl from Natchez," says she never would have expected to find herself directing the chefs of the Plaza Hotel.
But that is where the Mississippi chef, who owns a restaurant called Liza in Natchez, will be tomorrow during the opening night party for the musical "Show Boat."
The 1,500 guests will dine on historically accurate Southern food, the kind passengers on a Mississippi riverboat would have had when the boat stopped in Natchez, Vicksburg, Miss., and New Orleans.
It will be authentic, Ms.
Sharp said, because she plans to bring a shaker of cayenne pepper with her.
If a chef  doesn't understand well-seasoned food, she said, "I'll just go behind him with my cayenne."


Death of Student in Moscow Is Now Listed as a Murder
The police first insisted that Mr.
Riccio had killed himself.
A Brown University student who arrived in Moscow on Sept. 10, he was found outside his dormitory at the Russian State Humanities University here with part of a rope around his neck and the rest of it attached to the balcony of his dormitory room on the 16th floor.
But the coroner disagreed with the police assessment, underlining the word murder in his report to the prosecutor's office.
Mr.
Riccio, from Glastonbury, was described by students in the United States and in Moscow as a deeply motivated, well-adjusted Russian major.
Friends and relatives said it was inconceivable that he would kill himself only nine days after arriving in Russia.
He started studying the Russian language in the seventh grade and was proficient enough in it by his sophomore year at Brown to  receive a job as a teaching assistant for freshmen.
Gregarious and outgoing, he  showed no signs of depression or even surprise during his first week in the country, friends said.


A New Power-of-Attorney Form Is Introduced
In the name of consumer protection and clarity, New York State is introducing its new power-of-attorney form today.
Need to authorize someone to do something on your behalf, like sign papers at a real-estate closing or handle business matters while you are in the hospital?
The new document is the one that do-it-yourselfers in New York now need.


Quayle Warmly Backs North and Attacks Clinton
They cheer loud and long for champions of Republican conservatism here in south-central Virginia, and today a country-club crowd of about 200 people, some paying $500 to attend, had a pair of heroes to salute.
At a fund-raising luncheon for Oliver L. North, the Republican candidate for  the United States Senate, former Vice President Dan Quayle wrapped a warm endorsement for Mr.
North around an attack on the Clinton Administration, telling the wildly approving audience: "The choice is real simple. Do you want a Clinton Democrat in the Senate, or a Reagan Republican?"


Bills to Play Bears Without Thomas
Buffalo Bills running back Thurman Thomas will not play in Sunday's game against the Chicago Bears.
Thomas, who has rushed for more than 100 yards in each of Buffalo's last three games, hurt his knee on Monday night against Denver and did not practice all week.
He was designated as inactive by the team today and is thus ineligible to play.


SURGERY IS FOUND TO FIGHT STROKE
A controversial operation to remove fatty deposits from a major artery in the neck sharply reduced the risk of stroke in individuals with no outward symptoms, scientists who conducted a large Federally sponsored study said here today.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF


Douglas A. Pagliotti, Stage Manager, 36
Douglas A. Pagliotti, the production stage manager for the Old Globe Theater  in San Diego, died on Tuesday at his home.
He was 36 and lived in San Diego.
The cause was AIDS, said Will Roberson, his companion.


Velazquez Returns
The Hall of Fame jockey JORGE VELASQUEZ, injured during a training ride in February, returned to competition yesterday at Calder Race Course in Miami.
Velasquez, 47, finished fourth in his only start of the day.
He sustained a broken pelvis and hairline fractures in his neck in the Feb. 3 spill at Calder.  (AP)


Will Oakley Show? Checketts Optimistic
After meeting with Charles Oakley and his representatives on Thursday, Dave Checketts, the Knicks' president, remains hopeful that Oakley will report to training camp starting Friday.
Checketts plans to meet with Oakley's representatives again before camp.
Oakley, unhappy that he is locked into a contract with four years remaining that will pay him $2.2 million this season, has threatened not to report.
Oakley is seeking an extension at the end of his current deal, a one-year balloon payment in the neighborhood of $10 million.
The Knicks reportedly offered the forward a one-year, $4 million extension months ago that Oakley rejected.
But while the two sides have not come to terms, Checketts said his meeting with Oakley was a positive step.


West Need Not Fear Vendetta by Singapore
To the Editor:
"Singapore Executes a Dutch Engineer Arrested on Drug Charges" (news article, Sept. 24) casts doubt on Johannes Van Damme's conviction for drug trafficking, repeating the story that he might have been linked to the Dutch national intelligence agency.


INSIDE
Airplane Noise Plan Rejected


Bartoli, Beyond the Melodic Line
To fully understand what all the fuss was about in Carnegie Hall on Thursday  night -- the television cameras taping for an Oct. 10 broadcast, the formally dressed patrons crowding the aisles, the atmosphere of anticipation in the hall  -- one had to wait until the middle of the concert's second half.
The attraction was not the gala opening of the Carnegie Hall season, nor was it the presence of Sir Neville Marriner conducting the Academy of St.-Martin-in-the-Fields.
Despite the orchestra's 1,000 or so recordings and widely respected achievements, the focus of attention was on Cecilia Bartoli, who is arguably the only classically trained singer under the age of 45 who is a box-office and recording star.
Toward the concert's end, one heard why.
In a selection from Bellini's "Sonnambula," Ms.
Bartoli's voice became an expression of pure delight: sensuous, exuberant and overflowing.
Amina's rapturous series of declarations, extending from "Care compagne, e voi, teneri amici" to "Sovra il sen la man mi posa," is a celebration of unqualified, innocent love.
Ms.
Bartoli gave it precisely that character.
The florid ornaments were never matters of display; they never proclaimed: "Look what my voice can do. Don't you like it?" Instead,  the turns and roulades seemed to be emotion transmuted into sound, eruptions of  feeling that could not be constrained by a simple melodic line.


Sandberg May Coach
RYNE SANDBERG could be back in a Chicago Cubs uniform next year -- as a coach.
Sandberg said yesterday he was talking with the Cubs about doing instructional work in spring training as part of a four-year personal services contract he is negotiating with the team.
"I'd be willing to do that," he said.
Sandberg, 35, lives in Phoenix, where the Cubs train.
He retired on June 13  in the second year of a four-year contract extension worth $29.4 million. (AP)


Fed August Rate Rise Based In Part on Market Concerns
The decision by the Federal Reserve's top interest-rate policy committee on Aug. 16 to raise short-term interest rates by half a percentage point was unanimous and based partly on concerns that a smaller move would disappoint financial markets, according to a summary of the meeting issued today.
"Consideration was given to a lesser adjustment in reserve conditions," said the summary, which is written in central bank and financial market jargon.
"Reserve conditions" and "further monetary tightening" both can be read as interest-rate increases.


Call It Prison Rape
To the Editor:
Your film reviewer refers to a gang rape in "The Shawshank Redemption" as "homosexual rape" (Sept. 23).
Prisoner rape is an outrage perpetrated by heterosexuals, usually on heterosexual victims.
To call it "homosexual" rape gratuitously insults homosexuals and misleads the public about a horrifying practice for more than 300,000 men and boys a year.
If reviewers need to warn viewers that the rape alluded to involves one gender only, "male rape" or "prison rape" would be sufficient.
STEPHEN DONALDSON President Stop Prisoner Rape New York, Sept. 26, 1994


Meltdown in the N.H.L.
Here is what happened yesterday when the N.H.L. owners followed major league  baseball in shutting down their game:


COLT'S MANUFACTURING IS OFFICIALLY OUT OF CHAPTER 11
The Colt's Manufacturing Company announced Thursday that it was officially out of bankruptcy protection after two years in Chapter 11.
Colt's, the gun maker, which first filed for protection from its creditors in 1992, is being taken over by a partnership headed by Zilkha &amp; Company, a New York investment firm.
The partnership paid about $27 million for an 85 percent stake and has assumed another $27 million or so in liabilities.
The state has also paid $10 million to acquire the rights to Colt's name from a group of investors.
The name was split off from the company as part of a 1990 buyout.


Dr. Archer Gordon, 73, Is Dead; Heart Expert Who Devised CPR
Dr.
Archer Gordon, a heart specialist who helped perfect modern cardiopulmonary resuscitation, died on Sept. 18 at Los Robles Hospital in Thousand Oaks, Calif.
He was 73 and lived in Camarillo, Calif.
He died of complications from diabetes, said his son Richard, of Sherman Oaks, Calif.


At a Wake, Mourning A Short Life Of Promise
There were boys as young as 8 or 9, none older than 16.
They sat, mostly quietly, on the stairs and rails outside 423 Baltic Street in Brooklyn, the rare bits of laughter forced.
At last, with the evening light fading, two housing authority cars carrying  the parents of Nicholas Heyward Jr. swung past and out of the Gowanus Houses complex.
And the boys, with a easy, silent unity, began to move.


AMERICAN STORES IS SELLING 45 ACME MARKETS
The American Stores Company said yesterday that it had agreed to sell 45 of its Acme Markets stores in Pennsylvania and New York to the Penn Traffic Company for $94 million.
Penn Traffic will operate the stores under its Insalaco's, P&amp;C  Foods, Riverside Markets and Bi-Lo trade names.
Victor L. Lund, president and chief executive of American Stores, said the stores being sold were profitable but fell outside Acme's core markets in the greater Philadelphia area and the Delaware Valley.
American Stores is one of the nation's largest food and drug retailers, operating 1,678 stores in 27 states.
Penn Traffic operates 236 retail and wholesale food stores in upstate New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio and northern West Virginia.


Cortines Proposes New System To Educate Violent Students
Seeking to reverse two decades of policy on how to handle the most troubled children in New York City's schools, Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines wants to establish a new system of disciplinary academies, where attendance would be mandatory for students expelled from other schools for carrying guns or illegal  knives.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo have both endorsed the concept in recent days.


F.A.A. Offers Plan to Loral
The Federal Aviation Administration will let the Loral Corporation keep a major contract for air traffic software only if it agrees to fix its price and schedule.
"If the agency can negotiate and agree upon a fair and reasonable price and  schedule, then the F.A.A. will move forward with Loral," the agency said in a one-page release.
"Otherwise the agency will proceed with other strategies."


Corruption in the 'Dirty 30'
Police officers being led away in handcuffs have become a distressingly common sight in New York this year.
This week, 14 more cops from Harlem's scandal-ridden 30th Precinct were arrested on corruption charges, bringing the total number of arrests there to 29.
Two sergeants were taken in as well, suggesting that active complicity in corruption runs higher than the cop on the  beat.
The shameful behavior in Harlem's "Dirty 30" precinct underscores the need for a permanent independent anti-corruption agency to help stamp out police crime before it becomes so widespread.
The rogue cops in the 30th called themselves "Nannery's Raiders," after their supervising officer, Sgt.
Kevin P. Nannery.
The band is charged with faking police radio and 911 emergency calls to cover up illegal raids on drug dealers'  apartments, during which they seized drugs and stole large amounts of cash.
The  Mollen Commission noted that supervising officers often looked the other way while street cops ran wild.
But Sergeant Nannery allegedly went further and became an enthusiastic participant.
In one case, investigators say, the sergeant and two of his "raiders" stopped a man in an apartment building, took his keys and then ransacked his apartment.
They found several thousand dollars' worth of  drugs and cash, took the money and then let the dealer go.
The officers also perjured themselves in many court cases, a development that could eventually lead to the dismissal of as many as 50 cases.


Taking Aim at Credit Card Debt
Donnaire Dillon applied for credt cards in her own name when she are her husband separated.
Not long after her divorce, she had run up $7,000 in debt.
When she heard about a debt reduction program offered by the Bankcard Holders of America, a nonprofit organization, she decided to give it a try.
For  a small fee, it supplied a computer analysis of her credit situation and a repayment plan tailored for her.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the second trial in Jeffrey M. Masson's libel suit against the writer Janet Malcolm misstated his specialty.
He is a psychoanalyst, not a psychiatrist.


Dakar Journal;Linked to Internet, Could Africa's Voice Be Heard?
Babacar Fall, a 43-year-old Senegalese journalist and communications expert,  is busily plotting a strategy to earn for Africa, the world's least electronic continent, a seat in the global information game.
In a region where telephones are still often a luxury, even when they crackle with static and frequently go dead, Mr.
Fall is impatiently scrambling to harness the powers of the Internet for his continent.


Clashing Portraits Emerge In Fatal Carjacking Case
The prosecutor called him a greedy and cold-blooded killer who went to a suburban shopping mall to steal a Jeep to replace his own sputtering vehicle and ended up shooting a teen-ager to death and wounding another.
But his lawyers described him as a victim himself, a premedical student who  had escaped the clutches of the streets until he was bullied into becoming the fall guy in a carjacking by a cutthroat drug dealer who did the actual murder.


Clinton Shakes the Money Tree
President Clinton's stock speech on the campaign trail this autumn, in ballrooms and meeting halls, always includes a long recitation of his achievements.
But it omits a striking one: in 20 months, he has personally raised $40 million in Democratic political donations -- nearly half the national party's reported total.
He has done it mostly by taking a leaf from the voluminous fund-raising manual of the Republicans before him, and using the prestige and power of the White House for Democratic financial gain.


No Letup in Japanese Bank Crisis
In a sign that Japan's four-year-old banking crisis keeps growing worse, the  Mitsubishi Bank said today it was taking a loss of more than $1 billion because  of bad debts at two affiliated finance companies that are undergoing their second rescue operation in a year.
Bank officials said it was still not clear whether they had stanched the flood of red ink at the two companies, which have been swamped by bad real estate loans.


French AIDS Scandal Inquiry Widens to Former Premier
Two years after minor French officials were jailed for knowingly distributing blood contaminated with H.I.V., the scandal reached a political level today when a former Prime Minister was placed under judicial investigation as an purported  accomplice to poisoning.
The official, Laurent Fabius, headed a Socialist Government when some 1,250 hemophiliacs were infected in 1985 by blood tainted with H.I.V., the virus that  causes AIDS.
He has denied any responsibility, asserting that he ordered compulsory screening of blood stocks for the virus as soon as he knew tests were available.


Hutu Bandits Seize Refugee Camps in Zaire
Hutu bandits seized one of the largest Rwandan refugee camps in eastern Zaire today, and relief agencies pulled out after staff members were threatened, United Nations officials said.
"We've had our colleagues physically threatened with rocks and machetes," said Lyndall Sachs, a spokeswoman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.


Finding Raises Hopes of Treasure Hunters
A cache of emeralds, gold and silver found off Bimini in the Bahamas has raised the hopes of treasure hunters that they have finally located a Spanish galleon said to have sunk with a huge cargo of gold and silver coins more than 200 years ago.
In an interview published today in The Miami Herald, Rick Meyer, who has led a five-year, $3 million search for the galleon Santiago el Grande, said: "It all matches up -- the carbon dating, the size of the ship, the maps from the archives. There's no way to be sure yet, but we think we've found her."


ST. JUDE MEDICAL COMPLETES PURCHASE DEAL
St.
Jude Medical Inc. of St.
Paul said yesterday that it had completed the purchase of Siemens A.G.'s cardiac rhythm management unit for about $525 million.
It is the largest acquisition of a medical device company this year and the first major diversification effort by St.
Jude Medical, which produces the world's leading mechanical heart valve.
Siemens's Pacesetter Inc. unit holds the second-largest market share for devices that correct bradycardia, or a too-fast heartbeat.
In 1993, it had $350 million in sales and 1,300 employees.


Livery Cab Driver Killed
A livery cab driver was shot dead yesterday in Jamaica, Queens, apparently during a robbery by two men, the police said.


Observer;Do Them Yourself
Here are some ideas for columns that don't want to be written.
Maybe you, reader, can force one or two to submit.
1.
INSURANCE-ISSIMO -- When Washington types started talking about health care, didn't you think they were talking about health?
I did.
So why did they waste all that time wrangling over insurance?


Won't Get Fooled Again? Meet the New Jets, Same as the Old Jets
It's not buried under the Jets' locker room, or locked in the playbook vault.
Perhaps it's in the glass case where the team keeps the silver football from Super Bowl III.
That championship team's motto during Super Bowl week was "Poise and Execution." The two words are inscribed on the victory rings.
Poise, an elusive ingredient this season, has been on Coach Pete Carroll's mind all week -- even today as his skittish players wrapped up practice for Sunday's game at Cleveland.
"We're trying to compete -- with control," Carroll said.
"We're trying to recapture a feeling we had when we were playing well."


Where Health Care In the U.S. Excels
To the Editor:
In "Failure, by the Numbers" (Op-Ed, Sept. 24) Paul Spector asks "Why do we spend so much for less service and shorter life expectancy?" That average life expectancy in the United States ranks behind 17 other countries he cites as evidence of the failure of our health care system.
This is simplification to the point of being misleading.


Man Found Guilty Of Killing 3 Tourists
A man was convicted on Thursday of murder in the drownings of three female tourists he lured onto his boat, raped and tossed into Tampa Bay.
The jurors recommended today that he receive the death penalty.
Jurors deliberated less than an hour and a half before finding the man, Oba Chandler, a 47-year-old aluminum contractor, guilty of three counts of first-degree murder.


Saudis and 5 Other Gulf Nations Will Ease Their Boycott of Israel
Saudi Arabia and its five Persian Gulf partners announced today that they were lifting parts of the 46-year-old Arab boycott of Israel and pledged to urge the rest of the Arab world to drop all trade restrictions involving the Jewish state.
Today's announcement reflects the dramatic changes in Arab attitudes toward Israel since the Palestinians made peace with it a year ago.
It also is another  concrete signal to the Israelis that making peace has its rewards.


Sports of The Times;Lockout, Push Backs, Pull-Ups
SHORTLY after 1 o'clock yesterday afternoon, National Hockey League owners, carrying themselves with the collective air of generals entering a high military court, marched dramatically into a meeting room filled with microphones and cameras.
The sight of 31 owners and general managers assuming their positions on a three-tier dais made for an impressive show of force.
It was as if they wanted to let the villagers know, in case they had forgotten, who controlled the village.
The "villagers," of course, are pro hockey players, the "village" is the cluster of teams for whom they play from one year to the next.


Bridge
A Polish player previously unknown to fame is making a strong bid to win a second title at the NEC World Championships here.
Apolinary Kowalski of Warsaw,  a 46-year-old chemical engineer who won the World Mixed Pairs Championship 10 days ago, leads in the World Open Pairs final after two of five sessions.
His partner is Jacek Romanski.
They are being pursued by several pairs with world reputations.
The leaders are:


Business Digest
The Economy


Dollar Retreats From Highs Against Yen as Talks Go On
The dollar surged against the yen yesterday on a report of an agreement in the trade talks between the United States and Japan, but the dollar retreated from its highs after officials denied that a pact had been reached.
The heavy buying of dollars yesterday indicated that dealers who bid the currency lower as the trade talks bogged down in recent weeks were worried they would be caught short in the event of a broader-than-expected agreement.


GATT Panel Supports U.S.
An international trade panel has ruled in favor of the United States in a dispute with European car makers over American laws on fuel economy and luxury taxes, American trade officials said today.
The case was brought before the panel of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade by the European Union, which contended that its makers of big cars were discriminated against by the laws.


Antidote to Hard Times: An Artist Gets a Break
IN the city of myth, everyone finds true love, starving artists are discovered and endings are happy.
In reality, the streets also smell of urine, beggars troll the subway, denouements are not neat.
Morgan Monceaux has lived both versions of New York.
Mr.
Monceaux is an artist.
Less than three years ago, he was homeless and foraged for food in Dumpsters.
He is to spend today signing copies of a new book on jazz musicians that he wrote and illustrated, "Jazz: My Music, My People" (Alfred A. Knopf, $18).
This week, some of the collagelike paintings featured in that book of biographies and personal recollections made its debut in the windows of the Barneys store on Madison Avenue.


What Is Your Impression Of Nicole Brown Simpson?'
Prospective jurors in the O.J.
Simpson case were asked by Judge Lance A. Ito  to complete a 75-page questionnaire.
Below and above are a few of the questions  released yesterday.
Domestic Violence: Have you ever felt sufficiently frustrated within a domestic  relationship that you considered violence?


New York Opponents Cheer F.A.A.'s Rejection of a Plan to RerouteNewark Jets
The Federal Aviation Administration today rejected a plan to reduce airplane  noise in New Jersey that some New Yorkers had feared would further clog their skies, apparently ending a border feud that had spread from suburbia to Congress.
Instead of adopting the proposal, which would have routed planes using Newark International Airport over the Atlantic Ocean, the agency said it wanted  to impose a more modest alteration of flight patterns to settle a seven-year dispute over the rumbling of jets in northern New Jersey.


Pataki's Rockefeller Lesson: Smile Makes a Better Point
The candidate saw the placard-bristling protesters waiting in the parking lot and immediately thought back two decades to his boss, Vice President Nelson A. Rockefeller, and what came to be known infamously as The Gesture.
"He made a gesture that in retrospect he shouldn't have," said State Senator  George E. Pataki, recalling Mr.
Rockefeller's single-digit dismissal of a group  of hecklers that was caught on camera as his young advance man, Mr.
Pataki, memorized a frightening lesson in how not to behave in his Republican campaign for Governor.


A New Justice


3% Japan Jobless Rate
Japan's unemployment rate remained at around 3 percent in August, although the number of people out of work edged up to two million, the official Management and Coordination Agency said today.


G.M. and Auto Workers Reach an Accord
The General Motors Corporation and the United Automobile Workers today tentatively settled a three-day-old strike at the Buick City complex in Flint, Mich., that had idled nearly 22,000 workers there and at other G.M. plants and had threatened to shut down the company's production throughout North America.
Although precise terms of the accord were not disclosed, union officials said General Motors had agreed to hire more permanent workers at Buick City, a step the company had earlier resisted.
G.M. declined to comment.


New Valley Wins Round On Its Plan
The judge presiding over the New Valley Corporation's bankruptcy case ruled yesterday that creditors consider the company's plan alone, tabling a competing  plan that proposed ousting its management.
Judge Novalyn Winfield ruled in Federal Bankruptcy Court in Newark that creditors consider the competing plan, submitted by the committee representing some company shareholders, only if they could not agree on the company's plan.


Yeltsin Sleeps Through Visit


Tennis;Navratilova's Banner Night
Four events away from retirement and two weeks shy of turning 38, fourth-ranked Martina Navratilova stopped by Madison Square Garden yesterday and confirmed that she will make her last-ever singles appearance here at the Virginia Slims Championships on Nov. 14-20.
Navratilova has reached the championships final 12 times and won it an unprecedented seven times.
To commemorate her farewell, on Nov. 15 a special banner carrying her name will be hoisted to the Garden rafters that makes Navratilova the only non-Knick or non-Ranger to be honored in that fashion.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Self-Perpetuating Coterie For Serialism and the Electronic Miller Theater


302 Queries for Simpson Panelists
Do they own any special knives, like hunting knives or pen knives?
Have they  ever seen O. J. Simpson on television selling orange juice or Hertz rental cars, and what kind of impression did he make?
What do they think about the news media?
About DNA evidence?
About the level of racial discrimination in Southern  California?
About Nicole Brown Simpson?
Those questions, plus 296 others on topics like divorce, domestic violence and the stress of jury duty, are on the 80-page laundry list of questions completed by 304 potential jurors in Mr.
Simpson's murder trial.
From the answers they provide -- including their choice of words, spelling, punctuation,  penmanship, even whether they use a pen or a pencil -- opposing lawyers can begin to select the 12 men and women who will determine the defendant's fate.


G.O.P. Filibuster Defeats Campaign Finance Curbs
A bill to overhaul the way election campaigns for Congress are financed died  today, joining universal health insurance and other measures in the graveyard where so much legislation has been buried in the last days of this Congress.
The campaign finance bill was taken off the agenda after the Senate failed one last time to end a Republican filibuster.
The vote was 52 to 46, eight shy of the 60 votes needed to invoke cloture and break the impasse.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the naming of a new chief executive by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation referred imprecisely to its history, because of misinformation supplied by the company.
The Davis-Douglas Company was founded in 1919, and McDonnell was founded in 1939.
They merged in 1967.
The reference to "102 years of family leadership" was erroneous.


Milking the Poor
George Mitchell, the Senate majority leader, does not have time before the election break to pass legislation on health care, welfare or campaign finance.
But apparently he has plenty of time to push through an odious bill that would reward a few dairy farmers in his home state of Maine and five other northeastern states by jacking up milk prices for the urban poor and everyone else.
Under the proposed dairy bill, which is ready for a floor vote, Maine, Rhode  Island, Vermont, Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Connecticut would form a compact to drive milk prices higher in their states than Federal regulations require.
Milk dealers located outside New England would be prohibited from selling milk in the region at a lower price.
The bill would, in effect, impose a protective tariff on milk from other states.


2-Week Wait for Hockey Hardly a Hardship for Most
There were expressions of disappointment among the more avid fans, but for many, the postponement of the start of the National Hockey League season showed  that when it comes to hockey, New Yorkers tend to be playoff soldiers and Stanley Cup patriots, if they have any interest at all.
"It's a sad day for professional sports," said Joseph O'Connell, the director of a Manhattan diagnostic clinic, who said he had abandoned his Ranger  tickets about 10 years ago but had been reconsidering since the team won the Stanley Cup.
"Wiser heads should prevail," he said.
"Hockey has been on a roll,  but it could get sidetracked."


From the Top 10 Lists, Stocks With Stories
WHO has the top Top 10 list?
On this side of the field is Lehman Brothers.
Every July since 1949, Lehman  has offered up a list of 10 best stocks for the next 12 months.
But last year Shearson Lehman split up, and while Lehman retained rights to the list -- Ten Uncommon Values -- Smith Barney, which got Shearson, felt heir to the tradition, too.
So in July it suited up a rival portfolio -- Ten Exceptional Names -- and yesterday ended the new contest's first quarter.


The Real Reason Mobil Opposes Ethanol Rules;Oxygenation Hazards
To the Editor:
We are slowly being poisoned by something most of us use every day: gasoline.
Since November 1992, New Jersey residents have been forced to use oxygenated fuel every winter.
No wonder so many are getting sick.


Senate Approves Appropriation for Capital
Moving to rescue the nation's capital from financial paralysis, the Senate today approved a $660 million appropriation for the city, just after Washington's Mayor, Sharon Pratt Kelly, finished describing at a news conference how she planned to halt much of the government.
Without the appropriation, which the House had already approved, the District of Columbia would have suspended operations at midnight, except the functions essential to protect life and property.
President Clinton this evening signed the measure, the last of the 13 appropriation bills for the new fiscal year, which starts Saturday.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago


Unhappy Players Say No Pay, No Practice
Players reacted angrily today to the National Hockey League's decision to postpone of the start of the season and said because they would not be getting paid they would not practice.
"We're saying, fine, if the season's postponed, surely you can't expect us to come in and skate as if nothing has happened," said Mike Gartner of the Toronto Maple Leafs, the president of the 700-member union.
"Something has happened. We've been locked out. That's a pretty serious thing to play under. Nobody's been paid for a substantial length of time."


U.N. Hearing Was Fair, but Secrecy Isn't
To the Editor:
Alan Dershowitz's Sept. 24 letter criticizing the fairness of Claxton v.
Gomez, the historic United Nations sexual harassment case, is misleading at best.


N.B.A. Reinstates Tarpley
Roy Tarpley, banned from the National Basketball Association three years ago, was reinstated by the league today, and the Dallas Mavericks said they would move to re-sign their former star to a multiyear contract for $2.6 million.
"I'm grateful to the people who have stood by me the last three years," Tarpley said in a statement released through the team.
"I'm excited to be back."


Trust Is a Stranger as the Season Comes Apart
Trust us, the hockey bosses told the players, the news media, the fans and the whole wide world yesterday afternoon.
Believe us when we tell you we're losing money, they said, as they sat on the dais at the New York Hilton.


Pro-Junta Gunmen Fire on Rally in Haitian Capital
Gunmen backing army rule scattered a demonstration of supporters of Haiti's elected President today as American soldiers, deployed blocks away in tanks surrounded by barbed wire, did nothing to stop the violence.
Rifle and pistol shots rang out, rocks flew, and machetes and clubs flailed as a score of the plainclothes auxiliaries known as attaches swaggered out of their hangout in the Normandie Bar and an office of the paramilitary party known as Fraph to block several thousand marchers marking the third anniversary of the military coup that overthrew President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Twining Ends Racing Career
Twining, the 3-year-old colt who won five straight races before trying to catch Holy Bull in the Dwyer Stakes nearly three months ago, came to the end of  his racing career yesterday when he was retired to Kentucky as a stallion.
The colt, a son of Forty Niner and the champion broodmare Courtly Dee, has not raced since July 5, when he made a noble but punishing attempt to match strides with Holy Bull, the leading candidate for Horse of the Year.


New Award for Jeter
DEREK JETER, the Yankees' top prospect, has received yet another honor.
The 20-year-old shortstop, who was voted Baseball America's minor league player of the year, has been named USA Today Baseball Weekly's minor leaguer of the year.
Jeter hit .344 with 68 runs batted in and 50 stolen bases for three Yankee farm  clubs this season.
He will have a chance to make the major league team next season.
Runners-up for the award included outfielder RUBEN RIVERA, another Yankee minor leaguer and shortstop ALEX RODRIGUEZ, from New York City, who was promoted to the Seattle Mariners during his first season in professional baseball.


New Role for Former Romantic Star
In "See How They Fall," Jean-Louis Trintignant plays a scruffy, small-time crook accurately described by another character as "an old guy with a game leg." Seeing the onetime romantic star as a character actor gives the film some curiosity value.
There isn't much else to recommend this uninspired French work, part buddy movie and part film noir.
At the start, a salesman named Simon (Jean Yanne) is surprised to find himself getting old.
As his wife says in voice-over, "What did he have, 15 or 20 years left?" Any other middle-aged men might have quit his job or had an affair, but Simon has a more drastic response.
When his friend Mickey is shot and left brain dead, he tracks down the people who did it.


Golan Keeps the Peace
To the Editor:


Congressional Memo;Lawmakers Claw Their Way Toward a Bitter Conclusion
With his tenure in the Senate coming to a close, David L. Boren, Democrat of  Oklahoma, wanted to leave behind a legacy of a little reform.
So, after holding 36 hearings in the last year, calling 240 witnesses and drawing on the wisdom of dozens of scholars, he created a bill to overhaul Congress itself.
Among other things, it would have cut the Congressional staff by 12 percent, abolished half the subcommittees in the Senate and disallowed proxies if they determined the outcome of votes.


AGREEMENT TO ACQUIRE UNIMAC IS SIGNED
The Raytheon Company signed an agreement yesterday to buy the assets of the closely held Unimac Company, a maker of commercial front-load washers.
Terms were not disclosed.
Raytheon, based in Lexington, Mass., which has been expanding its commercial businesses, said the transaction is expected to close by the end of October.
Raytheon said Unimac was profitable and expected 1994 sales of $70 million.
Unimac will become a part of the Appliance Group's Speed Queen subsidiary, which make top-load washers and tumbler dryers, the company said in a statement.
Raytheon said Unimac employs 530 people in a factory in Marianna, Fla.


Alternative Medicine's Rise Cheers Christian Scientists
Convinced that public interest in spirituality and alternative ways of healing is on the rise, the Christian Science church will start a mass-marketing campaign on Monday for "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures," by the church's founder, Mary Baker Eddy.
The advertising campaign, on behalf of a book that says disciplined prayer can heal physical ailments, is unusual enough for the First Church of Christ, Scientist.


Dominicans Deny Rumor of Asylum
The Government said today that it had not received a request for asylum from  Lieut.Col.
Michel Francois, the chief of police in Haiti and a member of the ruling military junta.
Colonel Francois' brother, Evans, was part of the de facto Haitian regime's diplomatic corps assigned to the embassy in Santo Domingo.
Colonel Francois was  said to have decided to join him as soon as possible, according to television reports on Thursday.


Hispanic Chairman for Bronx Democrats Symbolizes Changing Face of the Party
In its glory, the Bronx Democratic machine was the domain of bosses named Flynn and Buckley, whose voices reverberated from the Grand Concourse to Pennsylvania Avenue.
And in its shame, the weakened machine of the 1980's was scandalized by the jailing of politicians named Simon and Friedman.
Now, with the machine age of politics dead and the Bronx reborn by new waves of immigrants, the leadership of the once fabled and feared Democratic Party organization has passed to a man named Ramirez.


Mayor Orders Police Dept. To Find $60 Million in Cuts
As Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani prepares to plug a hole as large as $1 billion in New York City's budget, he has ordered the Police Department to cut its budget by $60 million, or 3 percent, a senior administration official said yesterday.
The cut would reflect the deepest pinch yet for the Police Department, which the Mayor has until now largely shielded from his budget ax because of his core campaign pledge to fight crime.
But the reduction appeared to be a smaller  percentage cut than those facing other agencies, including the Human Resources Administration, which officials said would be cut by about $90 million, or 13 percent of the funds that it receives from the city.


SARA LEE WILL LAY OFF ADDITIONAL EMPLOYEES
The Sara Lee Corporation will lay off about 1,600 more employees than projected when it announced a worldwide cost-cutting plan in June.
Sara Lee, which makes food, personal and household products, now plans to cut 9,900 jobs.
That compares with 8,300 jobs that the company had said earlier that it expected to cut.
The additional layoffs will not require another charge against earnings, a company spokeswoman, Kate Gace, said yesterday.
In its fourth quarter, which ended on June 30, Sara Lee took a restructuring charge of $495 million, or $1.03 a share.
Sara Lee's stock gained 12.5 cents, to $22.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Sara Lee is reducing capacity in its United States hosiery operations  and European personal products unit.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about a boom in the jeans-making industry in El Paso referred imprecisely to the number of jobs in the United States that some proponents of the North American Free Trade Agreement said would be lost to Mexico each year.
About 10,000 jobs would be lost over all, they said, not just in the apparel industry.


Rent Strike Ends at Apartments in Edison
A group of tenants at the Durham Woods apartment complex in Edison, N.J., which suffered major damage during a gas pipeline explosion and fire last March, agreed to end a two-month-old rent strike yesterday.
Members of the Durham Wood Tenant Organization had withheld payment of their rent because of fears that crime had increased at the complex after the explosion and concern that planning for emergency evacuations had not been improved.


Bonds Rise As Trade Pact Is Seen
Prices of Treasury securities rose yesterday, buoyed by investors' optimism that the trade talks between the United States and Japan could produce an agreement.
A report, later denied, of an agreement on Japanese Government procurement contracts bolstered the dollar in the world currency markets, making dollar-denominated assets like bonds more attractive.


Man Held in Death Called Unfit for Trial
The man charged in the shooting death of an NBC stagehand at Rockefeller Center is not mentally competent to stand trial, two court-appointed psychiatrists told a State Supreme Court judge yesterday.
Justice Herbert J. Adlerberg gave the Manhattan District Attorney until Oct.  21 to review the findings.
If the prosecution accepts the findings, the suspect, William E. Tager, 46, of Charlotte, N.C., would be confined to a state institution for the criminally insane.


POP
In the World of Funk, 75 Minutes Is a Warm-Up Tramps


Smithsonian Substantially Alters Enola Gay Exhibit After Criticism
After months of criticism by veterans groups and members of Congress, the Smithsonian Institution has agreed to make major changes in its planned exhibit  of the airplane that dropped an atomic bomb on Hiroshima.
The exhibit featuring the B-29 bomber, the Enola Gay, will no longer include  a long section on the postwar nuclear race that veterans groups and members of Congress had criticized.
The critics said that the discussion did not belong in  the exhibit and was part of a politically loaded message that the dropping of the atomic bomb on Japan began a dark chapter in human history.


Mortgage Rates Climb
Thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages averaged 8.82 percent this week, up from 8.73 percent last week, according to the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
It was the highest level since May 1, 1992, when the average was 8.84 percent.
Fifteen-year mortgages averaged 8.31 percent, up from 8.21 percent last week.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 5.67 percent, up from 5.56 percent.


British Acquire 20% of MCI
The MCI Communications Corporation said today that British Telecommunications P.L.C. had completed its $4.3 billion purchase of a 20 percent stake in MCI.
The announcement comes more than a year after the companies announced a joint venture, called Concert, to provide global services to business customers.
MCI will have a 25 percent stake in Concert and British Telecom will  have 75 percent and its first venture in North America.


Autumn's Beauty Frames an Earlier Time's Elegance


A Truce to Help New York City
The fire fights between Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines have become a staple, and perhaps they are not without entertainment value.
It can be diverting to see two strong-willed opponents square off in the  arena of politics.
But smart voters and parents will recognize that these two are playing a kind of resignation brinksmanship that will damage New York City if they do not cut it out.
Their latest dispute is over Mr.
Cortines's decision to hire Barry Sullivan as chief operating officer of the school system over the objections of Mayor Giuliani.
There is no question that Mr.
Cortines has the right to pick his own staff, and if someone has to give, it should on principle be the Mayor.
But the  Mayor has grounds to see the surprise selection of Mr.
Sullivan, a former deputy mayor under David Dinkins, as a deliberately provocative act.
If Mr.
Cortines was interested in a healthier relationship with City Hall he would not have gone for such an in-your-face choice.


As Rangers Hear News, It's a Raise For Richter
Mike Richter had all but signed his new contract and would most likely have been ready to play in Saturday night's season opener in New Jersey against the Devils.
Mark Messier had not progressed with his talks and was on the golf course for a second consecutive day.
And Corey Hirsch, who already knew where he was going to be on Oct. 1, packed his bags and delivered an angry barrage before joining five of his teammates on a trip to the minor leagues.
At least Hirsch and the group headed to Binghamton knew they had some games to play.
The remaining Rangers, who sat in the players' lounge this afternoon to watch National Hockey League Commissioner Gary Bettman announce that the regular season had been postponed, have no idea when, or even if, they will be playing.


THEATER
How a Hunk Like Rock Hudson Is Not What He Seems Club at La Mama


House Votes to Extend Education Financing
Turning back a challenge by advocates of school prayer, the House today approved legislation reauthorizing $11 billion in aid to elementary and secondary schools.
The measure, which would extend for five years the programs authorized by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, will now go to the Senate, where Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, a Republican who has arranged filibusters on other education bills to force consideration of prayer provisions, has already signaled his dissatisfaction.


Investigators Cite Bow Door In Estonian Ferry's Sinking
The Swedish authorities said today they believed that the bow door of an Estonian ferry opened or was never properly closed on its doomed voyage this week, allowing water to flood in and irretrievably destabilize the vessel.
In their most detailed statements since the ferry, the Estonia, went down in  a howling storm early on Wednesday, officials from Sweden's National Maritime Administration stopped short of declaring that the bow door was the definite cause of the sinking.


Stamp Honoring Nixon? Lawmaker Voices Protest
The Postal Service plans to issue a stamp honoring Richard M. Nixon, and the  chairman of the House committee that oversees the post office does not like it.
Robin Wright, a spokesman for the Postal Service, said Thursday that the agency had a "longstanding tradition" of issuing stamps honoring deceased Presidents within a year of death.
Mr.
Nixon died on April 22.


Race for Governor: Cuomo Addresses Abortion
CANDIDATE Mario M. Cuomo


0.9% Increase In Spending In August
Americans flocked to auto showrooms in August, and overall spending rose faster than it had in six months.
The surge was more than twice the increase in  income, the Government reported today.
The Commerce Department said income rose four-tenths of a percent, a seventh straight increase, while spending jumped nine-tenths of a percent -- the largest gain since 1.3 percent in February.


Late Computer Orders Lower the Dow by 11.44
Stocks closed mixed yesterday after computer-guided sell orders buffeted the  Dow Jones industrial average in the session's final half-hour, causing the Dow to register its second straight decline.
"With the quarter ending, people unload some of the losers just to get them  off their books," Jeffrey Rubin, an analyst at Birinyi Associates Inc. in Greenwich, Conn., said.


Wheat Hits 18-Month Peak As Supply Outlook Tightens
Wheat futures prices topped $4 a bushel for the first time in 18 months yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade after the Agriculture Department reported a smaller wheat stockpile than traders had expected.
Data in the same report showed that soybean stocks exceeded expectations, causing soybean futures to drop to their lowest level in nearly two years.


Congressional Commission Calls for Crackdown on Illegal Aliens
A Federal commission today recommended tough measures to stop illegal immigration, including a computerized registry for job seekers and the denial of almost all public services and assistance to illegal aliens.
"If a person is here unlawfully, he should be entitled to no benefits," said  former Representative Barbara Jordan of Texas, chairman of the United States Commission on Immigration, which made its recommendations in a report to Congress.


Lawyers Assigned to the Poor Stage a Walkout
Legal Aid Society staff lawyers who represent indigent defendants in New York City walked off the job at midnight last night in a dispute over a new contract.


Phone Companies Hit Interactive-TV Snags
With the nation's two largest interactive cable television experiments falling behind schedule because of technological bottlenecks, telephone companies have been hoping to exploit the delays.
But phone companies are hitting their own snags.
"Some days I feel like it may be difficult to get anything right," Larry Levine, vice president for broadband and multimedia services at U S West Inc., said today at an industry conference here.


Violence Drives a Minority In Algeria to Take Up Arms
The civil turmoil pitting secularists against Muslim fundamentalists in Algeria has entered a new phase with the slaying this week of a well-known Berber singer.
The fatal shooting, which came just days after the kidnapping of another popular Berber entertainer, is pushing the Berber ethnic group, estimated to number at least 8 million among Algeria's population of 28 million, to arm itself.
In fact, some of its leaders are threatening "total war" to defend the relative autonomy of their people in the mountainous Kabylia region in the north.


COMPANY NEWS: Another Party Heard From;Madison Sq. Garden Deal Faces an Official's Threat
He does not work for the New York State Attorney General's office, for the United States Justice Department or for the Federal Communications Commission.
Alan G. Hevesi, New York City's Comptroller, isn't even a lawyer.
But Mr.
Hevesi, who is a politician, knows a monopoly when he sees one, even though he has no legal authority to use the term.
And the monopoly he sees is ITT-Cablevision's $1 billion purchase of the Madison Square Garden properties from Viacom Inc.


6 Killed in Milan Blast
An explosion believed caused by a gas leak ripped through an apartment building near downtown Milan today, killing at least six people and destroying a popular bar on the ground floor, the police said.
At least 12 people were injured, and rescue workers feared there might be more victims buried beneath the debris.


A New York Law Gives More Rights to Spouses
THE final and most controversial element of a 1992 New York law that drastically expands the inheritance rights of spouses took effect last month.
The law prevents someone from tying up substantially all of a surviving spouse's share of an estate in a trust.
Even though the intent is laudable -- giving a surviving spouse greater access to assets in the estate -- some experts say the law may make passing the family business to a younger generation more difficult.


Kraft Food Service Unit for Sale
Philip Morris Companies Inc. confirmed yesterday that it was negotiating the  sale of its Kraft food service business to a party that it did not identify.
The business, which distributes giant tubs of Kraft cheese and General Foods mayonnaise to restaurants, hospitals and universities, could sell for $600 million or more, industry analysts estimate.


Whitman May Face Rough Weather After Extending Tax-Cut Timetable
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman will probably weather the stormlet that followed  her admission on Thursday that she would not be able to deliver her hallmark income-tax cut on time, both Democrats and Republicans conceded today.
The far tougher test will be how she handles the state's budget problems that are now beginning to surface because of those same tax-cut pledges.
When it comes to popularity, the feeling around the State House, and in the  offices of academics and political consultants, is that Mrs.
Whitman has more going for her among the voters than just her dramatic promise to cut income taxes by 30 percent over three years.
Her popularity also rests on an artfully conveyed image as a reformer and an outsider.


Rowland Asks for Privacy After Report of Disturbance
John G. Rowland, the Republican gubernatorial candidate, and his former wife, Deborah, issued a statement today saying their personal lives were no one else's business.
The statement followed a newspaper report that said the police were summoned to the Rowlands' house earlier this year to settle a domestic disturbance.
The Hartford Courant, quoting unidentified sources, said that officers from  the Middlebury Police Department were called to the Rowland house in mid-April,  just days after a divorce settlement between Mr.
Rowland and Mrs.
Rowland had been entered in state court in Waterbury.
The Courant said that Mr.
Rowland had  gone to the house to seek Mrs.
Rowland's signature on their joint tax returns.
It was unclear who called the police, how serious the disturbance was, or how it was settled.


Help From Bolivian Police
A group of 108 Bolivian policemen left for Haiti today to help train a police force there.
The group departed on two cargo planes and is to spend four days in Puerto Rico before starting a three-month mission in Haiti, Police Chief Luis Rocha said.
The group will join police from other Latin American countries in training the force.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BMC WEST CORP., Boise, Idaho, a building materials distributor, said it would acquire certain assets of Henry Bacon Building Materials Inc. for an undisclosed amount of common stock, cash and property.


Spent Nuclear Fuel Is Unloaded in U.S.
Workers at the Savannah River nuclear weapons plant began unloading a five-car train of European nuclear waste today, and state officials promised to  try to keep out future shipments.
"It is important that we do all we can to prevent these materials from coming into our state," Attorney General Travis Medlock said on Thursday.


AMTRAK INVITES BIDS TO BUILD HIGH-SPEED TRAINS
Amtrak invited bids yesterday to build America's first high-speed trains, capable of top speeds of 150 miles an hour to ply the bustling corridor from Boston to New York to Washington.
Three industrial groups that helped build some of Europe's fastest and plushest trains have been invited to bid for the $600 million contract for 26 trains, an Amtrak statement said.
They are ABB and General Electric Transportation; Bombardier and GEC-Alsthom, and Siemens Transportation-AEG, with Morrison Knudsen, Fiat and General Motors electro-motive division.
The train that Amtrak has in mind is a state-of-the-art machine geared mostly toward the business traveler.
It will include fax machines, electrical outlets for computers, business centers, cappuccino and frozen yogurt, a statement said.


Labor Dept. Settles Lawsuit By Its Workers
The Labor Department, the Federal agency responsible for protecting workers'  rights, has agreed to pay $4 million in what is described as the largest settlement of a racial discrimination suit in Government history.
The department denied any wrongdoing or liability, saying it was settling the class-action suit brought by some of its black employees so it "could move forward." The agreement was announced on Thursday.


Woolworth's Chief Officer Steps Down
The Woolworth Corporation said late yesterday that William K. Lavin, its vice chairman and chief executive, had resigned because of differences with the board about the direction of the retail company.
John W. Adams, chairman of Woolworth, will assume Mr.
Lavin's responsibilities on an interim basis, the company said.
It has hired Herbert Mines Associates Inc., an executive search firm that specializes in the retail industry, to find a replacement for Mr.
Lavin.


The Strangest Instrument and Its Even Stranger Inventor
Surely the theremin is the weirdest of all musical instruments.
It looks like a podium with a horizontal loop and a vertical antenna.
It is played by musicians who don't touch it, creating sounds simply by moving hands in the air.
The noise it emits, described by newspapers of the 1920's as "ether music" and "music like none other ever played," can suggest a violin or a soprano or a Martian making a landing.
It is surpassingly strange.
The theremin's sound may not be instantly identifiable, but it has been prominent in certain thrillers and science fiction films, used to signal the presence of the unknown.
You can also hear it on the Beach Boys' "Good Vibrations," in those octave-skipping wheeps and whorls that shoot through instrumental breaks in the song.


U.N. Hearing Was Fair, but Secrecy Isn't;Repressive Tactics
To the Editor:
I participated in the "We the Peoples: Building Peace" nongovernmental organizations conference Sept. 20-22 at the United Nations headquarters.
The first day I brought your Sept. 15 Op-Ed article "Catherine Claxton v. the U.N."  I talked about it with other participants, with the idea of circulating it for the discussion.


MISSION TO HAITI: THE THUGS -- Loose Cannons;Violence by Paramilitary Groups in Haiti Raises Pressure on U.S. to Disarm Them
After two days of bloodshed in which armed paramilitary groups attacked demonstrators here, the United States finds its mission to install democracy in  Haiti jeopardized by its reluctance to begin disarming the paramilitary gunmen known as attaches.
American military commanders here are facing mounting pressure from Haiti's populace to take weapons away from the plainclothes paramilitary units, which are viewed as the most serious threat now that the Haitian army and uniformed police have been neutralized.
But an American military spokesman today defended  the policy of inaction, saying it was up to Haitians to police themselves.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6 HAITIAN MARCH TURNS VIOLENT Gunmen backing army rule scattered a demonstration of Aristide supporters as American soldiers, deployed blocks away in tanks surrounded by barbed wire, did  nothing to stop the violence.  1 U.S.
RELUCTANCE IN HAITI After two days of bloodshed, the United States finds its mission to install democracy jeopardized by its reluctance to disarm government paramilitary gunmen.  1 U.S.
But the cause of the disaster remains uncertain.  6 The Swedish town of Norrkoping was hit hard by the disaster.6 TENSION RISES IN ALGERIA The civil turmoil pitting secularists against Muslim militants in Algeria widened with the slaying of a well-known Berber singer.  3 FRENCH H.I.V.
SCANDAL WIDENS Two years after minor French officials were jailed for knowingly distributing blood contaminated with H.I.V., a former Socialist Prime Minister is under investigation as an alleged accomplice.  3 Dakar Journal: Linked to Internet, could Africa's voice be heard?  2


Transactions
Basketball


Female Place-Kicker Gets a Tryout at Duke
HEATHER SUE MERCER, a Duke freshman, has been granted a tryout next week as a place-kicker for the Blue Devils and is probably the first woman ever to try out for an Atlantic Coast Conference football team.
"I really don't feel I can talk  about it," Mercer said Thursday night.
"I haven't proven myself yet."
FRED CHATHAM, Duke's assistant coach for kickers, told The News &amp; Observer of Raleigh, N.C., that Mercer a couple of weeks ago asked for a tryout.
"We found out that she was a pretty good place-kicker in high school and even made some New York all-star teams. So we figured we'd let her kick a few and see how  she does."


Owners Take Lead in Senate Debate, but Players Hope for Comeback
The assault by Congress on baseball's antitrust exemption ended yesterday, until at least January, after one of the leading opponents of baseball's privileged immunity conceded the day on the floor of the Senate.
Senator Howard Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio, followed through on a promise to take on the exemption in the form of an amendment to an appropriations bill for the District of Columbia.
But when considerable bipartisan opposition, led by a Republican, Phil Gramm of Texas, rose to block the amendment during debate, Metzenbaum, mindful that Congress is scheduled to adjourn next week, withdrew his initiative.


Appearance vs. Reality Amid Taipei's Opulence
The title of "A Confucian Confusion," a frantically up-to-the-minute comedy of manners about life in present-day Taipei, refers to a novel written by one of t he characters in the movie.
In the book, Confucius is reincarnated as a popular media personality.
To his chagrin, the ancient Chinese sage discovers he is ad mired not for who he is but for being such a brilliant impostor.
In this satirical film, which was written and directed by the Taiwanese film  maker Edward Yang, confusion between appearance and reality runs to the hea rt of Taipei's ostensibly puritanical society.
The movie, which is being shown at Alice Tully Hall this afternoon at 2:45 and tomorrow night at 6:30 as part o f the New York Film Festival, follows the amorous and career peregrinations of a bunch of urbane young Taipeians, most of whom are well-to-do and bored.


Don't Point to Slovakia
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 27 article on Bosnia's easing of its demand that the arms embargo  be lifted says imports of arms to Bosnian Muslims and Croats "are illegal, but United States officials concede that they are occurring on a large scale, particularly from Slovakia and Slovenia."


Whitaker Tightens His Belt For McGirt
Pernell Whitaker owns it.
James (Buddy) McGirt wants it back.
It's called the World Boxing Council welterweight championship, and in a profession stocked with belts and titles -- check the trash, you never know -- this one has infinite value.
Mr.
Pound-for-Pound meets Mr.
Wannabe-Pound-for-Pound Saturday night in an encore performance of their 1993 fight at Madison Square Garden.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
99.27
97.85
105.95
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5502
1.5483
1.6309
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3432
1.3435
1.3385
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5774
1.5772
1.5055
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$394.40
$395.70
$355.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Meredith E. Hyde, James Treadwell
Meredith Ellen Hyde, the daughter of Valerie and David Hyde of New York, was married yesterday to James Ian Treadwell, a son of Dr.
Thomas Treadwell of London and Tatiana Barker, who lives on one of the DeCourcy Islands near Nanaimo, British Columbia.
The Rev.
Charles Fox performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Bennington, Vt.
Ms.
Hyde, 29, is keeping her name.
She is the internship director, in London, of American University's London Semester Program.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and received a master's degree in English literature from Oxford University.
Her father is a senior counsel to Cahill Gordon &amp; Reindel, a New York law firm.


Safety on the Road
For nervous motorists, Avis recently added two safety devices to cars rented in Miami and south Florida.
With the Emergency Police Alert system, available at no extra charge, motorists can call a police department dispatcher by pushing a button on a cellular phone.
Guidestar, a second device available for $5 a day, provides geographical data and directions for thousands of locations in the area.
Both will eventually be available on Avis cars nationwide. (800) 331-1212.


Pathmark Plans Cheer Shoppers, but Shake Shopkeepers
"Everything's going to be much better," said Jessica Bernard, 17, who was walking with her mother on 125th Street, near Third Avenue, where a Pathmark is planned.
"The cabbage is rotten here," she said, pretending to shop, "and we've got to be going to another place. At Pathmark, everything is in one place. They have a lot of sales and stuff like that."
In general, shoppers along eastern 125th Street, whose choices have been limited to bodegas, convenience stores and independently owned chain supermarkets, seem pleased by the idea of a supergrocery moving in.
But owners of the smaller supermarkets that already dot the area are angry.


Lynne duPont, David Solacoff
Dr.
Margaret Lynne duPont, a pediatric resident at the University of Maryland Hospital in Baltimore, was married yesterday to Dr.
David Kenan Solacoff, an orthopedic resident at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.
The Rev.
William Lane performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church Christiana Hundred in Greenville, Del.
The bride, 26, is known as Lynne.
She graduated cum laude from Williams College, and she and her husband received their medical degrees from Johns Hopkins University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Bradford duPont of Wilmington.


Gonzo Polo: The Only Sport Left
It was shaping up as the September Nightmare what with the Church of Baseball locking its doors, hockey melting, O. J. Simpson crooning "Memories," when by phone and fax Hunter S. Thompson began insisting, "Come on out . . . we'll slap some people around . . . my homeboys got a chance . . . ."
Who knew what he was talking about?
Dr.
Thompson is flogging his new best-seller, "Better Than Sex," about the last Presidential election campaign.
I dodged his calls.


Wall Street; Why Fund Investors Just Aren't Buying American
AS interest rates have risen this year, the great love affair between mutual fund investors and Government bond funds has soured.
At the end of August, such funds had seen 23 percent of their assets disappear from their peak in the summer of 1993.
And the closely related mortgage-backed funds had done even worse, with assets off 24 percent.


Maggie Drucker, Robert A. Feinberg
Margo Drucker, the daughter of Alice and Harold Drucker of New York, was married yesterday to Robert Andrew Feinberg, a son of Francine Feinberg of New York and William Feinberg of Ocean, N.J.
Rabbi Michael Feinberg, the bridegroom's brother, performed the ceremony at Wave Hill in the Bronx.
Ms.
Drucker, who is 30 and is keeping her name, is known as Maggie.
She is a lawyer in Englewood Cliffs, N.J., for the Simon &amp; Schuster publishing company.
She graduated from Brown University, and she and her husband received law degrees from New York University.
Her father is the president of Chalice Inc., an advertising agency in New York.
Her mother is the administrative manager of Janklow &amp; Nesbit, the New York literary agency.


Full Moons, Delicious Apples
To the Editor:
I, too, found the seasonal discrepancies in "Wolf" unnerving, and am glad that Anne Raver called it to our attention  [ "Black-Eyed Susans in May? (Who Wrote This Script?)," Sept. 4 ] .
I also rejoice that someone has at last had the courage to criticize that truly dreadful travesty, the film rendition of "The Age of Innocence," even if it was only to notice that the flowers were out of season.


State Pursues Professionals On Sales Tax
QUIETLY and methodically, with little publicity but some big early results, New Jersey has been using an aggressive new approach to recover some of the estimated $100 million lost every year in unpaid sales taxes on out-of-state purchases.
The program by the State Division of Taxation has so far singled out doctors, dentists and lawyers, in effect requiring them to audit themselves by listing all purchases for their businesses for which sales taxes should have been paid but were not.


The World; Bosnian Foes Gaze at History's Mirror and See a Jew
THE destruction of Yugoslavia has posed acute identity problems for its former inhabitants.
Torn from their former lives, Serbs, Croats and Bosnian Muslims have been casting around for images of themselves that provide uplift, comfort or justification amid ruin.
None is more surprising, however, than the role model selected by both principal combatants in the Bosnian conflict: the Jews.
Listen to this comment from a Bosnian Muslim:


Russia Rediscovers One of Its Own
GUSTAV MAHLER PREDICTED THAT his time would come, and it did.
Jan Sibelius's time seems to come and go with some regularity.
Sergei Rachmaninoff has always retained popularity, if not great respect, for at least a few of his works -- except, paradoxically, in his homeland.
When Rachmaninoff regretfully left the Soviet Union for good, at the end of 1917, his music fell into limbo.
It was performed but also attacked; it was officially banned from 1931 to 1933, after Rachmaninoff wrote to The New York Times, criticizing Soviet policies.
On his death in Los Angeles in 1943, he was commemorated with concerts in the Soviet Union, and his music has maintained a modest presence in Russia ever since.


Showalter Tries to Fill an October Void
The injury updates were still resting on his desk.
The advance scouting report was beside it.
The pitching matchups were listed on the wall to his right.
Even the tentative lineup card for the Aug. 12 game with the Blue Jays remained undisturbed.
Dusty but undisturbed.
When Manager Buck Showalter returned to his office at Yankee Stadium 10 days ago for the first time since the major league players went on strike, it felt like the aggravating day after again.
Showalter had asked the clubhouse manager, Nick Priore, to leave his office intact, and as a result, the aching reminders of the day the season began dying were sprinkled everywhere.


Polish and Dutch Win at Bridge
Pairs from Poland and the Netherlands captured the major titles at the conclusion of the NEC World Bridge Championships here this afternoon.
The final session of the Open Pairs was a marathon affair, beginning at 8:30 A.M., a remarkable hour for bridge players, and ending seven hours later.


Derivatives as the Fall Guy: Excuses, Excuses
EVERY day, the list of financial casualties grows longer and more varied -- from blue-chip corporations like the Procter &amp; Gamble Company to local governments like Portage County, Ohio.
They lost millions in the markets.
Now, they blame their losses on "derivatives," and on the banks and brokers who deal in these arcane-sounding financial products.
In many quarters, derivatives is already a dirty word.
As more and more companies have been stung by losses on their bets on derivatives, the nerdy term -- coined by the financial engineers of Wall Street and London a few years ago -- is invariably preceded in newspaper and magazine articles by the adjective "risky." Earlier this year, the General Accounting Office called for Federal regulation of trading in derivatives.
Congress is investigating them.
Last week, the central bankers for the 10 largest developed nations recommended increased disclosure of the derivatives holdings of banks, brokerage houses and companies.


Corrections
A letter to the editor on Sept. 18, about the staying power of Beethoven and Mozart, carried a misprinted signature.
The writer was Marshall Shapo, not Marshall Shapiro.


A Nod to Serious Dining, With Surprises
EAST END merchants and restaurateurs are just beginning to relax as they bask in the glow of a profitable summer season.
Year-rounders know that this is the time to reclaim the Hamptons.
Traffic snarls are a fading memory, beaches are deserted and a quiet, enjoyable meal out on Saturday night is a reality.
The American Grill, a late-arriving newcomer, might have been overlooked when it opened during the last frenzied days of July.
The Westhampton Beach space previously housed Montage, a youth-oriented night spot.
It is now a serious restaurant with wider appeal.


Lettie Teague, Alan Richman
Lettie Teague, a public relations consultant, and Alan Richman, a food and wine critic, both of New York, are to be married today at the Montrachet restaurant in TriBeCa.
Justice Joan B. Lefkowitz of the State Supreme Court in White Plains is to officiate.
The bride, 33, is completing a cartoon guide to wine, which is to be published next year.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
She is a daughter of Patricia and H. Edward Teague of Pittsboro, N.C.
The bridegroom, 50, a food and wine critic for Gentlemen's Quarterly magazine, won the James Beard Award for restaurant reviewing in 1993 and 1994.
He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
He is the son of Ida and Norman Richman of Coconut Creek, Fla.


The Simpson Case by the Numbers
Ronald L. Goldman was stabbed more than 20 times, and Nicole Brown Simpson had one wound that was five and a half inches deep.
Ninety five million households watched the car chase live.
There were 14 sites where blood was found on the Ford Bronco.
Statistics swirl around the O.J.
Simpson case like cameras around Mr.
Simpson's lawyer, Robert L. Shapiro.
Everthing about the case is big, including the jury selection process that began last week - 304 people were given a 75-page questionnaire to fill out.
Judge Lance A. Ito and the attorneys will pore over the answers, looking for disqualifying biases.


Skirmishes Over S.R.O. Continue
Six months ago, the Manhattan Borough President, Ruth W. Messinger, asked administrators of Euclid Hall, the much-protested single-room-occupancy hotel at 86th Street and Broadway, to form a community advisory board.
The goals: to involve opponents in the formation of hotel policies, and to keep all concerned parties informed.
But thanks to the factionalization of the community, the panel has been unable to address any of those issues.


Ronni Bucklan And Paul Baker
Dr.
Ronni Sue Bucklan, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Barnett Bucklan of Stony Brook, L.I., is to be married today to Dr.
Paul Robert Baker, a son of John S. Baker of Westport, Conn., and the late Marion Baker.
Rabbi Irwin Lowenheim is to perform the ceremony at Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a periodontist in Westport and New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University and received a certificate in periodontics from Columbia University.
She and the bridegroom received dental degrees from New York University.


POSTINGS: 36 Stories at York and 92d; 273 Apartments Where A.S.P.C.A. Used to Be
If it had taken history into account, the developer might have called the building Animal House.
After all, the site, at York Avenue and East 92d Street, was for many years home to the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.
But the developer, the Glenwood Management Corporation of New Hyde Park, L.I., opted for a more conventional name for the 36-story, 273-unit apartment building that is nearing completion where a four-story A.S.P.C.A. building used to be.
It is called the Brittany.


Sarah H. Sloan, Thomas Hentoff
Sarah Hunter Sloan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward W. Sloan 3d of Farmington, Conn., was married yesterday to Thomas Goodman Hentoff, a son of Nat Hentoff, the author and columnist, and Margot Hentoff of New York.
Betty Hauptman, a justice of the peace in Greenwich, Conn., officiated at the Milbrook Club there.
Judge Phyllis A. Kravitch of the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit in Atlanta took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 32, is the budget director at National Public Radio in Washington.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University and an M.B.A. from the University of Virginia.
Her mother, Kathleen H. Sloan, is an associate professor of public administration at the University of Hartford.
Mr.
Sloan, the bride's adoptive father, is the Charles H. Northam Professor of History at Trinity College in Hartford.
She is also the daughter of the late Lieut.
Col.
Russell P. Hunter 3d of the United States Air Force.


Turner's Redskin Task: Facing His Handiwork
He helped to create the monster. Now Norv Turner's task is to find a way to destroy it.
Make no mistake, when the Dallas Cowboys (2-1) tackle the Redskins (1-3) in Robert F. Kennedy Stadium this afternoon, this 69th meeting between intense rivals features several subplots.
Linebacker Monte Coleman will tie former Redskin Art Monk, currently with the Jets, for most games by a Redskin (205).
Heath Shuler becomes the first rookie quarterback to start for Washington in 33 years.


'Big Sam' Houston To Rise Again in Stone
SAM HOUSTON, father of Texas, was a really tall fellow 6 feet 6 or 7 inches according to some historical accounts, 6 feet 2 inches according to a (presumably more accurate) application he once filed for a passport.
But there's no point to quibbling anymore.
Sam is now going to be 67 feet high.
And he'll weigh 30 tons.
In a literally colossal bid to commemorate the man who was the first president of the Republic of Texas, and to create a permanent tourist attraction, Huntsville -- best known as the hometown of the most active execution chamber of any of the 50 states -- has given its blessing to the construction of a huge white-cement statue of Houston.


Tourist Area In Egypt Feels Endangered By Violence
Hassan Abdou swept the blood off the street where a German tourist was gunned down this week by assailants suspected by the authorities of being Muslim militants.
"How could these godless people do this?" asked Mr.
Abdou, a street sweeper here in southern Egypt.
"Without tourists this place is worthless."


Vanessa Williams, a Homespun 'Spider Woman'
THE voice purrs on pop albums and entices nightly on the stage of the Broadhurst Theater, but when Vanessa Williams addresses her children, she is any mother beginning the day.
"Remember, you girls have gymnastics after school," she said twice to 7-year-old Melanie and 5-year-old Jillian one recent morning, as 17-month-old Devin lolled happily in her arms and Sebastian the Shih Tzu rolled on the rug.
It was 8 A.M., mere hours after Ms.
Williams, star of "Kiss of the Spider Woman," had returned to her home here after what she called a double day of Wednesday performances.


A Correction: Vendors' Malls
A map with an article last Sunday about plans to open a vendors' mall in Sara Roosevelt Park in lower Manhattan gave incorrect locations for that market and some other potential mall sites that had been proposed last year.
Here is a corrected version. 1.
La Margueta de Fordham.
Fordham Plaza at Third and Park Avenues; opened Oct. 28, 1993. 2.
Washington Heights.
Amsterdam Avenue between 190th and 193rd Streets; never opened. 3.
Washington Heights. 175th Street; opened last March. 4.
Central Harlem. 126th Street; never opened because of zoning problems. 5.
Central Harlem.
Malcolm X Boulevard between 125th and 126th Streets; never opened because site not available. 6.
Central Harlem.
Malcolm X Boulevard between 116th and 117th Streets; to open shortly. 7.
Chinatown.
Roosevelt Market, Sara D. Roosevelt Park at Grand Street; to open Oct. 10. 8.
Fulton Street.
Near Restoration Plaza; never opened, site still being considered. 9.
Flatbush Avenue.
Near Church Avenue; no site has been selected.


Laura A. Pontrelli And Adam Fisher
Dr.
Laura Alison Pontrelli, a clinical psychologist in New York, was married yesterday to Frank Adam Fisher, a psychotherapist at the Ginsburg Clinic of the Bronx Psychiatric Center.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Town Club in New York.
The bride, 33, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Bard College and received a master's degree in psychology and a Ph.D. in clinical psychology from the New School for Social Research.
She is the daughter of Tania Lipko and Gene Pontrelli, both of Wilmington, Del.
The bride's father retired as a physical chemist at E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company there.
Her mother, a mental health counselor at the Fernhook Clinic, is also in private practice in Wilmington.


Getting Help At Airports
TRAVELERS AID, an organization whose lighted globe is seen more often now in old movies than in real railroad stations, has a wider mission than it once did, but still helps travelers in difficulty, which it began doing in 1917.
About 60 local agencies in the country provide "travel protective services," the sort of work associated with the Travelers Aid name: seeing that children traveling alone are not stranded when an airport shuts, helping those whose wallets have been stolen, tracking relatives who failed to meet the plane.


At Odds in Bosnia
Through 30 months of the Bosnian war, and the loss of 200,000 lives, NATO and the United Nations have had extraordinary difficulty working together to end the suffering.
But seldom have the two organizations been so obviously at odds or so clearly out of touch with the feelings of most people living in this country as over the past week.


Once Again, Colorado Saves Its Best For Last
After their moment last week, when the Colorado Buffaloes exhausted a supply of superlatives on one unforgettable play at Michigan Stadium, everything they achieve must now be redefined.
One week later, with the eyes and the heat of Texas upon them, the Buffaloes preserved their unlikely perfect season under relatively mundane circumstances.
They beat Texas, 34-31, on a game-winning field goal with one second to play, with a tipped pass to Michael Westbrook -- by now, Colorado's signature of kismet -- part of the decisive drive.


Ignore Baseball
To the Sports Editor:
I hope that during October, November and December this year you will run almost zero inches of printed copy about major league baseball.


Detective Comics
"Much later, he would conclude that nothing was real except chance." That discovery about the random nature of events is at the heart of CITY OF GLASS (Avon, paper, $12), a novel by Paul Auster first published in 1985 and now issued as the first volume in Neon Lit, a series of mysteries adapted to the comic-book format.
Mr.
Auster's work would seem to be an unlikely choice: it is an elegant meditation on the fragility of identity and the wayward power of words.
But in this terse adaptation of the book by Paul Karasik and David Mazzucchelli, the many layers of Mr.
Auster's speculations about existence are peeled back to reveal a deft mystery, involving the obsessive efforts of a writer, passing himself off as a private detective, to protect a disturbed young man from his brilliant and quite possibly deranged father.
Of course, nothing is as it seems: the young man may himself be deluded, his seductive young wife may have her own lethal agenda and the father may not be nearly as dangerous as he seems.
Mr.
Mazzucchelli's art is appropriately stark, demonstrating great ingenuity in rendering the intense isolation of these characters.
Future volumes in the series will include adaptations of a Barry Gifford story and of William Gresham's novel "Nightmare Alley." RICHARD E. NICHOLLS


A Pair of Fair Ladies, Both Tried and True
Quiz Show  Ralph Fiennes, John Turturro and Rob Morrow Directed by Robert Redford PG-13 120 minutes


Wellfleet Eats
To the Editor: As a five-month resident of Truro, Mass., on the Cape and a real-life inhabitant of Cincinnati, where I am restaurant critic for Cincinnati Magazine, I would like to add one more eatery to Suzanne Berne's charming piece on Wellfleet, Mass. ("New England All the Way," Aug. 28).
Painter's Lunch, between the pier and Mayo Beach, next to the W.H.A.T.
Theatre in Wellfleet, has been the hangout for Wellfleet literati and locals since it opened three years ago.
Kate Painter serves such moderately priced funky fare as clams Cataplana, littleneck clams in a Portuguese red sauce with linguica and chorizo; roasted eggplant with goat cheese, and eclectic sandwiches such as High on the Hog, roasted pork loin with horseradish mayonnaise and pearl onions.
JOAN FOX Truro, Mass.


Car Kills Pedestrian, 60
A 60-year-old woman was struck and killed in Queens last night by a car whose driver had an invalid license with multiple suspensions, the police said.
The woman, who was not identified, was killed instantly when the car struck her at an intersection in Flushing, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a Police Department spokesman.


Court Blocks Newspapers' Suit Against Rockland Prosecutors
A Federal appeals court ruled Friday that two newspapers could not sue the Rockland County District Attorney for First Amendment damages over an investigation into charges that they let an advertiser influence what articles they published.
The ruling helped rekindle a long-simmering feud between the newspapers and the prosecutors.
The charges against the newspaper were made by Linda Winikow, a former State Senator who was dismissed last year as a vice president of Orange and Rockland Utilities after pleading guilty to fraud and embezzlement charges.


Bones Beneath the Floorboards
MUCHO MOJO By Joe R. Lansdale. 308 pp.
New York: The Mysterious Press/ Warner Books. $19.95.


A Horse's Shadow
To the Sports Editor:
I am surprised at the quick judgment rendered by Joe Durso, about Holy Bull, hardly a Horse of the Decade.
I saw Holy Bull run an impressive race in the Woodward, but he was getting five pounds from most of the others in that race.
Sky Beauty's victory that same day, while toting 130 pounds, was far more impressive.
And what about distance and track condition?
The Bull was a dismal 12th in the Derby on an off track, then skipped the other two Triple Crown races.
This is a champion?


Translation Promotes Retirement Plan
PERHAPS what makes Diversified Investment Advisers headquartered in Purchase different from other pension-investment management companies is Oscar L. Destruge.
Mr.
Destruge, who has worked for the financial-services company for 25 years, was instrumental recently in developing the first comprehensive education program available in Spanish to help Hispanic employees understand their retirement plans and investment options.


Looking to the Needle
WHEN the sound of autumn is not the soft rustling of leaves but the hacking of coughs and the sniffling of noses, and fall's colors are washed through red, watery eyes, many New Yorkers head off, not to the see the foliage, but to visit the allergist.
" 'Tis the season to be wheezin', " hums Dr.
William J. Davis, a 55-year-old minister to the itchy.
Dr.
Davis's office, on 60th Street off Madison Avenue, is a cheerful, airy place, with bright colors and children's toys.
Tissues are available, but the only thing evidently infectious is his humor.


High Taxes Have Made New York a Has-Been Among States; End Motorist Subsidies
To the Editor:
Let's get the numbers straight.
George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor of New York, and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo are testing each other over tax cuts (editorial, Sept. 25).
They don't say much about what to cut or how much.
Maybe this will help.


Leslie S. Safian, Stephen B. Kuhn
Leslie Sue Safian, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Murray Z. Safian of Mamaroneck, N.Y., is to be married today to Stephen Bowie Kuhn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bowie Kuhn of Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla.
Herbert Rosenberg, a retired Village Justice of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., is to officiate at the Estherwood mansion there.
The bride and bridegroom are associates in the New York law firm of Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received her law degree from New York University.
He graduated from Middlebury College and received his law degree from Fordham University.


A Pair of Fair Ladies, Both Tried and True
My Fair Lady  Rex Harrison, Audrey Hepburn (and Marni Nixon's voice)  Directed by George Cukor G 173 minutes


Jennifer Griffin And Greg Myre
Jennifer Griffin, a freelance journalist in Islamabad, Pakistan, was married yesterday to John Gregory Myre, the chief of the Islamabad bureau of The Associated Press.
The Rev.
David Wayland performed the ceremony at Grace Episcopal Church in Keswick, Va.
Ms.
Griffin, 25, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Carolyn J. Griffin and John W. Griffin, both of Alexandria, Va.
The bride's mother is the producing director of Metrostage, a theater in Alexandria.
Her father is a partner in Dickstein, Shapiro &amp; Morin, a Washington law firm.


Home Alone
FIFTY DAYS OF SOLITUDE By Doris Grumbach. 114 pp. Boston: Beacon Press. $15.


The World; Psst. Spies Aren't Always Smart.
HANNAH ARENDT, the political historian and social philosopher, sat through the trial of the Nazi Adolph Eichmann.
She found him terrifyingly normal, monstrous because he was an ordinary man yet capable of mass murder.
Her phrase for this unsettling quality -- "the banality of evil" -- still reverberates.
Aldrich H. Ames, the mole for Moscow inside the Central Intelligence Agency, fits that mold: a mediocre officer in his country's clandestine service and the most destructive traitor in modern American history.


Science and Secrecy
STALIN AND THE BOMB  The Soviet Union and Atomic Energy, 1939-1956.
By David Holloway.
Illustrated. 464 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $30.


A Diet High in Fats Contributes to Disease
To the Editor:
The Yale study of the link between diet and ovarian cancer (news article, Sept. 23) confirms the hazards of a diet high in animal fat.
It concludes that women increase ovarian cancer risk by 20 percent per 10 saturated fat grams consumed a day, while those who eat servings of vegetables cut their risk proportionately.


Sept.25-Oct.1:; In Between the Lines


Pritchard May Not Play This Season
Doctors aren't sure if Denver Broncos wide receiver MIKE PRITCHARD will play again this season.
Pritchard, who suffered a lacerated left kidney last week, is being watched closely by the medical staff at Denver's Presbyterian-St.
Luke's Hospital.
Doctors said they are concerned that urine leaking from the kidney could cause an infection, and there's a possibility a tube will need to be inserted.
The original six-to-eight-week projection for Pritchard's recovery remains a possibility, but doctors don't know how his kidney will respond.
The team had hoped Pritchard might be released from the hospital sometime this week, but it appears likely he won't leave until the middle of next week.


From Mall Rat To Suburbia's Scourge
Suburbia was newly prosperous postwar America's idea of nirvana just 20 minutes from downtown.
It had everything an upwardly mobile family could want: two-car garages, backyard barbecues and a bedroom for every child.
What it didn't provide was a tradition for gathering in public places -- in other words, hanging out.
In his new play, "Suburbia," which recently concluded a run at Manhattan's Lincoln Center, Eric Bogosian, the 41-year-old writer, actor, performance artist and one-man scourge, portrays third-generation suburbanites homesteading, for lack of anyplace else, a 7-Eleven parking lot.
It's not a pretty site: concrete curbs, asphalt and industrial-sized trash bins.
The sharp-talking, pizza-puking characters, free-floating through their 20's, aren't thrilled with their lot, either, as they spend one summer's night waiting for the return visit of a schoolmate who has escaped to become a rock star.
In a recent interview at his favorite pool hall on New York City's Lower East Side, Bogosian, who grew up in the bedroom community of Woburn, Mass., talks about suburbs he has known, mall rats, hangouts and the public life of the 20-something generation.
The problem, he says, is not the people, but the place.


Theresa Morgan, Gary Goldsholle
Theresa Marie Morgan, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edwin J. Morgan of Morgantown, W. Va., was married yesterday to Gary Lee Goldsholle, the son of Gerry H. Goldsholle of San Francisco and the late Judith L. Goldsholle.
The Rev.
Paul Reynolds performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
John's University Parish in Morgantown.
The bride, 28, was until recently the human-resources specialist at Steptoe &amp; Johnson, a Washington law firm, where the bridegroom is an associate.
Mrs.
Goldsholle graduated cum laude from West Virginia University.
She also received a master's degree in industrial labor relations from the university, where her father is a professor of medicine and the director of its health service.


A HOPLOPHOBE AMONG THE GUNNIES
Weiss writes that he "never heard" the term "gunny." He must not have served in the military.
"Gunny" (gunner's mate) is a term common to virtually all branches of the service.


Bush Clan Diverges on Governor's Race
The Bush family, as in George Herbert Walker, the former President, and his brother Prescott Jr., both of the Greenwich Bushes, have parted company in deciding who should be the next governor of Connecticut.
President Bush, who grew up partly in Greenwich and whose father, Prescott Sr., was a United States Senator here, has endorsed the Republican candidate, John G. Rowland.
Prescott Bush Jr., who still lives in Greenwich, has endorsed Eunice S. Groark of A Connecticut Party, founded perhaps not coincidentally by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., also of Greenwich.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Named John Hall director of public affairs.


Cherry Corp.(CHER,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Enchanted Moments Preserved for the Ages
FOR MORE THAN THREE DECADES, MARTHA SWOPE'S name has been synonymous with memorable images of the performing arts -- particularly the glamorous worlds of theater and dance.
Now she has reached a watershed.
Although she is not retiring, she has closed her studio on West 43d Street in Manhattan and signed over her collection of nearly a million photographs to the Time Inc.
Picture Collection to be catalogued and preserved.
Eventually, it will be available in digital form.
Ms.
Swope will continue to work on projects that strike her fancy.


U.S. Troops Conduct Arms Search in Haiti
Moving on information wrung out of a prominent gunman seized on the street, American soldiers searched a half dozen sites today for weapons of paramilitary supporters of Haitian Army rule.
At dusk, several hundred soldiers were searching the biggest site, a former jet set resort called Habitation Leclerc, which is being turned into a botanical garden by a foundation led by the dancer Katherine Dunham.


In the Giants' Offense, Cross Is the Toughest Guy on the Block
If they kept statistics on blocking, the kinds of blocks that are so thorough and punishing that the defender ends up in the next zip code, then the Giants' Howard Cross might lead all tight ends in professional football.
He can catch, he can run, he can do it all when he is asked to do it all, but it is blocking that has caught the eye of the rest of the league.
"He may be the best blocking tight end in football," Fox football analyst John Madden said recently.
"There is probably no one better at clearing a path than Howard Cross."


Cheerily and Affectionately, the First Lady Goes Stumping for Her Brother
She hugged him.
She patted him.
She laughed at his Pope jokes.
She laughed at his fat jokes.
She made some fat jokes of her own.
She even smiled when he introduced her as "the main dish."
Other Democratic candidates may skitter away from the Clintons, but this underdog contender for the United States Senate had been dying for the First Lady to come down and bless his campaign.


Roquefort or Mascarpone, Cheese Agrees With Pears
PEARS and cheese are among the more felicitous culinary combinations.
And now that fresh autumn pears are in season, they can be twinned with all sorts of cheeses in a host of recipes, savory and sweet.
Consider adding pears to a salad that will be enhanced with cheese or a cheese dressing.
Parmesan and Roquefort or some other variety of blue-veined cheese are obvious choices.
But sturdy ricotta salata, farmhouse cheddar or a strong goat-milk cheese, can also be used.
Pieces of fresh pear are good in a Greek-style salad made with feta cheese.


Laura A. Wilts, Howard L. Perlow
Laura Anne Wilts, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Wilts of Waukegan, Ill., was married there last evening to Howard Lee Perlow, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Perlow of Vernon Hills, Ill.
Rabbi Paula Feldstein officiated at the Bonnie Brook Golf Club.


WHERE IN THE WORLD IN NICK WAPLINGTON
ALTHOUGH NICK Waplington usually depicts himself in his birthday suit, he does not go unclothed.
The world is this roving photographer's wardrobe.
He throws a twilit tanker port around his shoulders as if it were evening wear, turns the Unisphere into an atomic halo, slips into a robe of dried mud, crowns himself with a sooty tiara of smokestacks and cables, frizzes clouds into a fright wig and makes a hot tub with a painted desert backdrop look like a case of overdressing.
Some photographs in Waplington's latest series, "Other Edens," feature well-known landmarks. (The works will be shown at the Burden Gallery in New York from Oct. 25 to Dec. 3, with a companion book being released simultaneously by Aperture.) But Waplington doesn't want to be specific about the locations he puts on.
Nor does he volunteer information about himself.
Perhaps he feels too many details might disrupt the Everyman Goes Everywhere story his pictures appear to tell.
But, for the record, Waplington is 29, lives in London and took these photographs beginning in 1990.
And his art has its own genealogy.
The social historian Stephen Kern called it "the culture of time and space" -- those early 20th-century art movements that registered the perceptual shocks brought on by cars, planes, movies, X-rays, telephones and electric light.


Modern Art Museum Opening in Kansas City
The Kemper Museum of Contemporary Art and Design, the first museum in Kansas City, Mo., dedicated to contemporary arts, is scheduled to open today with a exhibition of rare early watercolors by Georgia O'Keeffe that have never been shown publicly as a group.
The series of 28 works, known as the "Canyon Suite," were painted by O'Keeffe when she was head of the art department of West Texas Normal College in Canyon, Tex., from 1916 to 1918.
The permanent collection of the new Kemper Museum, which is affiliated with the Kansas City Art Institute, features more than 700 works by major contemporary American artists including Robert Motherwell, Robert Rauschenberg, Jasper Johns, Jim Dine, Frank Stella, Helen Frankenthaler, David Hockney, Bruce Nauman, William Wegman and Nancy Graves.
The focus of the collection is on 20th-century American art from modernists such as O'Keeffe, Charles E. Burchfield and Thomas Hart Benton through contemporary artists.
Kansas City was where Benton lived and worked, and where he taught a class at the Kansas City Art Institute to a young student named Jackson Pollock.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
POLICE INVESTIGATION  ESTHER  Her Murder Haunts  a Small Town in Oklahoma.
By Leonard Sanders.
John Macrae/Holt, $22.50.


Janice Greenberg, Daniel Horowitz
Janice Greenberg, a daughter of Joan and David Greenberg of Oyster Bay, L.I., is to be married today to Daniel Owen Horowitz, the son of Shirley and Arthur Horowitz of Hewlett Harbor, L.I.
Rabbi Brooks Susman is to perform the ceremony at the Crescent Beach Club in Bayville, L.I.


Cintas Corp.(CTAS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Even in a Parade You Have to Keep Dry


Columbia Gives New York Something to Cheer About
No Yankees or Mets.
No Rangers, Devils or Islanders.
The Giants and Jets are away for the weekend.
New York sports fans were stuck -- egads! -- with local college football, and not much else.
It wasn't even a good day for flag football in the Sheep Meadow.
It would have been nice for fans if the rain had held off for Columbia versus Lafayette at Wien Stadium.
So what if the contest at Baker Field wasn't an Ivy League matchup; it was one of only two major college football games yesterday in this sports-starved metropolitan area.
The other game, in case someone missed it, was Miami at Rutgers.


Sept.25-Oct.1: How Much Is Too Much?; G.M. Workers Strike Over Workload
Last week 11,500 workers walked off the job at General Motors Corporation's Buick City manufacturing complex in Flint, Michigan, not over demands for a new contract but because they said they were sick and tired.
But by week's end, union officials announced a tentative agreement to hire more permanent workers.
The three-day strike idled nearly 22,000 workers in Flint and elsewhere.


THE PRESIDENT'S LAWYER
HIS," SAYS Robert S. Bennett, the Washington superlawyer, "is not a power town." He is on the patio of his timber-framed summer home in Paradise Valley, Mont., sipping iced tea and taking in the cool mountain air. An ebullient, 5-foot-9, 200-pound pile of a man, Bennett is in jeans, cowboy boots and a denim work shirt. Two huge black dogs of indeterminate breed lie peacefully at his feet.
"You see how gorgeous it is?" he asks, gesturing at the clouds and mountains.
"I sit out here sometimes if I really want to do some thinking about a case. I catch my breath." He shakes his head.
"There's no pretense here. People don't care who you are or what you do. They're not interested in power or bull. You go to a party and the center of attention is the guy who's the best guide on the river."


Dutch Decorative Arts (Finally) Have Their Day
TO AFICIONADOS OF early 20th-century design, Dutch Modernism means the revolutionary de Stijl movement.
However to David Revere McFadden, an assistant director at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, there is more to the subject than the minimally shaped and colorful de Stijl objects produced in the Netherlands from 1917 to 1931.
Not surprisingly, then, de Stijl designs are only modestly represented in "The Structure of Style: Modernism in Dutch Applied Arts, 1880-1930," an exhibition at the museum through Feb. 19.
The rest are in the Art Nouveau, Arts and Crafts, Symbolist and Art Deco styles.


U.S. GAINS ACCESS TO MORE MARKETS IN JAPANESE DEAL
In a significant advance for the United States, Japanese and American negotiators reached agreements today to open Japan's markets in insurance, glass and medical and telecommunications equipment in ways that should increase American exports to the world's second-largest economy.
But the all-night negotiations to meet an American deadline failed to produce a deal to increase Japanese purchases of American cars and car parts, which account for two-thirds of Japan's $60 billion trade surplus with the United States.
President Clinton responded by immediately carrying out his threat to initiate limited trade sanctions against Japan for failing to open more of its market for auto parts, even as he expressed satisfaction with those deals that were struck.


'World Within World'
To the Editor:
Regarding Sir Stephen Spender's essay about "World Within World" ("My Life Is Mine; It Is Not David Leavitt's," Sept. 4), as the co-editor of an anthology of gay fiction with David Leavitt I offer this passage from Christopher Isherwood's review of the memoir:


How to Make a School, From A to Z
A MIRACLE of a school opened its doors this fall in Brooklyn, a monument to the perseverance of a group of parents who clung to a simple belief: Their children deserved better middle schools than the ones they seemed destined to attend.
The parents wanted small classes for their children.
A safer school environment.
More hands-on instruction.
More relevance in lessons, and teachers who were not afraid to try new and different methods of instruction.
They wanted their children to learn about cultural and racial diversity, not from books, but from traveling around Brooklyn and visiting its institutions, seeing firsthand the richness that is New York.


Bad Year for Grapes, Great Time for Beauty
FALL mornings bestow the landscape here with a heart-catching beauty, drenching fields and foliage in a golden light and saturating the hills with color.
At the North Salem Vineyard one recent morning, the dew sparkled on clusters of grapes as a crew of pickers worked to harvest the fruit.
Only their conversation and the call of birds could be heard in the quiet setting.
Listening to the birds caw and chatter, Dr.
George W. Naumburg Jr. looked less than serene, however.


TRIBECA MILESTONES: HOW IT GREW
1776-1830: Residential community; landfills move shoreline from Greenwich Street to West Street.  1830-1880: Conversion to warehouses and lofts around Washington Market, the city's main food market.
MID-1960'S: Market moves to Hunts Point; Robert Moses demolishes some warehouses for renewal plans. 1974-75: Opening of Independence Plaza, three apartment towers.  1976: Zoning change permits residential loft conversions; artists arrive. 1979: Riverrun Cafe opens in a revamped warehouse, followed by a parade of upscale restaurants. 1983: Borough of Manhattan Community College and Washington Market Park open. 1988: Public School 234 opens. 1991-92: Four historic districts named, covering most of TriBeCa.
NOW: City Planning considering altering zoning from residential/manufacturing to residential/commercial.


K. A. Donahue, Mark A. Spano
Kimberly Ann Donahue, the daughter of David and Gwendolyn Donahue of Trumbull, Conn., was married yesterday to Mark Anthony Spano, a son of A. W. Spano of Harrison, N.Y., and the late Rose Marie S. Spano.
The couple were married in a civil ceremony at the Alfred S. Sulla Municipal Building in Harrison.
The bride is a public health educator at Women, Infants and Children, a Government health-counseling program in Norwalk, Conn.
She graduated from Bates College and received a master's degree in public health and nutrition from Columbia University.


'Soul' Wins Super Derby After Duel
The big horses were gathering or working or racing yesterday along the road to the Breeders' Cup, with its $10 million in purses and seven landmark races, which will be run on Nov. 5 with championships on the line in every division of the sport.
At Louisiana Downs, two of the candidates for the Breeders' Cup Classic dueled down the homestretch of the $750,000 Super Derby and finished about one long neck apart: Soul of the Matter, who ran fifth in the Kentucky Derby, held off the customary late move by Concern, who nearly caught Holy Bull in the Travers in August and missed by the same margin yesterday.
Bay Street Star was third and Meadow Flight, who chased Holy Bull in the Haskell in July, ran out of the money.


Matt Scudder Is Sober Now
A LONG LINE OF DEAD MEN By Lawrence Block. 285 pp.
New York:  William Morrow &amp; Company. $20.


How Much Is It Worth To Win a Mugger's Respect?
To the Editor:
In his Sept. 25 Soapbox essay, "9:30 P.M., RVSD: a Nonvictim," Adam Rothman characterizes his encounter with a mugger as leaving him "with my wallet, my dignity and his respect." The idea that a potential mugging victim (or rape victim or murder victim, for that matter) should be happy gaining the "respect" of a man who was apparently ready to kill just goes to show how much blaming the victim has become internalized in American society.


UP AND COMING: Gil Bellows; Hey, Brando, Remember That Hunk at the Door?
LESS THAN FOUR YEARS AGO, Gil Bellows was working as one of those unbelievably attractive doormen at the Royalton Hotel in midtown Manhattan.
Since then, he has been a co-founder of Seraphim, a small theater group that might be described as a low-watt Naked Angels, the Off Broadway company.
Off Broadway he has played a heroin addict, a gardener and a roommate.
And he has landed roles in three new films.
"The Shawshank Redemption," the current movie based on Stephen King's short story, is his first to reach the screen.
As Tommy Williams, an illiterate thief who befriends a pair of convicts played by Morgan Freeman and Tim Robbins, Mr.
Bellows is on screen for less than 10 minutes toward the end of the film.
But since Tommy provides information that might free Mr.
Robbins's character (who is serving two life sentences), his part is pivotal.


Worm Composting: A Somewhat Gooey Tale
LAST year, in the dead of winter, I missed my compost pile.
So I bought some mail-order red worms from Kalamazoo, Mich., and plunged into vermi-composting, as it's known in polite circles.
I just call it composting with worms, in a worm box.
And I have adventures to report to the squeamish, to the reluctant, to all those worm haters out there who no doubt toss banana peels and apple cores, good rich coffee grounds and calcium-packed eggshells into plastic garbage bags that will be taken to some brimming landfill.


Jennifer A. Terry, Tucker J. Glavin
Jennifer Ann Terry, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Terry of Fairfield, Conn., was married yesterday to Tucker Joseph Glavin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Glavin of Wellesley, Mass.
The Rev.
Stephen Chinlund performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Southport, Conn.
Mrs.
Glavin, 27, graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is the director of public relations at St.
Luke's School in New Canaan, Conn.
Her father is a senior vice president in the Stamford, Conn., office of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, where the bridegroom is a financial consultant.


Correction
The Streetscapes column on Sept. 18, about the reconstruction of a former Y.W.C.A. building in the Union Square area for use by a Buddhist organization, misstated the changes made to the building's library.
The library space was not divided for an additional floor; the room retains its original height.


Anne Rehkopf, Mark Townsend
Anne Elizabeth Rehkopf, the daughter of Katherine Eckels Rehkopf of Shawnee Mission, Kan., and Frederick A. Rehkopf of Chicago, was married yesterday to Edward Mark Townsend, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph H. Townsend of Atlanta.
The Rev.
Charles F. Rehkopf, the bride's grandfather, performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church Center for the United Nations in New York.
Mrs.
Townsend, 26, is a development associate for the American Institute of Graphic Arts, an association for graphic designers in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Tulane University.
Her father is the president of Schal Bovis, a construction management company in Chicago.
Her mother is an accountant in Shawnee Mission.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Ann C. Rehkopf.


On This Menu, It's Coffee, Tea And Phone Calls
Of course, the new cafe that replaced Pappa's ice cream parlor at 13th Street and Avenue of the Americas serves cappuccino, mochaccino and caffe latte.
But then there are also rich homemade ice cream, rum-spiked milkshakes and Long Island iced tea, sandwiches and salads and, with a minimum $5 order, 25-cent phone calls to anywhere in the United States, including Alaska, Hawaii and the Virgin Islands.


What Librarians Know
To the Editor:
Having just seen "Quiz Show," I was reminded of Anne Raver's statement "Mr. Redford pays marvelous attention to detail, from the Art Deco furniture to hairdos in the rapt studio audience."


Equality on Police Force: Women Arrested, Too
Police Officer Sounia Wilson was standing in the dank and clamorous women's locker room of the 30th Precinct station house in Harlem on a hot day in July two years ago when she first met Police Officer Justine A. Fazzini.
Officer Fazzini barreled through the room collecting her hat and night stick on her way out the door to respond to a 10-13 -- a call for an officer in need of assistance.


SUNDAY, October 2, 1994; Excalibur, Not High Caliber
Museum Replicas of Atlanta recently mailed out a catalogue offering Renaissance rapiers, medieval broadswords, knives made for stealth and assassination, scimitars and gruesome battle-axes and maces.
The swords are made of fine steel and designed to take a fierce edge.
Does this sword proliferation put the nation at even greater risk of random violence?
Probably not.
Drive-by beheadings are really rare.
And you pretty much have to be Conan the Barbarian to commit mass murder with a broadsword.
In fact, since the degree of difficulty in sword fighting is so high, it might be a blessing for all the bad guys and the good guys to carry swords instead of guns.


Corrections
The front page of the Long Island Weekly today was printed without continuation lines.
The article about Garden City is continued on page 12, column 1; the article about drunken driving on page 6, column 3, and the article about vandalism in parks, on page 24, column 1.


Italian Government Assures Jews It Rejects Anti-Semitism
The Government of Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi has formally assured American Jews that it has no anti-Semitic bias after a Cabinet minister blamed "New York's Jewish lobby" for Italy's economic problems.
The assurance was given on Friday in a letter to Abraham H. Foxman, national director of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, during a visit here that coincided with a series of events highlighting efforts toward reconciliation between Roman Catholics and Jews.


MacPhail Hired to Lead Cubs to October
Andy MacPhail was so impressive presenting a salary-arbitration case for the Chicago Cubs in 1980 that the player's agents, Jim Bronner and Bob Gilhooley, offered him a job at twice his salary, and Richard Moss, who had won landmark cases as a Players Association lawyer, called Lee MacPhail and urged him to encourage his 26-year-old son to go to law school.
All of that happened before the case was decided, but the outcome didn't change anyone's thinking.
Bruce Sutter, the relief pitcher against whom young MacPhail argued, won a then arbitration-record $700,000 salary over the Cubs' $300,000.


SUNDAY, October 2, 1994; Satellites Into Plowshares
In other (metaphorical) sword news, some high technology developed for warfare is being turned to the benefit of farmers.
The Government's $10 billion constellation of 24 orbiting satellites, known as the Global Positioning System, is already being used by some agricultural machines, like huge spreaders that dispense fertilizer and herbicides according to on-board computerized maps.


Susan R. Saltzbart, Richard P. Kilsby
Susan Rachel Saltzbart and Richard Philip Kilsby, both managing directors at the Bankers Trust New York Corporation, were married on Friday in Colts Neck, N.J., at the home of the bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Alvin H. Saltzbart.
The ceremony was performed by Judge Bernard Kannen of the New Jersey Superior Court in Toms River.
Mrs.
Kilsby, 36, graduated from Wellesley College and received a master's degree in public and private management from Yale University.
Her father is a dentist in Lincroft, N.J.
Her mother, Carolyne Saltzbart, is a broker at Gloria Nilson Realtors in Holmdel, N.J.


Fish, Fresh Taste and a Saltwater View
THERE'S nothing fancy about the Boat yard Cafe, in the Dodson Boatyard in Stonington, and that's part of its charm.
The L-shaped dining room facing the water is small, seating 25 at most.
But if the weather permits, the prime place to eat is on the canopied deck directly overlooking the marina.
Inside and out, the green and white decor is simple, with striped plastic tablecloths outside, fabric ones inside.
The menu is more interesting than the makeshift look of the cafe suggests, and the operative word is seafood.


It's Time to Get Serious About Opera, Pumps, Art
UPTOWN -- Opening night at the Metropolitan Opera has historically been an opportunity for the white tie, the mega-jewelry and gowns big enough to sweep a grand staircase.
Of course, dressing up has come down quite a bit since the Met's founding in 1883, an era when Mrs.
William Backhouse Astor Jr. was an avalanche of diamonds, velvet, lace and satin and Mrs.
Frederick W. Vanderbilt used to wear a huge ruby suspended from her waist on a rope of pearls.
Ever since moving to its new home at Lincoln Center in the fall of 1966 (Lady Bird Johnson shared a box with Ferdinand and Imelda Marcos at the opening), the incidence of tail coats and tiaras has dwindled.


Arrivederci, Regular! Serious Coffee Arrives
Along Third Avenue in Bay Ridge, down the block from Len's Appliance Store and a place simply called Pizza, green tea and latte can now be had.
A new coffee bar, Caffe Cafe, recently began serving up mochaccino, espresso con panna and its own Bay Ridge blend of coffee, along with exotic teas.
The bar, on the busy commercial corner of Third Avenue and 84th Street, has swept the neighborhood into the endless movement of java drinking as a way of life.


A HOPLOPHOBE AMONG THE GUNNIES
Interesting timing.
The day after I read your article, I learned of the German tourist who'd caught a stray Manhattan bullet while riding on the Circle Line.
I'm tired of the frontier mentality that allegedly made this country great.
If you can't cut down on the number of weapons, there are still sensible ways to get a handle on things.


Commercial Property/Flushing's Chinatown; A Chinatown With a Polyglot Accent
SAY "meet me in Chinatown" to most New Yorkers and they start moving toward Canal Street.
Most Cantonese-speaking Chinese in town would probably head the same way.
But Mandarin-speakers from Taiwan, or the growing number of Koreans and Asian Indians who have moved to Queens, are as likely to go to Flushing, around Roosevelt Avenue and Main Street, as to Mott or Canal Streets.


George Orwell's Answer
To the Editor:
As the author of "The Odyssey of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade," I vowed not to quibble in public with my reviewers.
But a statement by one of your correspondents, Israel Kugler (Letters, Sept. 4) -- "Losing its popular appeal, the Spanish Republic fell to Franco" -- really demands an informed response.


Jane Mendelsohn, Nicholas Davis
Jane Simone Mendelsohn, the daughter of Dr.
Frederick S. Mendelsohn and Dr.
Leatrice G. Mendelsohn, both of New York, was married last evening to Nicholas Peter Davis, a son of Peter Davis of Castine, Me., and the late Johanna Mankiewicz Davis.
Rabbi Mychal Springer performed the ceremony at the Hudson Theater in New York.
The bride, 29, is a writer in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a psychiatrist in New York.
Her mother is a professor of art history at the State University College at New Paltz, N.Y.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Martha Mendelsohn.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Saugatuck; An Immigrant Haven, a Sailor's Delight
WITH its toe protruding into Long Island Sound, the Saugatuck neighborhood at the southwestern corner of Westport resembles the boot of Italy, facing east toward its mate across the sea.
It lends credence to the commonly held belief that European immigrants settle in areas of America that remind them of home.
"In the mid-1800's Westport farmers, the railroad, and anyone else who needed cheap labor would meet the shiploads of immigrants at the docks in New York, promising them jobs and homes," said Margaret Lebedis, a guide at the Westport Historical Society.


A HOPLOPHOBE AMONG THE GUNNIES
Bill Doughty says that if the riders on the Metro-North train who were robbed had been permitted to properly protect themselves, they might not have been such easy targets.
Can you picture a trainful of armed commuters?
How many shooting deaths would there be . . . among the commuters?


DRINKS
The Cosmopolitan: New York's cocktail du jour can be ordered at the Rainbow Room with a flaming orange peel or, elsewhere around town, simply with its usual mix of citrus-flavored vodka, Cointreau and lime and cranberry juices. (Kim Garnick/The New York Times)


Lee C. Gowen, Jeffrey A. Marine
Lee Crosbie Gowen, a daughter of George and Marcia Gowen of New York, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Andrew Marine, the son of Gary and Marion Marine of Chadds Ford, Pa.
Msgr.
George Bardes performed the ceremony at Most Holy Trinity Church in East Hampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Marine is a vice president in fixed income sales at Lehman Brothers, the investment bank, in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Virginia and she received an M.B.A. degree from the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her father, the general counsel to the United States Tennis Association, is also a partner in Dunnington, Bartholow &amp; Miller, a New York law firm.
Her mother is the director of projects at the Center for Specialty Care, an ambulatory surgery center in New York.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 When autumn comes, Dr.
William J. Davis -- minister to the itchy, the sneezy and the wheezy -- gets very busy.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Dan Rossi is a one-man hot-dog cart cartel.
Looking into the steam-clouded future, he doesn't like what he sees.
MOVIE CLOCK 14 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 15 Rhythm of India in Flushing Meadows; a touch of Prague in Battery Park City.
GOOD EATING 16 Around Times Sq.: not just theater.
From Indian barbecue at Jewel of India, to all-American barbecue at Virgil's.
SOAPBOX 17 Topless on the subway: testing the limits of equality.
Plus, Photographer's Journal and the world between the cobblestones.


Investors Invest; Executives Manage
To the Editor:
Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich advocates a dangerous doctrine when he recommends that pension fund managers intervene in the management of the companies in which they invest ("A Moral Workout for Big Money," Viewpoints, Sept. 11).
If there is one thing that we know from the management research of the last decade, it is that concerns that diversify into unrelated industries do a lot worse than those that focus on core businesses.


Cynthia M. Avella, Lawrence S. Motz
Cynthia Michelle Avella, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Avella of Key Biscayne, Fla., was married yesterday to Lawrence Scott Motz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry L. Motz of Anchorage.
The Rev.
Robert J. Tomlian officiated at St.
John Nepomucene Roman Catholic Church in New York.
Mrs.
Motz, 29, is an equity research associate at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, the investment research and management company in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Columbia University.


Wall Street; Copper Linings for Wall St. Clouds?
COPPER, that great catalyst of scintillating conversation at gatherings of metallurgists, is making for interesting talk in stock market circles.
September-delivery copper closed at a four-year high of $1.278 a pound on Monday, the peak of a recent rally that caught the attention of Wall Street's tea-leaf readers.


The Nation: Are the Savings Real?; Paying the Price for Tax Cuts
IT'S election season and tax cut fever is upon the land.
Taking a cue from Christine Todd Whitman's successful campaign for governor in New Jersey last year, George Pataki, the Republican gubernatorial candidate in New York, is calling for a 25 percent reduction in income tax rates -- savings, he argues, that are possible without adverse consequences to localities dependent on state aid.
But when is a tax cut really a tax cut?
Experience has shown that, barring an economic boom or a large amount of obvious fat in the budget, cuts at one level of government are often made up for by tax increases at another.
The alternative is a reduction in services.
If history offers a fair test, suggests Helen Ladd, an economist at Duke University and the Brookings Institution, it is in California and Massachusetts, where the consequences of local property tax rollbacks have been reverberating through government at both state and local levels for more than a decade.
And here, argues Ms.
Ladd, "the chickens are coming home to roost" in the form of higher state taxes or as deterioration in the quality of popular public services.


Topics of The Times; Poverty Law Makes It to 20
The White House held a small party the other day to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the Legal Services Corporation, created by Congress to provide lawyers for the poor across the country.
It is safe to say that no recent administration would have sponsored such a celebration.
Richard Nixon, whose hostility to vigorous lawyers for the poor made the law necessary, reluctantly signed it just before leaving office in 1974.
President Reagan brought to Washington his antipathy for poverty lawyers who had sued him as Governor of California to enforce state laws designed to help the poor.
For years his Administration sought zero funding for the corporation.


Merging on The Information Superhighway. The New Comfort Zone Where Public Meets Private
CONVERGENCE: IT'S THE buzzword of the digital age, the mantra of the infobahn, invoked to explain all the alliances and takeovers we see announced daily in the newspapers.
These unions recall the shifting ententes of 19th-century European powers: telephone companies linking up with computer companies; software producers allying with television networks; film studios bonding with video game makers.
Everywhere, media are converging, and not just at the corporate level: soon computers and televisions will be almost interchangeable devices for pumping information and entertainment into our homes.
Already, the devices around us have begun to converge.
From the clock radio to the computer, they have accomplished liaisons far stranger than any corporate union.
One result of the process is that there is no longer a simple answer to the question, "What is this machine?" "It's not just a radio, it's an integrated audio system with CD, dual four-headed tape decks, quartz lock tuner and graphic equalizer."
Like upstairs and downstairs, public and private used to be well defined.
One acted, dressed, thought and furnished in ways deemed appropriate for one or the other realm.
No more.
In today's world, the line between public and private, once absolute, is not only shifting but dissolving.
In its place is the possibility of a comfort zone where public and private overlap, share the same elements and create a new sense of community.
The convergence of public and private is already under way in politics, the media and business.
Its impact on home design affects us dramatically by altering the place we know best.
Now, home offices and home theaters -- even kitchens -- are integrating the technology and the styles associated with professional life.
On a more literal level, using architectural artifacts -- often salvaged pieces of buildings -- as room decor is more popular than ever.


Vesna Karaklajic and James Oelsner
Vesna Karaklajic, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Miodragh Karaklajic of Belgrade, Yugoslavia, was married yesterday to W. James E. Oelsner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
James Oelsner of Palm Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Jeffrey H. Krantz performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's of Lattingtown Church in Locust Valley, L.I.
The bride, 28, graduated from the State University of New York Maritime College.
She and her husband, who is 33, work in Palm Beach, she as a portfolio manager for Occidental Asset Management, an investment management concern, and he as the president of the Occidental Group, a ship agency.


A HOPLOPHOBE AMONG THE GUNNIES
I was surprised, in the 1990's, to see The New York Times Magazine still describing a professional woman in terms of her breast size.
And I wondered about the psychological problems of an author who described himself as a hoplophobe -- a person with an irrational fear of weapons -- while describing shooting as "almost orgasmic." To "gunnies," of course, it's not; it's the relaxed culmination of a calm, steady, concentrated mental and physical effort.
THEODORE H. FIDDLEMAN Arlington, Va.


New Jersey Forum for New York Message
After months of hopscotching from one end of the state to the other, the New York gubernatorial campaign moved today to perhaps its oddest venue so far: a rain-soaked cliff in New Jersey overlooking the George Washington Bridge.
Three mayors assembled by the campaign of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo attacked a new plan to reduce income taxes put forth by the Republican candidate, George E. Pataki.
That the mayors were from New Jersey, not New York, was another sign that the budget-cutting policies of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman would remain a focus of the New York campaign.


Winning Streak Is Over For Boston University
James Madison 24, Boston University 21
Mike Cawley ran for one touchdown and passed for another to lead visiting James Madison to a 24-21 Yankee Conference victory over Boston University yesterday, ending the Terriers' regular-season winning streak at 16.
Cawley was 13 of 25 for 158 yards and rushed for an additional 80 yards as James Madison (3-1, 1-1) upset the nation's seventh-ranked Division I-AA team.
Robert Dougherty, the run-and-gun quarterback for the Terriers (3-1, 2-1), totaled 241 yards in the air.
West Virginia 34, Missouri 10
Restored to the starting quarterback job after three weeks on the bench, Chad Johnston passed for 291 yards and 2 touchdowns as visiting West Virginia defeated Missouri.
West Virginia (2-4), which won its first 11 games last season, snapped a three-game losing streak during which it scored only 31 points.
Getting a week off between games didn't help Missouri (1-3), which lost for the third straight time at home.
Wake Forest 33, Army 27
Rusty LaRue threw for 263 yards and scrambled 14 yards for the winning touchdown with 5 minutes 54 seconds remaining as Wake Forest survived Army's 374-yard ground attack at Winston-Salem, N.C.
LaRue completed passes to 12 receivers, with short touchdown passes to Gardell Chavis and Matt McNeel.
His touchdown run came as the passing pocket collapsed around him and redeemed him for a fumble minutes earlier.
With 8:14 left and Wake Forest trailing by 27-23, the Demon Deacons (2-3) had a first down at the Army 3.
But LaRue lost the snap from center and Army (1-3) recovered.
IN OTHER GAMES
Quarterback Carlos Garay threw two touchdown passes and also rushed for a third as HOFSTRA (5-0) crushed previously undefeated NEW HAMPSHIRE, 28-6, in a steady rain at Hempstead, L.I. . . .
MARIST quarterback Bob Delponte completed 2 touchdown passes, one of them 78 yards to Chris Heath, and ran 4 yards for a third score in a 32-13 Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference victory over ST.
JOHN'S.
MONMOUTH (2-2) stopped WAGNER, 22-14, as quarterback Dan Sabella finished 17 of 30 for 263 yards with touchdown passes of 9 and 47 yards to Bill Keliher.
Wagner fell to 1-3. . . .
AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL's Rashid Thomas scored three touchdowns in a 34-14 victory over C. W. POST (3-1), which had a 13-game winning streak snapped.
Reggie Greene scored a pair of second-half touchdowns on runs of 8 and 3 yards as SIENA snapped a 14-game losing streak with a 38-21 victory over IONA in the M.A.A.C. . . .
Timm Schroeder threw two touchdown passes for STONY BROOK (4-0) in a 22-6 victory over SACRED HEART.


Susan Z. Soloway And David Cohen
Susan Z. Soloway, the daughter of Linda Tannenbaum of Pompano Beach, Fla., and Louis Soloway of New York, was married last evening to David Alan Cohen, the son of Rita and Melvin Cohen of Eastchester, N.Y.
Rabbi Amiel Wohl officiated at the "21" Club in New York.
Mrs.
Cohen, 25, is a sales assistant at the investment bank of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University, from which her husband received a law degree and an M.B.A.
Her father is a senior partner in Certilman, Balin, Adler &amp; Hyman, a law firm in East Meadow, L.I.


A Pair of Fair Ladies, Both Tried and True
Princess Caraboo  Phoebe Cates, Kevin Kline, Stephen Rea, John Lithgow Directed by Michael Austin PG 94 minutes


Christiane Sheid and Scott W. Martin
Christiane Valentine Louis Sheid, a daughter of Michele Herant Sheid of Los Angeles and Louis X. Sheid of Del Mar, Calif., was married yesterday to Scott Worley Martin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack W. Martin of Chattanooga, Tenn.
The Rev.
John Andrew performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York.
Ms.
Sheid is a senior vice president at Lehman Brothers, the investment bank in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the University of California at Los Angeles, from which she also received an M.B.A.


An American Promise
CITY ON A HILL Testing the American Dream at City College.
By James Traub. 371 pp.
Reading, Mass.: A William Patrick Book/ Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. $25.


Sept.25-Oct.1; Restoring Florida
In what will be the largest effort ever at managing an entire ecosystem, Federal agencies last week announced plans to restore Florida's Everglades, reshaping much of the area's 11,000 square miles into something closer to the undisturbed wetlands of a century ago.
The goal will require massive changes, especially in farming areas and water consumption, said officials of the Corps of Engineers.
Environmentalists hailed the plan, saying it might help save nearly five dozen endangered and threatened species.


Recycling the Past
BUILDINGS GO UP, BUILDINGS COME DOWN.
Architects like to think that they are designing for the ages, but as often as not, the wrecking ball has the last word.
Or the next-to-last word.
Today, when a choice specimen breathes its last, architectural salvage companies, collectors and decorators stand ready to plunge right in, eyes fixed on a cornice fragment, a walnut sacristy, a bronze elevator door or a nice terra-cotta Indian -- just the thing for someone, somewhere.
"I sold the entire contents of a Carmelite monastery to a guy in California," says Evan Blum, the owner of Irreplaceable Artifacts, an architectural-ornament dealer in New York.
The gentleman in question, who owns a mountain in Malibu, did not reconstruct a place of retreat and meditation.
Acting purely on whim, he scattered turn-of-the-century marble angels around the property, used the stained glass for a music pavilion and set up the monastery bells as a chow-time signal for his farm animals.
In short, he followed the only rule that seems to apply when decorating with architectural pieces: There are no rules.


Mob Informer Doesn't Deserve Praise
To the Editor:
When Judge I. Leo Glasser of United States District Court imposed a five-year sentence on Salvatore (Sammy the Bull) Gravano, the mob figure who became a major Government informer (front page, Sept. 27, and editorial, Sept. 28), he may well have served effective notice that it pays handsomely for criminals to turn in their accomplices.


Roquefort or Mascarpone, Cheese Agrees With Pears
PEARS and cheese are among the more felicitous culinary combinations.
And now that fresh autumn pears are in season, they can be twinned with all sorts of cheeses in a host of recipes, savory and sweet.
Consider adding pears to a salad that will be enhanced with cheese or a cheese dressing.
Parmesan and Roquefort or some other variety of blue-veined cheese are obvious choices.
But sturdy ricotta salata, farmhouse cheddar or a strong goat-milk cheese, can also be used.
Pieces of fresh pear are good in a Greek-style salad made with feta cheese.


Heather Albert And Michael Dyer
Heather Leigh Albert, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton Albert of Weston, Conn., was married there yesterday to Michael David Dyer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Dyer of Springfield, Va.
The Rev.
Kevin J. Cameron performed the ceremony at the Norfield Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Dyer, 30, is a media relations specialist at Very Special Arts, an educational affiliate of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
Her father is a children's book author and consultant in management communications in Weston, where her mother, Lois B. Albert, is the office administrator for Albert Communications, her husband's company.


Roles Reverse in Pensacola Abortion Wars
Pat Welch sat in an office at the Pensacola Ladies Center here, warily scanning out the window for any sign of trouble.
Then she laughed, a little embarrassed, and apologized for her distracted and compulsive manner.
It was a reflex, she said, born of a year and a half as a volunteer escort at the clinic, where a doctor was shot and killed.


Oldest Law Firm Is Courtly, Loyal and Defunct
Until the very end, when the doors officially closed on Friday, New York's oldest law firm had a 19th-century whiff about it.
Yes, most of the paintings of hunting horses and tall ships, the photographs of partners in mutton chops and Civil war uniforms, were kept to one conference room in the blandly modern midtown offices of Lord, Day &amp; Lord, Barrett Smith.


The Mysteries of Literature
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS Errant Essays on Perpetrators of Literary License.
By Nicolas Freeling. 155 pp.
Boston: David R. Godine. $22.95.


Challenging Kuhn
To the Sports Editor:
What planet has Bowie Kuhn been living on for the last few years ("Let's Put Reason Back in Baseball Debate," Sept. 25, The Times)?
While I have no sympathy for employees who average over $1 million per year in salary, it is the owners who have precipitated and planned for this strike.
They realigned four divisions into six divisions so they could extract another round of playoff money.
They entered into a broadcasting contract with The Baseball Network and devised the great marketing strategy of having the All-Star Game, in July, as their first telecast, and only televising the extra round of playoffs on a regional basis.


Fair Offers a Chance to Meet the Artists
ONE of the unadvertised pleasures of the Morristown Craftmarket is the opportunity to meet and talk with craft artists.
Since they spend so many hours working alone in their studios, most artists are delighted to discuss how they manipulate clay, fiber, glass or metal.
Of course, touching fine craft items is frowned upon in museums, but in fairs the artists encourage visitors to stroke the rich surfaces of their silk, leather or wood and perhaps try on a set of earrings.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


How Quest for Penguin Eggs Ended
To the Editor:
Herewith the ironic sequel to that bitterly cold retrieval of Emperor penguin egg embryos from Antarctica's Cape Crozier (Science Times, Sept. 27).


Breaking the Deadly Hold Of Schizophrenia
LORI SCHILLER'S life began to unravel at age 17.
Before that, she had been an achiever -- driven to succeed, but also known for her sense of fun and humor.
The oldest of three children in her family, Ms.
Schiller maintained a 3.9 average at Scarsdale High School, while heading the prom committee and serving as literary editor of the school magazine.
It was in the summer of 1976, while she was working as a counselor at summer camp, that the first sign of what would be a horrifying journey into madness appeared -- one from which she would ultimately make a miraculous trip back.
As she lay in bed, musing about a past summer romance, she suddenly heard a loud voice yelling, "You must die!" Other voices joined in chorus, shouting, "You must die!" "You will die!"


F.Y.I.
Where to on the B.Q.E.?
Q.
Why do the signs on the B.Q.E. say east and west rather than north and south, since that's how it runs (from Queens south to Brooklyn, and from Brooklyn north to Queens)?
I am still confused today.
How can I permanently imprint in my memory that east is to Queens?
Or is west to Queens?


Taylor Ingraham And David Tait
Taylor Nye Ingraham, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sears W. Ingraham of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to David Martin Tait, a son of Margaret Tait of Halifax, Yorkshire, England, and William Tait of Ilkley, Yorkshire.
The Rev.
Edward R. Danks performed the ceremony at the Noroton Presbyterian Church.


Q AND A
Seeing South Africa
Q.
Do you have any information on group tours to South Africa?
We do not wish to concentrate on safaris, but would like to visit Johannesburg, Cape Town and other high spots. -- Ruth Fischer, Lexington, Mass.


7 Industrial Nations Deliver a Rosy Economic Forecast
Finance Ministers from the seven major industrial powers proclaimed today that the world economy looked firmly set for a period of sustained growth coupled with low inflation and announced a series of measures to support this.
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, who served as chairman of the meeting, said the industrial nations faced "an excellent economic outlook," with prospects for growth "improving significantly" and trade set to rise "at a faster rate than at any point in the last five years" while inflation remains "subdued."


4 in Row: Syracuse Triumphs In a Rush
Later this season, when Virginia Tech and Syracuse reflect on the bounces they received and the bounces that got away, they will probably agree that a certain point of definition was reached at the Carrier Dome this afternoon.
In a brutal but fast-moving game that highlighted two outstanding quarterbacks and two impressive ground games, Syracuse came from behind to upset Virginia Tech, 28-20, before 47,635 fans.


Forgotten Fans
To the Sports Editor:
Hey!
What's going on here?
Here I am at Yankee Stadium and I'm ticked off.
I mean, I'm really ticked off.
Sitting in the stands, alone, and I'm waiting for the game to begin.
Where is everybody?
Where's the guy who sits behind me screaming his lungs out?
I never thought I'd miss him.
Where's the beer guy?
The peanut vendor?


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 2, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
2
2
PEARL IN THE MIST, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) The ordeals of a girl beset by a hostile stepmother and a troubled twin sister.
3
2
THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A revised edition of a 1985 novel about a young girl's mysterious disappearance.
4
2
CHAMPIONS OF THE FORCE, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
5
11
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.
6
16
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
7
14
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
8
1
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a man and a woman and for her first lover.
9
7
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Love and hope -- plus recipes -- on a Mexican ranch.
10
6
GONE, BUT NOT FORGOTTEN, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) The wives of several Portland, Ore., businessmen disappear.
11
5
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
12
7
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
13
1
HIDDEN FIRES, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $5.99.) A 1982 novel about a Texas preacher's daughter who is tricked into marriage.
14
15
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's daughter.
15
2
BORN IN FIRE, by Nora Roberts. (Jove, $5.99.) The romance of a glassmaker and a gallery owner in western Ireland.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
3
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
3
38
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
4
5
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
5
569
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
6
19
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business innovation.
7
38
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
8
5
YOU BELONG TO ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $6.99.) Six true-crime cases reported by a veteran policewoman.
9*
85
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
10
21
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A memoir of a young woman's mental illness.
11*
22
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
12*
20
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their effects.
13
1
DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great Plains.
14*
1
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
15*
11
A BOOK OF ANGELS, by Sophy Burnham. (Ballantine, $10.) Encounters with celestial beings as recorded by people past and present.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
6
GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.) The witticisms of a fictional slow-witted wanderer through history.
2
185
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
3
47
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel.
4
3
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 17, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


At Work; A Job Coach's Sobering Pep Talk
IN jittery economic times, the rational person really has only two choices: sink heavily into denial or face reality.
There is much to be said for the former, especially in media markets where reruns of "The Odd Couple" play continuously, but those who would bite the bullet might seek out Carol Kleiman's humane and sobering new book, "The Career Coach" (Dearborn, $15.95).
"You are the only one who can make things happen over the course of your working life. You are the only one in charge of your career," Ms.
Kleiman notes about two-thirds of the way through the book.
This is not good news or bad news, she suggests.
It just is, and the sooner it sinks in, the sooner your career will stop feeling like "The Poseidon Adventure."


Eve Feuer, Ronald Urvater
Eve Claudia Feuer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Feuer of Chappaqua, N.Y., is to be married today to Ronald Martin Urvater, the son of the late Phillipe and Judith Urvater.
Rabbi Robert Fine is to perform the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in New York.


In the Region/Westchester; Legally Zoned Nude Dancing Club Troubles Yonkers
LOCAL business owners are troubled by the opening two months ago of a nude-dancing establishment right in the middle of the downtown waterfront district here, an area that has been targeted for revitalization.
The club is now shut down, pending the outcome of an eviction order served by the landlord.


Cindy Edelstein and Frank Stankus
Cindy Ann Edelstein, the daughter of Anita Edelstein of Highland Park, N.J., and the late Alfred Edelstein, was married last evening in New York to Frank Stankus, a son of Frank and Ana Stankus of Worcester, Mass.
Cantor Dan Rous performed the ceremony at the New York Prop Gallery.
Ms.
Edelstein, who is keeping her name, owns the Jeweler's Resource Bureau, a marketing agency in New York.
She graduated from Hofstra University and the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father owned Forest Jewelers in Port Richmond, S.I.
Her mother is an assistant treasurer at the Bank of New York in Secaucus, N.J.


Sports of The Times; Sports Void Will Help Us Get a Life
GARY BETTMAN disappointed me.
I am not referring to his "postponement," or "lockout," or whatever it was that pushed back the hockey season, and gave us either a new lease on life or a lost weekend, depending on your view.
We could have been celebrating raggle-taggle baseball franchises like the Yankees and Expos and Indians finally having some success this weekend, and we could have been enjoying the return of the violent kaleidoscope called hockey.
Instead, there is only professional football on the tube, which is entirely up to you.


He'd Rather Fight Than Use Keyboard In His Haydn Series
WHEN YOU contemplate purchasing a recording of, say, Mahler's Symphony No. 2, you expect that whatever the differences in interpretation and sound quality of the available versions, the notes will be the same in all of them.
That is not the case with the symphonies of Franz Joseph Haydn, who left behind a confusing tangle of documents relating to his compositions and performances.
To arrive at a definitive set of performing parts is a highly contentious matter, and thus grist for the fine-grinding mills of musicologists, who love nothing more than a good scrape.
Although Haydn's 106 symphonies are one of the best-known and most widely performed bodies of work in Western music, they have not always been well served by the record labels.
Just four years ago, the CD catalogue lacked a complete set of them.
But now three complete Haydn symphony projects are under way, and although the two most interesting ones, led by Christopher Hogwood on L'Oiseau-Lyre and Roy Goodman on Hyperion, both use period instruments, they sound very different.
Behind the difference lies a sharp scholarly dispute, as recent conversations with some of the combatants revealed.


Trial Is Set for 3 on Charges of Kidnapping Hasidic Youth
In April 1992, a 13-year-old Jewish boy from Ramsey, N.J., disappeared after receiving bar mitzvah instruction at a Brooklyn yeshiva run by an ultra-Orthodox rabbi.
He resurfaced publicly last February in Rockland County.
For nearly two years, the agonized parents of the boy, Shai Fhima Reuven, now 15, did not know where he was and said that he had been abducted and brainwashed by religious zealots bent on converting him to a devout brand of Judaism.


On an Elephant's Back
Though four-wheel vehicles are the common mode of transport on safari, traveling on the back of an elephant is a more scenic, if slower, alternative.
And for its East African Elephant-Back Safaris in Botswana's Okavango Delta next year, Ker &amp; Downey has five elephants.
The animals, including two newcomers, are trained to carry travelers during five-day treks on the bank of the Xhenega River.
Riders sit on a howdah, or saddle, and camp in tents with bucket-style showers.
Safaris, March to November, cost $4,000 a person. (800) 423-4236.


In Canada, Time to Pass the Puck, Not Grab the Buck
Canadians are mad as hell, but it looks like they're going to have to take it -- at least until mid-October.
For the first time in its history, the National Hockey League won't begin its season on schedule.
To Canadian sports fans, it was bad enough being struck out by baseball in a year in which the Montreal Expos seemed on the way to a pennant -- after two years in which the Toronto Blue Jays clinched the World Series.


Washing Away Sin


Nation of Islam On Housing Job: A Legal Mix?
A Brooklyn politician, angry that a unit of the Nation of Islam was awarded a security contract for a state housing project, has appealed to New York State housing officials to have the contract revoked.
Assemblyman Jules Polonetsky, who represents the 46th District, which includes Coney Island, was approached at a community meeting in the neighborhood by a security guard for Ocean Towers, a housing project regulated and subsidized by the state, The guard was looking for Mr.
Polonetsky's help in maintaining a temporary contract awarded to his employer, X-Men, which is affiliated with the Nation of Islam.
Instead of offering help, Mr.
Polonetsky became enraged that members of Louis Farrakhan's Nation of Islam were working in the building at all.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 18 about a plan for Disney ice rinks misspelled the surname of the project designer.
He is Michael Maltzan.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Privy to History
"WE are committed to keeping buildings as they were," said Ruth Broadbent of Sayville.
Mrs.
Broadbent and her husband, Chuck, are restoring their 19th-century house and barn.
So it seemed only right, Mrs.
Broadbent said, that they should restore their 19th-century outhouse, as well.


T. L. Fitzpatrick, Charles Dietzgen
Tracey Loraine Fitzpatrick, a daughter of Nancie V. O'Connell of Cheshire, Conn., and the late Thomas F. Fitzpatrick, is to be married today to Charles Antoine Dietzgen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter C. Dietzgen of Palm Desert, Calif.
The Rev.
James F. Karpen, a Methodist minister, is to perform the nondenominational ceremony at the Terrace, a restaurant in New York.
The bride is a talk-show host and a reporter for TKR Channel 8, a local cable service based in West Nyack, N.Y.
She graduated from the State University College of Technology at Alfred, N.Y.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Who Might Fill the Shoes Of the Fisherman, and Why
THE shock of the Vatican's decision to call off Pope John Paul II's visit to the United States last month -- because, it said, he needed more time to recover from a leg fracture suffered last spring -- has triggered a round of speculation.
The question can be reduced to two words: who's next?
But the stakes are broader than that.
In pondering who might lead them next, the cardinals of the Roman Catholic Church are also beginning to focus on the direction the church might take, and which part of its global constituency might be emphasized in the coming decades.
Should it give new prominence to its fastest-growing constituency, Africa, rather than Europe?
Should there be some change of tone in the way the doctrinal issues are presented and on which the present Pope has allowed so little change?


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Widget Store Opens In Rockefeller Center
Brookstone, the gadget-oriented, hands-on store, will be opening in a second location in Manhattan.
The store, which has 125 locations around the United States, will move in to the location of the former Nikon house in Rockefeller Center on Nov. 12.


Robyn L. Ballard, James P. Ziperski
Robyn Lisa Ballard, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Claude M. Ballard of Little Rock, Ark., was married yesterday to James Patrick Ziperski, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Ziperski of Wauwatosa, Wis.
The Rev.
James Miracky performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Christ King Church in Wauwatosa.
Mrs.
Ziperski and her husband, both 29, work at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.
She is an associate in the municipal bond department, and he is a vice president in the capital markets group.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the chairman of Rockefeller Center Properties in New York.


Monkey Business
To the Editor:
An infinite number of monkeys, working at an infinite number of typewriters, so it is conjectured, would eventually replicate "War and Peace"  [ "The Granddaddy of Disorder," Sept. 18 ] .


Dolly in Her 'Matchmaker' Days
THE colliding characters in Thornton Wilder's "Matchmaker" at the McCarter Theater are on the brink of a significant fling as though life depended on it, and it does.
For the stifled and the restless of Yonkers, the freeing place is old New York in the early 1880's, when glitter meant "the lights of 14th Street" ( from a lyric in "The Matchmaker's" musical adaptation, "Hello, Dolly!") and 14th Street meant uptown.


South Africa
To the Editor: I read with great nostalgia the article "The Heart of the Zulu Kingdom" (July 24).
In 1985 I journeyed with a British couple and a guide to the Zulu battlefields from Umhlanga Rocks via Pietermaritzburg.
I was especially eager to visit Rorke's Drift, after reading Donald R. Morris's "The Washing of the Spears" (recommended in the article).
My companions were equally eager to go because the husband's hobby was studying military strategy.
It was one of the most fascinating tours I have experienced, highlighted by exciting stories of exceptional bravery by both the British and the Zulus.
We were told that originally only the graves of the British soldiers were marked, but that now the dead Zulu warriors have been accorded equal recognition.


Data Bank/October 2, 1994
Data Bank/October 2, 1994
New Orders for Durable Goods
Aug.
July
June
Monthly percent change
6.0
-4.0
1.2
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
0.4
0.5
0.2
New-Home Sales
Monthly percent change
9.7
1.9
-9.1
Gross Domestic Product
II Q'94
I Q'94
IV Q'93
1987 dollars, in percent
4.1
3.4
7.5
Consumer Confidence
Sept.
Aug.
July
1985=100
88.4
90.4
91.3
Weekly Jobless Claims
Sept. 23
Sept. 16
Sept. 9
In thousands
310
321
327
Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
Friday spot price, per barrel
$17.72
$16.83
$17.53
Gold
Sept. 30
Sept. 23
Sept. 16
Friday A.M. London fix, per ounce
$394.40
$395.70
$389.60


J. A. Mendenhall And Hans Richter
Jennifer Ann Mendenhall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Mendenhall of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Hans Max Richter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Max E. Richter of Bedford, N.Y.
Msgr.
Charles Stubbs performed the ceremony at the First Church of Round Hill.
Mrs.
Richter, 24, graduated from the University of San Diego and is studying for a master's degree in social work at Columbia University.
Her father retired as a vice president of the Union Pacific Company.


The Hudson Valley By Train and Minibus
Exploring some of the Hudson Valley's highlights without a car is easier this fall with the introduction of a new package by Metro-North.
Called the Sleepy Hollow Excursion, the package provides round-trip rail fare from Grand Central Terminal to Tarrytown; minibus service between the station and three historic sites, and admission fees.
The sites are Sunnyside, the home of the author Washington Irving; Lyndhurst, the 1830's Gothic-revival mansion, and Philipsburg Manor, a Colonial-era farm and grist mill.
Guided tours are provided at all three.


Levitt's Bid: Reform Nasdaq
THE Nasdaq stock market is being forced -- squirming and complaining -- into new rules that will make it easier for investors to get better prices when they buy and sell stocks.
And some people are very angry at the Securities and Exchange Commission for requiring the changes.
"The S.E.C. is going too far," says John Watson, the president of the Security Traders Association, an organization that is dominated by Nasdaq traders.
"I don't think any business should have the Government dictating that they can't make a profit."


Rachel Fisch, Russell Kaplan
Rachel Lynne Fisch, a daughter of Norma and Joseph Fisch of Somerset, N.J., is to be married today to Russell Scott Kaplan, the son of Sylvia and Kenneth Kaplan of Maplewood, N.J.
Rabbi Stephen Marcu is to officiate at Bretton Woods, in Morris Plains, N.J.
The bride, 27, is a speech pathologist in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland at College Park and received a master's degree in speech and language pathology from Columbia University.


Tagliabue Sings Praise Of Harmony
With the cancellation of the major league baseball season and the World Series and the postponement of the start of the National Hockey League season, Paul Tagliabue, the Commissioner of the National Football League, feels fortunate to be presiding over a sport that is in full swing and has labor peace through the year 2000.
As part of a settlement of the Freeman McNeil lawsuit in January 1993, the N.F.L.
Players Association agreed to a collective bargaining agreement that included a salary cap -- based on team's spending 64 percent of their shared revenue on player salaries -- tied to free agency for veteran players.
Before that agreement, N.F.L. players had not had a contract since 1987 and had been involved in a lengthy and caustic legal battle over free agency.
There was even a failed players strike in 1987.


Holly Corroon and Marc Robinson
IN 1981, Holly Corroon and Marc Robinson both lived on the Upper East Side and walked down the same stretch of Lexington Avenue to work each morning.
While he never noticed her, she developed a crush on him, looking for him on the crowded sidewalk every day, walking close behind him sometimes, imagining where he was from, the things he talked about, what he did for a living.
"I thought he was an L.A. movie producer," she recalled.
"He always had a tan, and he wore his hair a tiny bit long. It wasn't an investment banker's haircut. I'm still highly insulted he didn't notice me. I keep asking him, 'Are you sure you don't remember me?' "


Patricia Morrill, E. I. Riegelhaupt
Patricia Gertrude Morrill, the president of Morrill Associates Inc., an executive search firm, and Edward Irwin Riegelhaupt, the president of Taconic Consultants, an investment banking advisory firm, both in New York, were married last evening in Winchester, Mass.
The Rev.
Arline C. Sutherland officiated at the Winchester Unitarian Church.
Rabbi David B. Kudan took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Morrill, who is keeping her name, graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Manning C. Morrill of Arlington, Mass.
Her father, now retired, was a corporate vice president of W. R. Grace &amp; Company.


Again, an Illegal Driveway Touches Nerves
Workers appeared in front of 39-61 43d Street one day last month and proceeded to lay a smooth double driveway across the front lawn.
In short order, neighbors were firing angry faxes to the local community board, placing bitter phone calls to the City Planning Commission, lodging emotional pleas with the City Department of Buildings.


Investors Invest; Executives Manage
To the Editor:
Robert B. Reich's observations about the workplace are right on the money.
Whether or not the holistic measures of corporate performance he cites catch on with investors, Union Carbide has demonstrated that employee commitment goes hand in hand with financial performance.


Reminiscences On the 15th St.'Y'
To the Editor:
Your article about the Y.W.C.A. at 7 East 15th Street is historically accurate with respect to this gem of Romanesque architecture and its sale by the "Y" in 1917.But the following quotation is hardly adequate: "Since then 7 East 15th Street has been used as office space, and carelessly altered, although the facade has survived miraculously intact."


A Building to Love, but Not to Buy
THE most expensive item on display these days at Ralph Lauren's flagship store on Madison Avenue is not the tartan socks ($21), or the mohair skirts ($365) or even the leopard-accented throws ($2,165).
It's the building it's all housed in.
Called the Rhinelander mansion after the grande dame who built it 96 years ago, the little architectural gem can be had for a cool $46 million -- cash and carry.


Streetscapes/St. George/New Brighton; 78 Houses and a Church Overlooking the Harbor
WHEN Laurie Beckelman was appointed chairwoman of the Landmarks Preservation Commission in 1990 she promised to emphasize landmarks and historic districts beyond central Manhattan.
She did just that, especially in Queens, which had 78 landmarks when she arrived and 683 now, and Staten Island, which had 132 and now has 218.
Ms.
Beckelman resigned her post as the agency's head this summer, but remains on the commission.
One of the commission's last acts under her leadership was the designation of a 78-house, one-church residential area at the north end of Staten Island, the St.
George/New Brighton Historic District.


Edith Wharton's Rating
To the Editor:
In his review of Shari Benstock's "No Gifts From Chance: A Biography of Edith Wharton" (Aug. 14), Greg Johnson concludes that Ms.
Benstock's study cannot escape comparison with R. W. B. Lewis's life of Wharton, just as Wharton herself "lived out her career in the shadow of Henry James's larger reputation."


Ronni Bucklan And Paul Baker
Dr.
Ronni Sue Bucklan, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Barnett Bucklan of Stony Brook, L.I., is to be married today to Dr.
Paul Robert Baker, a son of John S. Baker of Westport, Conn., and the late Marion Baker.
Rabbi Irwin Lowenheim is to perform the ceremony at Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a periodontist in Westport and New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University and received a certificate in periodontics from Columbia University.
She and the bridegroom received dental degrees from New York University.


Q and A
Neighbor Is No Fan of a Ceiling Fan Q I live in a condominium unit in Westchester County.
The owner of the apartment below me installed a ceiling fan in his bedroom, which is below my bedroom.
When the fan is turned on I can hear the cyclical sound of what I believe is the fan's motor.
The sound is loud and annoying enough to prevent me from getting an adequate amount of sleep.


A HOPLOPHOBE AMONG THE GUNNIES
I was aboard the Metro-North train the night it was robbed and I disagree that armed commuters could have kept it from happening.
The train was crowded and few realized what was going on; it seemed more like a group of kids clowning than an actual robbery, until the fleeing robbers fired a single shot into the floor of the car.
It was a terrifying moment but one that could have been made more horrifying had 50 passengers pulled out their pistols and opened fire.
GLENN A. D. WEYANT Nantucket, Mass.


As Legal Aid Lawyers Strike, Supervisors Fill In at Courts
In a move that threatened to tie up New York City's court system, Legal Aid Society staff lawyers representing indigent defendants walked off their jobs in a contract dispute early yesterday, but with many courts closed for the weekend the effects of the job action were all but invisible.
The customary weekend parade of people accused of being thieves, prostitutes and aggressive panhandlers and other defendants were represented by 27 Legal Aid Society supervisors who filled in for absent subordinates at criminal court arraignments in all five boroughs, and the bail hearings continued without interruption.


Jets Say Odds Are Good They Will Return to Form
The Jets are betting among themselves. But don't call in the F.B.I.
"It's just chump change," explained Anthony Prior.
"It's for who can stop Eric Metcalf at the 30."


SUNDAY, October 2, 1994; The Burning Man
What a way to spend Labor Day weekend!
Erect a 40-foot-tall wooden man, limned with blue neon lights and stuffed with fireworks, in the desert about 100 miles north of Reno.
Let him tower for three days over an irreverent arts festival and impromptu community that creates its own newspaper and several competing radio stations.
Participate in performance art, go naked, play skeet-golf or go to the drag races -- foot-racing 50 yards in drag.
For music -- a little retro-techno-proto-apocalyptic rock here, some space punk there.
Then, on the evening of the third day, the Sunday before Labor Day, lower the wooden man for a ritual raising by all celebrants and have two torchbearers, wearing only black body paint, set him on fire.


Guide to the Chunnel
After six and a half years -- and $15 billion -- the 31-mile Channel Tunnel between England and France still isn't open for regular passenger service.
At last report, both the high-speed Eurostar, which ferries passengers through the tunnel, and Le Shuttle, which transports cars and drivers, could be delayed until year's end.
But for travelers planning way ahead, Michelin's new "Channel Tunnel Map-Guide" is available in bookstores.
The $5 guide includes road maps of southeastern England and the coast from Paris to Antwerp, and travel times between major European cities. (800) 423-0485.
TERRY TRUCCO


A Principal Who Knows What She Wants
THERE is an air of authority about Sister Marie-Alberta, principal of St.
John's School in Old Saybrook.
Sitting behind her desk, her black veil covering her hair and metal-rimmed glasses framing her eyes, she is imposing.
Her figure is even more striking in the halls of the school, where her long, black habit is visible from veil to hemline.
Yet how many principals keep a box of chocolate-covered peanut butter cups in a side drawer of the desk for small visitors?
And how many principals, upon seeing a first-grader still sound asleep at his desk at the end of a rest period, would decide to let him sleep just a few minutes more?
"That's compassionate," Sister Marie-Alberta said as she looked at the boy and smiled.


Christopher P. Ottaunick Yvette B. Tricon, Louis A. Klevan
Yvette Barre Tricon, the daughter of Alfred J. Tricon of Houston and the late Loleta D. Tricon, is to be married today to Louis Alan Klevan, the son of Charlotte K. Levy of Pittsburgh and the late Leonard Klevan.
Rabbi Richard Chapin is to perform the ceremony at the National Arts Club in New York.
Miss Tricon, 34, is a portfolio manager at Offitbank in New York.
She graduated from the University of Texas and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Houston.
Her father, who is retired, was a design engineer at Dresser Atlas, an oil company in Houston.


The Executive Computer; From Lotus Predator to Lotus Partner in Just 72 Hours
YOU can't have it both ways, except maybe in the computer business.
One day recently, the Oracle Corporation's publicist called, with an invitation to view Documents, the company's purported "Notes killer" software.
Three days later, Oracle and the Lotus Development Corporation announced a joint development agreement to link Notes, a Lotus product, with Oracle Media Server, the multimedia version of Oracle's industry-leading data base program.
Kill it.
Marry it.
Spread it on a cracker.
The possibilities are infinite in the software game.


A HOPLOPHOBE AMONG THE GUNNIES
Philip Weiss asked for our help to teach him basic marksmanship fundamentals.
He and I had long conversations about many things -- like demographics, Constitutional history and the mental discipline needed for precision shooting.
Unfortunately, he chose instead to demean the shooting sports in ridiculous, prurient terms.
In his eyes, marksmanship competition is a sexual power trip and private decisions about personal protection are paranoid.
Satisfaction with excellence and precision, the peace of mind that comes from our free choice to exercise a basic right, the chance to expose ignorance and unfounded fear to the light of logic and common sense -- these are some of the opportunities that escaped your writer.


Recital Riches for a Sunday Afternoon
LOVERS of chamber music face an abundance of riches this afternoon, with at least half a dozen attractions on the schedule.
At noon, the first in a new set of Sunday family concerts, organized by Chamber Music Plus as part of its 15th anniversary season, brings "Tales from England" to the Seaverns Room at the Bushnell.
The music is actually by the American composer Seymour Barab, but his settings are of various wry and whimsical verses by Lewis Carroll and W. S. Gilbert.
The actor John McDonough does the readings; the instrumentalists in the violin-cello-piano trio are Rene Jolles, Harry Clark and Sanda Schuldmann.


Bachrach Cara S. McCarthy And Brit Hutchins
Cara Sloan McCarthy, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph G. McCarthy of Englewood, N.J., was married there yesterday to James Britton Hutchins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Christopher Hutchins of Bangor, Me.
The Rev.
Kenneth M. Near performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Hutchins, 28, is an advertising manager at the State Street Bank and Trust Company in Boston.
She graduated from Vassar College, and she and her husband received M.B.A.'s from Babson College.
Her father is the Bell Professor of Plastic Surgery at New York University and the director of the Institute of Reconstructive Surgery at N.Y.U.
Medical Center.


For Alexander Dolls, More Than Just Pretty Faces
FROM the sidewalk it is just another squat, drab building in central Harlem, sandwiched between elevated subway tracks and an outdoor meat market.
But inside the Alexander Doll Company, hundreds of workers assemble elegant dolls that are coveted by children and collectors alike.
For decades, Madame Alexander dolls have been a royal family in the collectible doll market.
Now, bolstered by a renewed interest in old-fashioned toys, the privately held Alexander is expanding its product lines, seeking out new customers and even selling dolls through a home-shopping network.
Most of its manufacturing is done in the bustling Harlem plant, a rarity amid vacant lots and city-owned tenements.


Rhododendron Trouble
To the Editor:
We live a few miles from the fort and area in the Adirondacks where "The Last of the Mohicans," starring Daniel Day-Lewis, takes place.
We have lived here practically all our lives.
You don't see rhododendrons in these woods.
In the movie, the close-ups of the foliage are full of rhododendrons.


For Taiwan, Asian Games Are Recognition
Taiwan's team at the Asian Games, which open on Sunday in Hiroshima, is unlikely to return home with many medals, but the country won a prize this week that, in the arcane twists of East Asian diplomacy, made the trip a success.
The head of the committee bidding to bring the 2002 Asian Games to Taiwan received his identification card.
That seemingly routine gesture was at the center of a tense diplomatic dispute that over the last several weeks has threatened relations between China and Japan and underscored China's increasingly overbearing attitude toward its neighbors.


The Process Process
We never heard the long hoo-ha threatening an invasion of Haiti described as a war process.
Why not?
Certainly every other procedure and proceeding -- all from the Latin procedere, "to go forward" -- in today's diplomacy has been so expressed.
Negotiation is out; process is in.
We have, of course, the peace process, an alliterative outgrowth of the 1789 peace talk that's now applied mainly to the Middle East.
In Peter Rodman's forthcoming behind-the-scenes history of the cold war, "More Precious Than Peace," we have a reference to the negotiating process in Angola, as if this longtime Kissinger aide does not want to overdo the phrase made famous by his former boss in 1974.
According to another of Henry's helpers, Harold Saunders, the shorthand expression peace process was chosen then because it "encompasses a full range of political, psychological, economic, diplomatic and military actions woven together into a comprehensive effort to establish peace between Israel and its neighbors."


The Importance of Being Open
To the Editor:
In light of Margaret Murphy's dire warning on disclosure by public companies ("Warning: Disclose Environmental Cost," Viewpoints, Sept. 4), I'd like to recount the resistance I ran into over this issue as a corporate director several years ago.
In the mid-80's, I was on the board of the Koppers Company, a Pittsburgh-based building materials maker, which manufactured coal-tar derivatives for many decades.
Koppers had very serious environmental problems; we were spending $50 million a year cleaning up what we knew about and had 40 engineers trying to find all the problems.


Long-Awaited Ferry Service to Begin Within Weeks
A long-heralded ferry link between Long Island City and midtown Manhattan is to begin operating by the middle of this month.
The ferry is intended to reduce traffic not only on the Queens-Midtown Tunnel and the Queensboro Bridge, but also on thoroughfares on both sides.
But ever since last fall, when the plans were announced, the project has worried Long Island City residents who say its users will park on their already congested streets instead of paying for parking.


Kerin M. Bean, T. H. Walworth 3d
Kerin Marie Bean, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Bean of South Norwalk, Conn., was married yesterday to Theodore Holton Walworth 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walworth Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Neely Towe performed the ceremony at the Stanwich Congregational Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Walworth, 29, is a former boutique and restaurant owner on Anguilla in the British West Indies.
Her father, now retired, was a director of feature films and television commercials.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


40 Years, 239 Victories and Still Counting
When the legendary coach Vince Lombardi first began barking orders on a football field, he barked as a young player wearing a St.
Francis Prep jersey.
The head coaches Dan Henning of Boston College and Gerry DiNardo of Vanderbilt also played for the Terriers.
So have many other coaches throughout the country, and, like Henning and DiNardo, they all learned the game from Vinnie O'Connor, who began coaching the St.
Francis varsity team in 1955, when Eisenhower was in the White House and the school was in Brooklyn.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
TARATUTA and STILL LIFE WITH PIPE: Two Novellas By Jose Donoso.
Translated by Gregory Rabassa.
Norton, $8.95.
In two novellas this esteemed Chilean author plays with both reality and the artistic process.
"Taratuta" features a writer seeking the truth about an obscure Russian revolutionary; "Still Life With Pipe" focuses on a couple who come upon the paintings of an artist who may or may not be a genius.
"Both are complex but intensely readable," one critic said last year.
CURRICULUM VITAE: Autobiography By Muriel Spark.
Houghton Mifflin, $10.95.
Who was the model for Miss Jean Brodie?
Who inspired the sad finality of "Memento Mori"?
This memoir of the author's first 39 years reveals what was autobiography and what was invention in many of her novels, as well as the facts behind her early failed marriage and her conversion to Roman Catholicism.
Last year our reviewer, Helen Bevington, said, "Reticent when she chooses but always free of invention, Muriel Spark succeeds in her mission: she puts the record straight." "Curriculum Vitae" ends with the publication of Ms.
Spark's first novel, THE COMFORTERS (New Directions, $10.95), which has just been reissued.
In it a writer and Catholic convert begins hearing voices that make her realize she is a fictional character herself.
The book "adds to the growing evidence that Kingsley Amis and other members of the 'couldn't-care-less' school of writers are not the only lively force in British fiction today," Aileen Pippett said in The New York Times in 1957.
New Directions has also restored to print THE DRIVER'S SEAT (New Directions Bibelot, $6), Ms.
Spark's novel about a breezy young European woman who sets off on a vacation to find a boyfriend and determinedly orchestrates her own demise.
In 1970 our reviewer, George Stade, found the novel distinguished by "technical adventurousness and formal elegance."


You Want Multiculturalism? Here It Is
THE FRENCH Musicologist Pierre Vidal once described Heitor Villa-Lobos as "Bach and Beethoven rolled into one." The description is not altogether inapt.
Beethoven's white-hot intensity is in evidence in the Brazilian composer's best works for orchestra; and while it is an exaggeration to ascribe to his compositions the formal perfection of Bach, there is no doubt that he was a master of counterpoint, a brilliant writer with a remarkably fluent and versatile musical mind.
Yet Vidal's metaphor, generous as it is, does not go far enough, for Villa-Lobos was also a master of a musical medium that never particularly interested Bach or Beethoven: the song.
He is best known for his "Bachiana Brasileira" No. 5, scored for soprano and eight cellos, which has been recorded by everyone from Victoria de los Angeles, who sang it on the composer's own recording, to Galina Vishnevskaya and Kiri Te Kanawa.
But he also wrote a great body of folk songs, many of them with texts in obscure Amazon Indian languages and the Afro-Brazilian patois.


NEWS ABOUT THE MAGAZINE
THE TIMES MAGAZINE WELCOMES A NEW name and an old friend.
Max Frankel, who recently retired as executive editor of The Times, today begins "Word &amp; Image," a weekly column of commentary on communication of every sort.
Max's byline, though mothballed during 20 years of editing, is familiar to many Times readers.
It first ran in 1951, over a description of the demolition of the Third Avenue el.
It appeared most recently in the news columns in January 1973, over an article evaluating Lyndon Johnson's Presidency, dictated from a restaurant when he learned of Johnson's death.


Queensland Cuisine: A Tropical Bounty
FAR North Queensland is Australia's tropical paradise, best known for its mangoes and the Great Barrier Reef, an underwater fantasy of mysterious corals and jewel-bright fish.
Cairns, once a sleepy, wide-verandaed country town dependent on sugar cane and beef, has become the principal city of this northern area.
Currently in the midst of a tourism boom, its airport is the sixth busiest in Australia.
A center for big-game fishing, Cairns is also the stepping-off point for the many luxury resort hotels dotted along its palm-fringed coast and on the islands offshore.
An hour's drive north of the city takes you to Port Douglas, a port rivaling Cairns at the turn of the century but now completely devoted to tourism.
A small but thriving village, Port Douglas is focused around the harbor, but beyond its jungle headland stretches the splendid Four Mile Beach.


High Taxes Have Made New York a Has-Been Among States
To the Editor:
"New York's High Taxes" (editorial, Sept. 25) sounds an alarm about New York's high taxes, but ends in a whimper.
Instead of proposing drastic tax relief, which is needed, you suggest a "modest tax cut where it is needed the most, New York City."


Florida Backs Local Curfews For the Young
A new state law allowing local governments to enact curfews for young people went into effect here today, but it has already suffered a setback.
Dade County's curfew on teen-agers, enacted late last year to help prevent violent crimes against tourists, was recently thrown out by a judge who said it violated the state Constitution.
The new state law, enacted at the end of February, allows local governments to adopt curfews based on a Dallas curfew upheld by a Federal appellate court last November.


Blessing the Books and Their New Home


Agreement Is Reached On Pollution
In a decision that could result in higher electricity rates across the New York region, the governors of 10 Northeastern states have agreed to require power plants to cut pollution from smokestacks sharply over the next nine years.
The agreement will force utilities and factories to cut, on average by the year 2003, more than two-thirds of the pollution they release into the air, Federal officials say.
If successful, the measures -- along with recently agreed-upon limits on car emissions -- would substantially improve air quality in the Northeast, these officials say.


Behind the Cuts at Harlem Hospital, a Cycle of Failure
Last month, Harlem Hospital got more bad news.
After a budget reduction in February that had already closed the hospital's burn and radiation-therapy units and cut 112 jobs and $2.1 million in supplies and consultant fees, the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation had decided to cut again as part of a plan to try to close a $357 million deficit in its budget.
But this time, the hospital, which had shared more or less equally in the first round of reductions, was to bear the brunt: 303 layoffs and 134 of its 746 beds to be taken out of service.


It's in the Ears
To the Editor:
I have no argument with the reporting of "When Horses Are Worth More Dead Than Alive" (Sept. 18), but the big photo with the article was off target.
The animal in the foreground is one of the mascots of the United States Military Academy -- in a word, a mule.
I don't believe that anyone kills mules for insurance fraud, least of all a U.S.M.A. mascot.
Note the long ears, the West Point insignia on the saddle blanket and the "A" on the left rump.
THOMAS E. BUCK  Bethel, Conn., Sept. 19  The writer, West Point '62, is a retired brigadier general.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Pierce and Novotna to Meet in Final  Top-seeded Mary Pierce of France defeated sixth-seeded Judith Wiesner of Austria, 6-2, 7-5, and Jana Novotna of the Czech Republic downed Anke Huber of Germany, 1-6, 6-1, 7-5, yesterday to reach the final of the $400,000 Volkswagen Grand Prix in Leipzig, Germany. (AP)


Rachel Stern, Peter Graham
Rachel Beth Stern, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard S. Stern of Old Westbury, L.I., is to be married today to Peter James Graham, the son of George G. Graham and Barbara L. Graham, both of New York.
Rabbi Aaron Petuchowski is to officiate at the St.
Regis in New York.


The Homeless: Chronic Emergency
When Mayor Rudolph Giuliani took office in January, he inherited an intractable homeless problem that has been handled for years with short-term emergency measures.
The city is operating under legal obligations that compel it to house people who have nowhere to live, and to do so promptly.
Often, it is slow to respond.
During the Dinkins administration, Justice Helen Freedman of State Supreme Court cited several city officials for contempt of court because families who had nowhere to go were forced to sleep in city offices overnight, or even longer.
Last week, Justice Freedman held the city in contempt again, making it clear that she would not be averse to contempt arguments against individual members of the Giuliani administration as well.


Jacinda D. Isley, Nick Purrington
Jacinda Doreen Isley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Isley of Raleigh, N.C., was married there yesterday to Alfred Nicholas Purrington, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred L. Purrington 3d, also of Raleigh.
The Rev.
Dr.
William C. Simpson Jr. officiated at the Edenton Street United Methodist Church.


Drawback of Flat Tax
To the Editor:
Jude Wanniski (letter, Sept. 23) quotes favorable comments about the idea of a flat tax made by Prof.
Paul Samuelson in the 13th edition of his textbook "Economics." I don't have the 13th, but in the 12th edition, Professor Samuelson concludes his discussion of the flat tax thus: "However, the major disadvantage of this radical proposal, in some people's view, is that it would lead to a massive redistribution of the tax burden from the rich to the middle class." PETER BAIDA  New York, Sept. 26, 1994


Jill K. Mengel, Jason G. Swirbul
Jill Kathryn Mengel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip R. Mengel of Tuxedo Park, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Jason Grey Swirbul, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
L.
Philip Swirbul, also of Tuxedo Park.
The Rev.
Edwin H. Cromey performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Mary's in Tuxedo.
Mrs.
Swirbul, 26, graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
She is an acquisitions specialist at the Plaza Home Mortgage Bank in Albuquerque, N.M.
Her father is the chief executive of the Glen-Gery Corporation, a brick manufacturer in Reading, Pa.
Her mother, Jayne Mengel, is an interior designer.


Prague
To the Editor: Jane Perlez, in "What's Doing in Prague" (Aug. 28), missed the mark steering tourists away from crowds and Prague's most interesting and important sights: i.e., the 16th-century clock tower that hourly delivers a procession of figurines including the 12 Apostles; the old Jewish Cemetery, with 12,000 graves in a dozen layers in Josefov; the old Jewish Quarter, and the State Jewish Museum.
For restaurants, Ms.
Perlez did not mention the area behind the Vltava River, including Parnas (On the River) U Fleku, a noisy brewery and beer hall where we had a generous and tasty portion of roast goose with red cabbage and dumplings.
By the way, U Fleku is known for its dark beer served in a large stein.
The entire meal was moderately priced.


Whitaker Dominates McGirt In Rematch
For every right hand James (Buddy) McGirt landed, Pernell Whitaker responded with a blistering five-punch combination.
For every laborious breath McGirt took between rounds, Whitaker took two.
He patted his cornermen on the head, too.
And playfully winked at McGirt's following.
In boxing parlance, he had again staked his claim to pugilistic fame.


Modeling Wholesome? Is This Fiction?
WORRIED that the Menendez brothers' trial, violent movies and talk-show depravity have numbed the nation's sense of moral outrage?
Worry no more.
It's there.
If you have any doubts, just walk into a bookstore and request a book about modeling geared toward prepubescent girls.
"You want what?" said a clerk at Books of Wonder, the children's bookstore in the Chelsea section of Manhattan.
"I'm sorry, we wouldn't carry anything like that, thank God." At Tower Books on Lafayette Street, a clerk glared and asked pointedly: "You want this book for your friend's kid? Do you like this friend?"


Nancy M. Cagan, Mark K. Horton
Nancy Michelle Cagan, a daughter of Lore Stein of Roslyn Harbor, L.I., and the late Dr.
Seymour H. Cagan, is to be married today to Mark Kelvin Horton, a son of Louise J. Horton of Norwood, N.C., and the late Vernie F. Horton.
Rabbi Jay Rosenbaum is to perform the ceremony at the St.
Moritz on the Park in New York.
The bride, 30, is an associate at the New York law firm of D'Amato &amp; Lynch.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received her law degree from Brooklyn Law School.
Her father was a radiologist at Winthrop University Hospital in Mineola, L.I.
Her mother retired as an English teacher at Jamaica (Queens) High School.


The Nation; Toxic Messes: Easier Made Than Undone
IN an age characterized by both technical innovation and war, some of the singularly novel inventions of the 20th century have been developed by the American military.
Nothing in physics has yet surpassed the dismaying power of the atomic bomb.
Military chemists have concocted chemical agents so deadly that a drop on the skin will kill.
But scientists haven't been nearly as enthusiastic or as successful in dismantling the inventions they worked so hard to create.
The fact is that technology is not always up to the job of cleaning up the messes it leaves behind.


INSIDE
Epidemics Spread in Russia
Cholera, dysentery, tuberculosis and many sexually transmitted diseases are spreading rapidly, and Russia's chief sanitary officer warns they could spread out of control.
Page 9.
Portrait of a Victim
The life of a woman whose body was found in the West Village last month held little joy, her family and friends say, and earlier brushes with violence.
Page 33.
Pollution Down, Rates Up
Northeastern governors have agreed to sharp limits on smokestack pollution that could result in higher electricity rates.
Page 33.
More Security for Clinics
In the wake of the killing of an abortion doctor in Florida this summer, abortion-rights groups there have seized the offensive.
Page 22.


The Bathtub Murder
THE SCOLD'S BRIDLE By Minette Walters. 327 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press.


Meet My Big Sister, She's the First Lady
Other Democratic candidates may skitter away from the Clintons, but one underdog Democratic Senate contender has been eager for the First Lady to bless his campaign.
And in what may be the crowning achievement of his primary campaign, Hugh Rodham yesterday proudly presented his sister, Hillary, to supporters in Florida.
Article, page 13.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


Reveille for New Rochelle's Abandoned Army Fort?
FOR 27 years, Davids Island, lying unoccupied in Long Island Sound just off this Westchester County city, has enticed developers.
Many consider its 78 level acres the best undeveloped real estate left along the New York State coastline.
But since 1987, when the city bought the former military base 18 miles north of Manhattan, potential buyers have found city officials eager for tax revenue but divided by political squabbles.
They have also found that the island's fragile environment is fiercely defended by environmentalists and strict state and county regulations.


Sherburne Abbott, James Steinberg
Sherburne Bradstreet Abbott, the director of international organizations and programs at the National Academy of Sciences in Washington, was married yesterday to James Braidy Steinberg, the director of policy planning at the State Department.
Judge Patti Saris of the Federal District Court for the District of Massachusetts in Boston officiated at the Quaker Meeting House in West Falmouth, Mass.
The bride, who is keeping her name, graduated from Goucher College and received a master's degree in wildlife ecology and natural resource policy from Yale University.
She directed the polar research program at the National Academy of Sciences from 1989 to 1992, and from 1986 to 1989 was the assistant scientific program director of the United States Marine Mammal Commission, also in Washington.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William G. Abbott 3d of Farmington, Conn.


American Express Buys Cook Agencies
American Express has agreed to acquire the 400 travel agency offices in the United States belonging to Thomas Cook Partnership, the American licensee for the London-based Thomas Cook Group.
American Express will also acquire Thomas Cook's international corporate travel management business, the two companies announced earlier this month.
The purchase price is about $375 million.
The two acquisitions together generate more than $3 billion in annual sales, American Express said.


A Director With a Taste for Surprise and Danger
ARRANGED MARRIAGES ARE never easy.
When Tony Kushner came here in 1991 with "Angels in America" he knew nothing about Declan Donnellan, the innovative director of classics whom Richard Eyre of the Royal National Theater so admired.
And Mr.
Donnellan had never directed the work of a playwright who was actually alive.
After their first week of rehearsals Mr.
Kushner saw Mr.
Donnellan's all-male production of "As You Like It" at the Lyric Hammersmith.
"It was the most interesting, most fun, most moving production of this play I had ever seen," he recalled recently.
"I was relieved and exhausted and happy."


Cup Challengers Create A Maelstrom of Discord
Internal discord among challengers for the America's Cup has created a hurdle perhaps bigger than boat racing itself.
With the French arguing among themselves, and almost everyone else berating the Australians, prospects for harmony in the 1995 event are remote.
A month of talks between France's two cup yachting syndicates broke off recently after a futile attempt to share the costs of dual campaigns.
The Australians, meanwhile, are balking at allegations of foul play for building more than two new boats.


A Slain Woman's Trail of Pain; Many Contradictions, but Trouble Was Her Constant
When Carol Ann Artutis was 13 years old she ran away from her family's modest white Cape Cod-style home on a quiet street in the working-class town of Linden, N.J.
The police say she told them she had been afraid of being beaten by her mother.
Her father, Charles Artutis, says his daughter used to say things like that "to get back at us."
Wherever the truth lies, the young woman kept running away, and by the age of 15 had begun living in homes for troubled youths.
As she grew older, she fell into a string of violent relationships with men -- some with prison records -- that the police believe may have led to her death as her 24th birthday approached.


Emotional Baggage
Oscar Wilde came up with his own solution to the travails of leaving home.
"I never travel without my diary," he wrote.
"One should always have something sensational to read in the train." True, but a diary - even one like Wilde's - isn't always enough to entertain or comfort.
What really makes a journey elegant and easeful is something that puts a personal stamp on impersonal places: heirloom-quality holders for your stash of bottled water or cherished compact disks; toiletries that outclass most hotels'; archival paper on which to record lasting impressions; special scent to enliven the atmosphere.
Here are some treasures for travelers that prove that when it comes to a sense of home, you can take it with you.
Laurel Graeber


Southold Weighs Curb On 'Light Pollution'
LIGHT pollution is not beneficial to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the town and must be minimized," says a proposed law in the Town of Southold.
Even as citizens across Long Island demand more and brighter lighting along streets, in parking lots and down dark alleys, Southold is moving in the other direction.


ABOUT BOOKS
Environmental Warning
THE stream of books on the environment of New Jersey continues to dampen dreams for the future.
"Plant Communities of New Jersey: A Study in Landscape Diversity," by Beryl Robichaud Collins and Karl H. Anderson, is no exception, with its alarm about "current and foreseeable threats" to the state.


Recovery And Lawsuits After Explosion
EARLY on July 27, a propane tanker crashed and exploded on Interstate 287 here, sending balls of fire coursing through the modest residential neighborhood on both sides of the highway.
Now, almost 10 weeks later, members of the Espinal family, like other victims of the blast, struggle to rebuild their lives.
"The healing process is very slow," said Leonardo Espinal, whose family was injured in the blast.
"It is very hard, very painful."


Rwandan Rulers Warn Against Violence
About 30,000 Rwandans jammed one of the capital's main stadiums today, pressing shoulder to shoulder or climbing atop walls to view several thousand former rebel soldiers on parade and hear an appeal from their new Government to refrain from seeking revenge.
Gen.
Paul Kagame, Rwanda's Defense Minister and Vice President, warned the crowd against carrying out revenge killings of ethnic Hutu in retaliation for the widespread massacres of ethnic Tutsi across the country last spring.


SHANNON FAULKNER, ONE OF THE BOYS
In her article, Catherine Manegold says that Shannon Faulkner "is not a bomb-tossing, wild-haired daughter of the new revolution. She is not a crusader, activist, earth shaker, cantankerous man-hater, lesbian or ugly duckling out to find a mate."


Sept.25-Oct.1: An Elusive Calm; Latest Assassination Bewilders Mexicans
A single shot from a 9-millimeter automatic pistol killed one of Mexico's most important political leaders last week and shattered the sense of calm that Mexicans were just getting accustomed to after an unpredictably violent year.
The uncertainty and fear linked to the bloody rebel uprising in Chiapas last January, the assassination in March of the governing party's presidential candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio, and the threat of trouble following the Aug. 21 presidential election, had seemed to fade by the time September began.


Lauren F. Wyler and Stephen R. Smith
Lauren Faith Wyler, the daughter of Marjorie F. Wyler of White Plains and Richard L. Wyler of Chappaqua, N.Y., is to be married today in New York to Stephen Randy Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin A. Smith of St.
James, L.I.
Rabbi Daniel S. Wolk is to perform the ceremony at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from the University of Michigan and in May received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father owns S. Wyler Inc., the New York dealer of antique English silver and porcelain that was founded by her great-grandfather Sigmund Wyler.
Her mother is an antiques dealer at New Canaan (Conn.) Antiques.


VIRTUOUS FAST FOOD
YOU'VE LEARNED ALL THERE IS TO know about the right way to eat.
You've cut back on red meat.
You've put vegetables and grains at the center of your plate.
Your lips don't even recognize the unctuous texture of saturated fat.
But you still you feel guilty about your diet.
Relax and join the crowd.
Puritanism is deeply rooted in American culture, as evidenced far more by how we behave at the table than by what we do in bed.
Dieting, eating, feasting, noshing -- it all adds up to one big guilt trip.
Why else would we refer to "sinfully delicious" desserts and "guilt free" frozen low-fat yogurt?
Any restaurateur in the country can tell tales of yuppies who eat salad for their first course, ungarnished grilled vegetables for their second and then pig out on the most outrageously calorific desserts, as though, having paved the way to paradise through good intentions, they've also earned the right to blow it all off track in one fell swoop.


The Return of an Old Favorite, the Kilt
Some fall fashions are as perennial as autumn foliage.
For example, the schoolgirl's kilt, complete with backpacks and black knee socks, that is fast becoming this year's uniform for young working women.
Some of the kilts being worn would be too short to slip past the headmistress at the schoolroom door.
Others are more traditional tartans with leather-and-buckle closings or decorative safety pins.


Punchy Sound Bite
To the Editor:
Recently The New York Times asked me to submit a "wish list" for the forthcoming cultural year  [ "A Season of Dreams," Sept. 11 ] .
I was pleased that the paper had chosen to seek out my ideas, and I responded seriously.
I felt it was a chance to make some comments and to support people whose work I admire.
From theorists to musicians to film makers to architects, some were celebrated, some were subculture luminaries, and others were doing important work seldom recognized by The Times.


Sound Bytes; Now Playing On Tiny Screen
IF you think computer games are terrifyingly realistic today, you haven't seen anything yet.
Douglas Kay, who joined Lucas Arts Entertainment in August as chief technical officer, wants to meld the most advanced technologies of movie-making with the creative minds behind computer games.
The company is owned by the film maker George Lucas, whose holdings also include Lucasfilm, a feature film company, and Lucas Digital, a special effects and post-production company that includes Industrial Light and Magic.
Mr.
Kay joined Industrial Light in 1985.


SUNDAY, October 2, 1994; Crossover Pet Products
As usual, everything's up to date in Kansas City, where the KC-K9 Bakery is producing delicacies for dogs that seem to appeal to some people as well.
But this is not just Midwest madness.
Elsewhere, human beings are discovering the benefits of horse shampoo and hoof strengthener.
KC-K9 started when Mark Beckloff and Dan Dye, the owners, began testing recipes for dog treats -- made with little fat and natural grains -- at home.
They now make 52 varieties, including puptarts and pizza.
"We have people who come in to buy treats for themselves; they feel good about eating them," says Beckloff.
The treats contain no sodium or sugar, and Beckloff says that except for the canine greeters -- Gracie, a Great Dane; Dottie, a Dalmation, and Sarah, a black Labrador mix -- "it's just like a human bakery."


A New Look For Mile Race On Fifth Ave.
As the premier road race on the quintessential course, the Fifth Avenue Mile has seen better days, but as should be evident this morning when the first of hundreds of competitors begin taking their marks at the 82d Street starting line for an expanded card of 16 separate races down the avenue to 62d Street, it has certainly seen worse.
Indeed, two years after the lack of a corporate sponsor forced the New York Road Runners Club to scrap the elite men's and women's races, the elite runners are back, and more competitors than usual are expected in the preliminary events.


Paterno Erupts Before His Team Does
Of the threatening skies that appeared over Franklin Field, no cloud seemed darker than the one hovering directly over the head of Joe Paterno.
After one quarter of today's disheveled 48-21 victory over Temple, Penn State trailed the lowly Owls by two field goals, 6-0.
The same Temple Owls who won exactly one game last season.
Paterno was furious.
He stalked the sideline as if he had been involuntarily caged.


A Guitar God Finds Redemption
TALKING WITH Eric Clapton is like handling a sheathed sword.
On the surface, he seems gentle, calm and harmless.
But occasionally his protective covering slips, revealing a man so raw and incisive that his words or simply his gaze can be as piercing as a blade.
Mr.
Clapton's guitar playing is similar: it sometimes seems as if he's plucking emotions instead of strings.
This is one reason some consider him the greatest living guitarist; his fans in the 1960's called him God.
It's also why he seldom grants interviews to the press.
In conversation, the 49-year-old English musician is excruciatingly honest and self-critical, whether he's discussing his passion for the blues, the accidental death of his son or his slow dances with heroin and alcohol.


Burmese Stereotypes
To the Editor:
"Business Must Shun Burmese Despots" (Viewpoints, Aug. 28) reflects a rhetorical, outdated and culturally biased view of Myanmar.


The First Side-Impact Air Bags: How Volvo's System Works
Volvo has gotten a jump on its competitors in the auto safety race with the introduction of the first side-impact air bag.
The Swedish car maker, known for its safety consciouse features, is making much of its lead in its television commercials for 1995 models.
The side air bags are standard equipment in the new 850 Turbo models and are a $500 option on other 850 models.
The 940 and 960 models are expected to be next, in 1996.


Topics of The Times; Too Remote
That black gadget that lets you control the TV from across the room is one of life's true conveniences -- when you can find it.
In a recent sample survey for Magnavox, more than half the respondents said they lost their remote controls as often as 5 times a week, and 1 in 10 said they lost it between 6 and 10 times.
Where is it?
Most frequently it is in or under the chair or couch the last viewer sat in.
But there are stranger places.
One-fifth of the respondents said they had found it as far away as the kitchen or the bathroom at one time or another; 6 percent had found it in the refrigerator, 4 percent in the garbage, 3 percent outdoors and 1 percent in the car.
One percent also said the dog made off with it.


The Nation; From Not Quite Acceptable To Maybe Even Electable
TEN years ago, when Ross Perot was best known as a computer tycoon, Prof.
Steven J. Rosenstone of the University of Michigan wrote that voting for a third-party candidate is an extraordinary act.
Those who do, he said, "must repudiate much of what they have learned and grown to accept as appropriate political behavior," to the point of enduring "ridicule and harassment from neighbors and friends." Besides, he added, "they must accept that their candidate has no hope of winning."
Perhaps the political science professor was indulging in a bit of hyperbole, but acceptable political behavior today is hardly what it was even in the 1980's.
Just as American consumers no longer have blind faith in all-powerful institutions like Ma Bell and the homogeneous television networks, so too are they beginning to demand personal choice in the political marketplace.
That means candidates no longer boast about their membership in the Democratic or Republican parties -- and certainly not about being career politicians.


Journal; Judge Ito's All-Star Vaudeville
The verdict is already in on week one of the alleged trial of the century: It was a bomb.
Jury selection, untelevised and unremarkable, yielded no news, and desperate tabloid investigations into the private life and new hairdo of the prosecutor, Marcia Clark, failed to find a pulse.
So the media circus (that is, reporters reporting on reporters) became the story, a video hall of mirrors leading nowhere.


Capriati Pulls Out of Second Tournament
JENNIFER CAPRIATI has pulled out of the Filderstadt tournament in Germany because she is not yet fit, a tournament spokesman said in Bonn yesterday.
The spokesman, DIETER FISCHER, said Capriati's manager, BARBARA PERRY, had informed him late on Friday that the 18-year-old American was "too immobile" to play in the tournament later this month.
"Her manager said she needed a few more weeks," Fischer said.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MARITAL MAYHEM  BEFORE HE WAKES  A True Story of Money, Marriage, Sex and Murder.
By Jerry Bledsoe.
Dutton, $22.95.


The Performance Scale: What It Is
The performance scale was designed to give parents an extra tool in measuring the effectiveness of schools.
It takes traditional measures of success -- graduation rates in high schools and math and reading scores in intermediate schools -- and adjusts them to put a spotlight on the differences schools are making in the lives of students.
Educators have long known that there are many reasons behind schools' successes and failures.
Sometimes they differ because of what takes place within the school.
But they also vary because of differing experiences and backgrounds of students and their families.


13th Street Plan Clears Latest Hurdle; Squatters Vow a War
Anyone who doubted the depth of the unhappiness over plans to turn five squatter-occupied buildings on East 13th Street into low-income housing had only to attend a community board meeting Thursday.
With more than 50 police officers patrolling the meeting at Public School 20 on Essex Street, some 80 squatters and supporters marched with drums and banners, to join hundreds of others for two hours of pandemonium.
Protesters shouted, chanted and shoved, grabbing the microphone and issuing threats.
Board chairman Luis Soler angrily called for calm.
"I cannot allow anyone to intimidate the board," he said.


World Markets; Good News for Commodity Sellers
WITH the world's industrial engines shifting into the higher gear of economic recovery, demand for commodities is up and so are the prospects for improving performance in mineral-rich countries, not least those in Africa.
The rise in prices of everything from aluminum to zinc has coincided with economic reform programs taking hold in the countries of what were once the world's least desirable areas of investment.


Time to Tuck In Surprises for Spring
PETUNIAS are looking lanky and losing their oomph.
Marigolds are waning.
Tree leaves are turning color; some have even started to litter the lawn.
Peony foliage is yellowing.
Everything suggests that the gardening season is over.
Wrong.
Fall gardening has just begun.
Even as things appear to come to a halt above ground, important things are happening below.
The earth is still quite warm and with enough moisture roots are growing.
Gardeners are wise to take advantage of this and plant, plant, plant all they can.


Miller (Herman) Inc.(MLHR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 3


Brooke Asher And Glen Kessler
Brooke Asher, the daughter of Rachael and Kenneth Blumenstein of Forest Hills, Queens, was married last evening to Glen Kessler, a son of Helen and Anson Kessler of Hendersonville, N.C.
Cantor Robert Bloch performed the ceremony at the Park Lane Hotel in Manhattan.
The bride is a telemarketing consultant in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Hunter College.
Her father retired as the president of the Miller Shoe Corporation in New York.
Her mother is an English tutor in New York.
The bride, who was born Nancy Karen Blumenstein, changed her name.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Purchasing managers' index, Sept.
56.2
57
Construction spending, Aug., pct. change
0.6
0.2
Tuesday
Leading indicators, August, pct. change
0.0
0.6
Auto sales, Sept., millions, annual rate
7.4
7.2
Wednesday
Factory-goods orders, Aug., pct. chg.
2.3
3.2
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
310
320
Friday
Nonfarm payroll, Sept., change, thous.
179
260
Unemployment rate, Sept.
6.1
6.0
Consumer credit, Aug., change, billions
$5.6
$9.0
This Week's Developments
Thursday
Chain stores release September sales data
Friday
Congress adjourns until after elections


Deborah Dolan, Brian Sweeney
Deborah Ann Dolan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles F. Dolan of Cove Neck, L.I., was married there on Sept. 24 to Brian George Sweeney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George B. Sweeney of Hockley, Tex.
Msgr.
Thomas Hartman performed the ceremony at St.
Dominic Chapel.
Mrs.
Sweeney, a graduate of Fairfield University, is an equestrienne.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Cablevision Systems Corporation in Woodbury, L.I.


POSTINGS: Landmarks Foundation Award; Viva Philip Johnson
Expect eight toasts -- including those by Robert A. M. Stern and Frank Stella -- no speeches, some surprises and skyscraper salad and postmodern dessert (a classical dessert restated) at a benefit luncheon honoring Philip Johnson in the Terrace Room of the Plaza Hotel on Oct. 20, with a reception at 11:45 A.M.
The New York Landmarks Preservation Foundation will recognize Mr.
Johnson's achievements with its bronze Medal of Honor, made by Tiffany &amp; Co.
Previous recipients include I.M.
Pei, Brooke Astor and Mayor Robert F. Wagner.


Megabashing Japan
DEBT OF HONOR By Tom Clancy. 766 pp. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $25.95.


WITHOUT A TRACE
In her essay on lipstick (Style: "Without a Trace," Sept. 11), Mary Tannen tapped into a treasured remembrance of my mother.
It was a wonder to find, among the stuff I've held on to, a pink envelope with the imprint of my mother's kiss, sent to me 24 years ago when I was living abroad.


A New Season For Carnegie Hall
A Moroccan supper at the Plaza celebrating the opening of its 104th season, Sept. 29.


'I'm Sorry' Is Not Enough, With or Without Feeling
To the Editor:
In regard to Robert Lipsyte's Sept. 18 Coping column, "Can't Anyone Say 'I'm Sorry,' With Feeling?" let him consider the following scenario:
An acquaintance requests a large favor, reinforcing his presentation with, "Please, please, pleeeeze!" So, at great inconvenience, you accede to the request, whereupon the recipient of the favor says, "Thanks a lot," repaying the favor in full, he thinks.
When he is asked, later, for a small favor, he replies, "I'm so sorry, but I just can't." The "sorry" is said with feeling, but it doesn't help much.


Correction
A review on Aug. 21, about "Joe Papp: An American Life," described a daughter of Joseph Papp, the theatrical producer, incorrectly.
Mr.
Papp's daughter Barbara, whose existence he was unaware of for many years, was his second daughter, not his first.
A letter explaining the mistake was received by the Book Review soon afterward, but it was misdirected.


Park's Decline Deeply Etched In Cobblestone
Along Bronx Park East, vandals have pried so many cobblestones from the parkside walkway that some stretches are entirely bare and others are littered with broken cobblestones and glass.
The stolen cobblestones, which are sold to interior decorators for up to $4 a stone, are just one indication, longtime residents say, that this area of Pelham Parkway near Allerton Avenue has fallen on hard times.
Benches along the walkway are destroyed as soon as they are rebuilt; graffiti covers sections of the park wall; an area of the park walkway that doubles as an outdoor auto shop is littered with oil canisters.


Professional Approach
Homes used to be stocked with housewares that were push-button easy to use, and bore a Good Housekeeping seal of approval.
Today, the best recommendation a product can get is that it wasn't intended for home use at all.
Adapting objects originally devised for professionals is the new standard for the design of housewares.
This should come as no surprise to anyone who has outfitted a bath as a personal gym, bought kitchen appliances a chef would envy or converted a study into a state-of-the-art home office.
Here, then, are some of the latest home products that mean business.
Julie V. Iovine


Roquefort or Mascarpone, Cheese Agrees With Pears
PEARS and cheese are among the more felicitous culinary combinations.
And now that fresh autumn pears are in season, they can be twinned with all sorts of cheeses in a host of recipes, savory and sweet.
Consider adding pears to a salad that will be enhanced with cheese or a cheese dressing.
Parmesan and Roquefort or some other variety of blue-veined cheese are obvious choices.
But sturdy ricotta salata, farmhouse cheddar or a strong goat-milk cheese, can also be used.
Pieces of fresh pear are good in a Greek-style salad made with feta cheese.


Silly Sex, Polemics Or Sitcom?
ON one side listen to the environmentalists, on the other the timber industry.
What to preserve?
Wildlife and redwoods?
Or jobs?
Such a polarity is under observation in "Betty the Yeti," which is being put on by Stamford Theater Works, but it's not that simple.
There are compromising positions, bureaucratic snarls and euphemistic babble about industrial decline, Federal mismanagement and indicator species.
And there is a yeti that among other things, brings about new questions: Is one of a kind worth the upkeep?
Is uniqueness useful?
Thus, the intrusion of practicality upon principles.


The King of Pushcarts
AMONG the hot-dog-industry types who dropped by Dan Rossi's office the other day was Mohamed El-Sayed.
Mr.
El-Sayed, for those who weren't paying attention over the summer, is the Egyptian-born hot-dog seller who gained brief fame by staging a fast to protest the city's ticketing and towing of his cart, at 50th Street and Avenue of the Americas. (After three days, he collapsed, and though he's back out there now, he keeps a $65 money order in his wallet, just in case.)
Mr.
Rossi feels bad for Mr.
El-Sayed, he really does.
But from where he sits -- a tiny aerie, warm as a roasted chestnut, above an old stable in Hell's Kitchen -- this is much bigger than Mr.
El-Sayed.
It's an entire business we're talking about here, and as Mr.
Rossi sees it, that business is deeply in danger of, pardon the expression, going the way of the pushcart.


A Bad Neighborhood in Haiti Turns Worse
There seemed to be a certain grim inevitability along the Rue de l'Enterrement on Friday when gunfire broke out during a pro-democracy demonstration.
With ever increasing confidence over the last three years, armed civilian men have sauntered out of the Normandie Bar on the street, making their deadly presence clear.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  U.S.-JAPAN TRADE ACCORD  Negotiators reached agreements to open several Japanese markets to American exports.
But no deal was reached in the key areas of autos and auto parts, and President Clinton moved to impose sanctions.  1  U.S.
TO GET TOUGHER IN HAITI  Facing rising violence, the U.S. has decided to expand the military's role in curbing the junta's paramilitary supporters, though it won't use troops to disarm them, Administration officials said.  1


The Battle Hymn of a Republican
DEAD RIGHT By David Frum. 230 pp. New York: A New Republic Book/Basic Books. $23.


Miami Vice


Ideas &amp; Trends; Who's for More Inflation and Who Isn't
EVER since the 1970's, when the nation really got hit with inflation, Americans have been telling themselves that a rising inflation rate is villainous.
But now some powerful people are stepping forth and saying that maybe a little more inflation is not so bad.
Or maybe the alternative is worse.
They don't put it that way.
The ghost of the 70's, when the inflation rate almost tripled in the blink of three years, is still powerful enough so that almost no one dares to offer three cheers for rising inflation.
But the ghost is losing its spookiness.
There have been too many months in which sharply rising inflation has been expected, feared, spotted down the block -- but never in the house.


Cultural Card Offers Concerts at a Discount
THE Westchester Philharmonic and the Westchester Symphony.
The Hudson Valley Singers and the Choral Arts Society.
Lyndhurst and Caramoor.
Competitors?
Often, yes, but not when it comes to offering reduced-price admission to holders of the new Cultural Advantage Card.
These and more than 30 other county organizations are part of the bargain package, and while the card will cost $5 next year, residents can get it free this year.
Pickup locations and other details are available from the Westchester Office of Cultural Affairs at 285-2922.


New U.S. Emissions Test, Debuting in Maine, Is a Flop
The nation's first experience with a tough new program of automobile emissions testing that the Federal Government will soon require in urban areas around the country has gone so badly that Maine, the program's bellwether state, has had to suspend it.
And resentment against the program, which could prove expensive to many thousands of drivers, is such that the legislatures of at least two other states, Pennsylvania and Vermont, are now balking at speedy adoption of it even though their resistance could ultimately cost them tens of millions of dollars in Federal highway money.


Another Quarterback Is Ailing for Nebraska
Nebraska 42, Wyoming 32
For the second straight week, Nebraska won a game and lost a quarterback.
Brook Berringer, filling in for the ailing Tommie Frazier, scored three touchdowns yesterday as the Cornhuskers struggled past Wyoming, 42-32.


South Africa
To the Editor: Having recently visited the Cape Province of South Africa, I can attest that the landscape is every bit as picturesque and colorful as Amy Waldman said it was in her article "An Arid 'Landscape of Extremes' " (July 24).
The Karoo is certainly a place not to be missed by tourists.
My husband and I drove over the Swartberg Pass and have never experienced such a breathtaking roller-coaster ride!
This graveled route should not be taken in the dark nor in the rain.
It is steep and curvy and requires a car with a standard shift and/or excellent brakes.


Museum Explores History of Photography
In less than half a century, the photography collection at the Art Museum at Princeton University has grown from a single Stieglitz to more than 8,000 items.
Of these, 457 are prints that were donated by an alumnus, David Hunter McAlpin, in 1971.
The next year, the university became one of the first to incorporate photography in its art history curriculum, appointing Peter Bunnell to teach a survey course.
Mr.
Bunnell, who is the McAlpin Professor of the History of Photography and Modern Art, continues to teach the course.
But as faculty curator of photography, too, he is able to bring the word to the public with didactic anthologies on the order of "What Photographs Look Like." This is one of three current shows he organized, all composed of works from the collection.


Mix and Mingle
FORTY-FOUR AT THE ROYALTON ** (212) 944-8844; 44 West 44th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
This stylish restaurant in the lobby of the Royalton is a favorite of the publishing and high-fashion crowds.
The chef is Geoffrey Zacharian, whose cooking is an assertive contemporary American mix with international accents.
Current starters include charred lamb sausage, duck prosciutto and goat cheese profiteroles.
Among entrees are roast cod on a warm bed of fennel, anchovy and white beans; sauteed calf's liver in a red wine sauce with hash browns, and grilled chicken with potatoes, lemon grass and vegetables. (Review: 3/27/92)


Job Opening: A Bernstein For Today
IN FEBRUARY 1960, LEONARD BERNSTEIN strode onto the stage of Carnegie Hall to conduct a Young People's Concert with the New York Philharmonic and hazarded a guess that none of his "dear young friends" in the audience had heard of Gustav Mahler.
Bernstein was about to remedy that situation.
Mahler, he explained, was a great composer and an important conductor; he had led the Philharmonic on that very stage.
Though "one of the most unhappy people in history," he often wrote ecstatic music.
He was a "double man," caught between opposing worlds.
And in everything he wrote, his feelings were "extreme, exaggerated, like young people's feelings." Mahler, Bernstein made clear, was much like himself, even like the listeners who sat before him.
This was a remarkable example of what Bernstein could accomplish in the 53 Young People's Concerts he presented between 1958 and 1972.
Scripts for 15 of them have been collected in an Anchor paperback, and videotapes of 25 are available from Sony Classical and the Leonard Bernstein Society; all are models of music teaching.
Bernstein talked pungently about modes and keys, pitch intervals and sonata form, folk music in the concert hall and the nature of musical Impressionism.
He did not shy away from fundamental questions about meaning in music or the nature of musical humor.
There is no one today who can address a young audience with comparable depth and simplicity, and such a person has never been needed more than now.


Giuliani Says Youth's Death Is Loss for Future of the City
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, joining about 1,000 mourners at the funeral of 13-year-old Nicholas Heyward Jr. yesterday, said that the youth's life was proof that "prejudices and stereotypes of youngsters" were unfounded and that his death was a loss for the city's future.
His words echoed those of the Rev.
Herbert Daughtry, the pastor of the House of the Lord Pentacostal Church in Boerum Hill, Brooklyn, where the funeral was held, who called for a breaking down of barriers between people and an end to violence.


The Evolution of Public Spaces
"Progress," the architect Edward Durrell Stone said, "usually means giving up something worthwhile for something less attractive." But when it comes to public spaces, there are some advantages to change.
For instance, automatic teller machines.
Here is a brief history of typical gathering places: their highs, their lows, their current incarnations.
Once A.J.
Liebling called businessmen who camped out in lobbies "telephine booth Indians." For a nickel, they had a quiet office, with a writing surface, a light to read by, a door for privacy, even a fan to blow away cigar smoke.
Then came the urban assault-model public phone - shatterprrof and vandal-resistant.
It left you at the mercy of the elements.
Even Superman had to find someplace else to change.
Now cellular phones make anywhere your office, from waiting rooms to the driver's seat of you imaginary Jag.


A Pair of Fair Ladies, Both Tried and True
Timecop  Jean-Claude Van Damme, Mia Sara, Ron Silver Directed by Peter Hyams R 98 minutes


Sports of The Times; N.F.L.'s Labor Pioneer Remains Unknown
FOR three weeks now, the National Football League has embraced the lore and legacy of its rich past.
This is a significant step for a league which has traditionally lived very much in the present.
In a year in which baseball and now hockey have been consumed by labor woes, the N.F.L. has the stage to itself as it celebrates 75 years of operation.
To commemorate the anniversary, the N.F.L. has named a silver anniversary team, and has trotted out old players and old uniforms.


Candidates See Distinct States, Each New York
Anyone listening to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and State Senator George E. Pataki, his Republican challenger, talk about New York's economy would think they were describing two different states.
"Happy days are near again," Governor Cuomo declares.
"I took you through two recessions. And at the same time laid a foundation for a powerful new economy. More powerful than any you've ever had in the state."


Loosening Up Nynex
This year Congress almost broke the monopolies of the local cable and telephone companies.
But in the end, special-interest lobbying and petty squabbling -- the kind that buried the health care and trade bills -- won the day.
Lost was the chance to breathe competition into phone and video markets, which is the only way to bring on the interactive services consumers are likely to crave.
But New York State residents may still win some relief.
The State Public Service Commission has reached an innovative deal with Nynex, the regional Bell company, to lower its rates and modestly open its markets to competition.
There are problems with the tentative accord, and state reform cannot fully substitute for Federal reform.
But the deal looks feasible and should provide substantial benefits for consumers.


Jill L. Kraft, Robert G. Butler
Dr.
Jill Lauren Kraft, the chief resident in primary-care medicine at Montefiore Hospital in the Bronx, and Robert George Butler, a doctoral candidate in chemistry at Princeton University, are to be married today in Kew Gardens, Queens.
Rabbi Menachem Zupnick will perform the ceremony at Congregation Shaare Tova.
The bride, 29, graduated from Princeton and received a medical degree from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I.
She is the daughter of Drs.
Anita and David Kraft of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
Her mother is a speech and language pathologist in the Briarcliff Manor school district.
Her father is a professor of physics at the United States Military Academy.


Parochial Schools on the Comeback Trail
PATRICIA FINCH scrubbed decades of dirt off the desks at St.
John's School in Old Saybrook in preparation for classes.
St.
John's, in the Roman Catholic Diocese of Norwich, was reopened this fall after being closed for 20 years.
Mrs.
Finch, one of many volunteers to cleaned and painted the school building, remembered sitting at the same desks when she was a pupil at St.
John's.
The thought that she was helping to refurbish them for her two children, whom she enrolled this year, made the work easier, she said.
"Those desks are antiques, mind you," she said.
"If it weren't for the Formica tops, my initials might have been there. I might have been scraping my bubblegum from one of those desks."
The reopening of St.
John's and St.
Bridget Catholic Elementary School in Cheshire, part of the Archdiocese of Hartford, marks a reversal in a decade of Catholic school closings due to rising costs and a shortage of nuns and priests.
The Norwich diocese, which includes Windham, Tolland, Middlesex and New London counties and Fishers Island, N.Y., plans to open regional middle schools in the Montville and Putnam areas in the next 18 months and at least three day care centers in the New London, Willimantic and Putnam areas, the superintendent of schools for the diocese, Howard B. Bennett, said.


Karen J. Rosen, David Pomerantz
Dr.
Karen J. Rosen, the daughter of Lore Rosen and Jerry Rosen, both of Albany, was married there last evening to Dr.
David S. Pomerantz, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ronald Pomerantz of Potomac, Md.
Rabbi Scott Spheen performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Emeth.
The bride is a fourth-year resident in psychiatry at Butler Hospital in Providence, R.I.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received a medical degree from Columbia University.


Michael Flannery, an Advocate Of a United Ireland, Dies at 92
Michael Flannery, a controversial grand marshal of the St.
Patrick's Day Parade because of his strong support of the Irish Republican Army, died Friday afternoon at the age of 92.
Mr.
Flannery, who worked four decades in the actuarial department of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, died of internal bleeding at Flushing Hospital in Queens, said Thomas Enright, a friend.
Mr.
Enright said Mr.
Flannery had fallen in the bathroom of his home in Jackson Heights.


J. B. Braverman, Jeffrey Underweiser
Jennifer Beth Braverman, the daughter of Dr.
Joan Callahan of Roslyn Heights, L.I., and Jeffrey Braverman of Great Neck, L.I., was married last evening to Jeffrey Underweiser, the son of Beatrice and Irwin Underweiser of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Jerome Davidson performed the ceremony at Temple Beth-El in Great Neck.
The bride is a clinical social worker in the Children With AIDS program at the New York Hospital.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
She is a candidate for a Ph.D. in social work at New York University.
Her father is the president of Rival Automotive Products in Great Neck.
Her mother is a professor of speech pathology and audiology at Adelphi University in Garden City, L.I.


Shakespeare Festival On Stage and Screen
Films, plays, exhibits, concerts and lectures will be among the events in London as part of Britain's first International Shakespeare Festival from Oct. 25 to Nov. 20, sponsored by the Royal Shakespeare Company, the Barbican Center and the BBC.


Doren H. Margold And John Dolan
Doren Harris Margold, a daughter of Davis S. Margold of Darien, Conn., and a stepdaughter of Linda S. Margold, was married yesterday to John Francis Xavier Dolan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Dolan of Bernardsville, N.J.
The Rev.
Arthur Kingdon, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Chapel of the Snows in Stratton Mountain, Vt.
Mrs.
Dolan, 30, graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is the events manager in the sports-marketing department of Gruner &amp; Jahr USA Publishing in New York, magazine publishers, for which she is a manager of the Family Circle Tennis Cup and the McCall's L.P.G.A.
Classic tournaments.
Her father is a member of the New York Stock Exchange.


Making a Restaurant Feel Like Home
NAME: Larry Bogdanow (pronounced to rhyme with how).
IDENTITY: Restaurant designer.
AGE: 47.
RECENT PROJECTS: The Cub Room, Kelley &amp; Ping and T, all in SoHo; Spartina in TriBeCa, Rubicon in San Francisco and the Bee Brook Cafe in Washington, Conn.
EARLIER PROJECTS: Union Square Cafe and Follonico in the Flatiron district, and Savoy and Kin Khao in SoHo.
Q.
What's your restaurant design philosophy?
A.
I still do a decent amount of residential jobs, and I like to keep the domestic scene going because I can see how people like to live and entertain.
I take those scenes and extend them in the restaurants, which are hot right now.
It's the main way to entertain.
Q.
What do you personally want in a restaurant?
A.
To feel relaxed.
Some people want to be titillated, excited.
A space should offer some of that.
In the 80's, it was the disco restaurants, all that shiny material.
Then they closed down.
Q.
How do you stay in touch with tastes but at the same time design a setting that will last?
A.
I try to create a timeless environment, to instill a sense that the restaurant's always been there.
Q.
What are the fads?
A.
Homeyness -- a relaxed, comfortable atmosphere.
I try to use natural materials, domestic woods like cherry, linoleum versus vinyl.
I use a lot of stuff from Environmental Construction Outfitters in SoHo.
At the T room, there's no rain-forest wood, no dangerous chemicals, no toxic materials.
But it's not a religion for me.
Q.
What's all this comfort about?
A.
It's so important now.
Modern life is uncomfortable, hurried, noisy.
The domestic environment should be comfortable so you can relax, lean back, think.
Q.
But isn't a restaurant supposed to be a little different from home?
A.
Yes, people need to be entertained, so you need to make a restaurant a little more flamboyant, use brighter colors on walls, elaborate fabrics and light fixtures, make it more dressed-up.
Q.
What's artificial?
A.
Big, loud places in the Flatiron district.
I'm doing one there now, and I'm scared.
What can I say?
I'll try to make it very relaxed.
The buzzword in restaurant design is democratic, "of the people." I try to be careful with that word.
It's something for everyman, universal.
Q.
How is the new Cub Room democratic?
A.
It's current to the 90's, and it's not meant to be a supper club.
It has a casual cafe with a takeout section, and you can sit down.
The barroom is where you can also eat, but it's for the young and beautiful.
There's a nook where you can see pastry chefs working -- this is a little anti-reactionary.
The dining room is separate, quieter, more comfortable, a tiny bit more formal with a more adult crowd.
Off that room is a chef's dining room, the scale of a private dining room at home, with a table for 12.
All the rooms are meant to peek into the kitchen without the noise.
Q.
What are other trends in restaurants?
A.
Retail, a lot of diversity in one place.
The idea is not to exclude anyone, not the rich, the old, etc.
I'm doing a place in Burlington, Vt., which has a housewares area, a restaurant, a cafe and a bakery.
Bigger spaces are also a trend, and in that some people need their own little corner, a cocoon, while others like to be in the middle of the room.
Q.
What else is your style?
A.
I tailor styles to the client, taking the same approach as I do in my residential work.
Most of the restaurant owners I work with are individuals, not companies or corporations.
Kelley &amp; Ping, for example, reflects my style in the painted wood floor, the easygoing tone.
My work also has a sense of rough and soft, like masonry with upholstery.
Examples of that are the T room, Savoy, Union Square Cafe.
Q.
Do you do research for your restaurants?
A.
I travel and go out to dinner all the time.
I also take clients around to restaurants I like and dislike.
Or we tour them, picking out lighting, floors.
I take notes, pictures.
Most restaurants don't mind if you do this.
Q.
What are some restaurants you're working on now?
A.
Heights Cafe in Brooklyn Heights.
The Lemon in the Flatiron district.
Lucky Dog Diner on the Lower East Side.
A cafe in Battery Park.
Warren Ashworth, my associate, is also working on these.
Q.
Do you ever think of opening your own restaurant?
A.
All the time.
It would be a peaceful place, but that's all I want to say.
I'd also like to open a children's restaurant.


The World; What Big Stick? Just Sell.
THE past few weeks have provided a revealing study in contrasts between the Clinton foreign economic policy and the Clinton foreign security policy.
To put it bluntly, Mr.
Clinton's foreign economic policy tends to be everything that the rest of his foreign policy is not: The strategy has been fairly consistent, even if the tactics varied; his goals have been generally well-articulated, the payoff for the American public clear-cut, and the passions of the President obviously engaged.
When it came to Bosnia, Somalia and even Haiti, the President often seemed unable to make a connection between his goals and the means he was ready to spend to achieve them.
But that has not been the case in much of his economic diplomacy.


Jane Rosenberg, Howard Stoffer
Jane Rosenberg, a partner in Goldstick, Weinberger, Feldman &amp; Grossman, a New York law firm, is to be married today to Howard Stoffer, the acting political counselor at the United States Embassy in Tel Aviv.
Rabbi Mordecai Waxman is to officiate at the Rainbow Room in New York.
The bride, who will keep her name, graduated cum laude from Mount Holyoke College and received her law degree and a master's degree in television and radio from Syracuse University.
She is a daughter of Edith K. Rosenberg of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Dr.
Harold Rosenberg.


AN EXERCISE HIGH THAT LASTS
HE LOOKED LIKE AN AGING DRILL sergeant, wiry and gray-haired, with a whistle around his neck and a clipboard in hand.
His name was Art Paff, he was an elementary-school gym teacher in a small town in Wisconsin in 1962 and he was made for the job.
I was a fifth grader at the time.
Close my eyes and I can see still the old taskmaster forcing us on long runs in the dead of winter, often on unshoveled sidewalks.
We wore sweatshirts on top, but just gym shorts, sneakers and socks on the bottom.
So we were running in temperatures near zero with bare legs.
"Just keep those legs moving and you won't get cold," Mr.
Paff would shout -- his version of sympathetic encouragement.
He had a handful of fitness homilies that he would deliver over and over, hoping, no doubt, to dissuade the wayward youths of Neenah, Wis., from lives of sedentary sloth.
The Art Paff lecture that I remember was his admonition to partake of some form of regular exercise.
Now, he would tell the assembled 11-year-olds, was the time to start.
"Everybody has habits," he would say.
"You can have good habits or bad habits. Why not choose good ones?"
Why not indeed.
I'm sure I recall this fitness bromide today because, even back then, Mr.
Paff was preaching the gospel to a convert.
As an 8-year-old, I would get up and run a half-mile before breakfast.
In the 34 years since, the routine has changed but I still have the exercise habit.
It has continued through high school, college, graduate school and afterward, through competitive athletics and no competition at all for more than two decades, through moves around the world.


Some Haitians Doubt Decision to Go Home
Jean-Louis Fortune was having second thoughts.
Only moments before, word had come from a nearby hangar, where a big television is permanently tuned to CNN, that there was trouble in Haiti, that pro-army gunmen had fired on demonstrators.
In Camp Six at the United States naval base here, where dozens of Haitian refugees who had elected to return to their country waited, Mr.
Fortune sought reassurances for his own decision to return home.


Liz Phair
TOO EARLY IN THE MORNING, Liz Phair and her three-man band are slumped on couches in the dressing room of a mid-Manhattan video studio.
Here, MTV tapes many of its live-music segments, and Phair is the guest on "120 Minutes," the channel's late-night show devoted to new rock.
She'll perform with her band, then she'll chat with Lewis Largent, the elaborately casual host.
Later, she'll face the public with a two-night stand at the Academy, a decaying West 43d Street theater pressed into service as a rock club.
Phair is crouched over her guitar; all that's visible is a puff of shoulder-length ash-blond hair.
In person, she's modest; it's her songs that can sometimes be startling in their sexual directness.
Quietly, she and her band -- Casey Rice on guitar, Leroy Bach on bass and Brad Wood on drums -- rehearse one of those songs, "Never Said," the college-radio hit from "Exile in Guyville," one of the most celebrated independent albums of the 1990's.
When the album appeared, Phair had performed fewer than half a dozen times in public, and she was barely a rumor outside Chicago.
It didn't take long before every alternative-rock fan knew her name: The album sold more than 200,000 copies, topped the Village Voice's 1993 rock critic's poll and was named album of the year by Spin magazine.
Within the next few months, her audience will grow rapidly, as her new album, "Whip-smart," carries her from the fringe to the real thing.


Note to Readers
The Travel section regrets that because of the volume of mail it receives, an unsolicited manuscript or article proposal cannot be acknowledged or returned unless accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If a manuscript is accepted, the author will be notified before publication.
Writers should not include photographs.


Behind a Boom in Blooms: Safety, Drama and TV
In the beginning, after everyone got kicked out of Eden, some hunters and gatherers stuck a few seeds in the ground, and the first gardeners were born.
Now, about 10,000 years later, the QVC shopping network has discovered gardening.
And so have the baby boomers -- 60 million potential consumers of trowels, perennials, shrubs, trees, lily ponds and worm boxes.


The Tyrant Mao, as Told by His Doctor
Mao Zedong, China's "Great Helmsman" whose brilliance, the official doctrine insists, led a vast nation to restored greatness, was actually an irritable, manipulative egotist incapable of human feeling who surrounded himself with sycophants and refused even to be treated for a sexually transmitted disease, though he knew he was spreading it to the numerous young women who shared his bed.
Those are among the elements of an extraordinarily intimate portrait of Mao drawn by Li Zhisui, who was his private physician from 1955 until Mao's death in 1976 at the age of 82.


'World Within World'
To the Editor:
Sir Stephen Spender has chosen to speak of his contretemps with David Leavitt as an instance of plagiarism; Mr.
Leavitt, for his part, describes it as an attack on his right to free speech and, less coyly, as a bit of homophobic bullying on the part of Stephen Spender and his British confreres.
I am sure that much of what both men say is true, and what is not is nevertheless honestly believed by the man who says it.
But short of calling either of them a liar, I would like to suggest that there is something more to this ugly business than is being said aloud by either individual.
I would also suggest that it is relevant to all the rest of us.


Profile; New York's Answer to Ross Perot
B.
Thomas Golisano is running for Governor of New York, something no one would care a whit about were he not threatening to spend $8 million to $10 million of his own fortune in the last-minute campaign.
The only thing about this that isn't far-fetched is the money.
Mr.
Golisano owns nearly $150 million in the stock of his ever higher-flying company.


Corrections
An article in The Times Magazine on Sept. 18 about the major league baseball owners misspelled the surnames of a Baltimore Orioles first baseman, of a former owner of the St.
Louis Cardinals and of the American League president.
The first baseman is Rafael Palmeiro, not Palmiero.
The former owner is Fred Saigh Jr., not Saight.
The league president is Gene Budig, not Buddig.
The article also misstated the opening year of the Detroit ball park now known as Tiger Stadium.
It was 1912, not 1902.


13-Year-Old Shot By Officer Is Buried


A HOPLOPHOBE AMONG THE GUNNIES
Philip Weiss's invasion of the cloistered world of National Rifle Association activists provided us hoplophobes with insights into what motivates them to defend the Second Amendment to the Constitution with such fervor ("A Hoplophobe Among the Gunnies," Sept. 11).
However, an additional point needs to be made.
The firearms business is very large and very lucrative.
Much of the posturing about the right to bear arms disguises what is merely economic self-interest.
MEYER L. BLOCK East Northport, L.I.


Sept.25-Oct.1: A 30-Year Respite Ends; Cases of Plague Reported In India's Largest Cities
Plague is a disease that can conjure up the worst fears, because most people know of its devastating impact on societies throughout history, especially in the Middle Ages when the bacterial infection killed a fourth of Europe's population.
Today, plague is curable with antibiotics if treated early.
But untreated, half the victims will die from the bubonic form (usually spread by infected bites of rodent-borne fleas) and virtually all will die from the pneumonic form (spread in airborne droplets from coughs).


Southern Co.(SO,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Aug 31


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
SATIRICAL ART
Alan Cober's etchings and Reginald Case's assemblages, on view at the Station Gallery in Katonah through Oct. 30, are certainly attention getting.


Donna S. Kramer, Ronald L. Cohen
Donna Stricof Kramer, a legal recruiter, and Ronald Lewis Cohen, a lawyer, both in New York, are to be married today.
Rabbi David Lincoln is to perform the ceremony at the Mark in New York.
The bride works at Baum, Stevens Inc., a legal placement concern.
She graduated from Northwestern University and received a master's degree in speech pathology from Columbia University and a law degree from Yeshiva University.
She is the daughter of Selma Wind Stricof of New York and the late Lew A. Stricof.


Arrow International(ARRO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Time to Tuck In Surprises for Spring
PETUNIAS are looking lanky and losing their oomph.
Marigolds are waning.
Tree leaves are turning color; some have even started to litter the lawn.
Peony foliage is yellowing.
Everything suggests that the gardening season is over.
Wrong.
Fall gardening has just begun.
Even as things appear to come to a halt above ground, important things are happening below.
The earth is still quite warm and with enough moisture roots are growing.
Gardeners are wise to take advantage of this and plant, plant, plant all they can.


SHANNON FAULKNER, ONE OF THE BOYS
It has always been clear that graduates of the Citadel are not officers, having been trained in only a make-believe military ("Shannon Faulkner, One of the Boys," by Catherine S. Manegold, Sept. 11).
As the school newspaper's mean-spirited attacks on Shannon Faulkner reveal, neither are they gentlemen.
MARY BUHL DUTTA Brighton, Mass.


Austerity Overtakes the Presidio
A soldier dreams of three things, or so the old Army saying goes.
To be made colonel, to go to heaven and to be assigned to the Presidio.
But as of today, the Presidio, the hilly, sprawling garrison with sweeping views of the ocean, San Francisco Bay and the Golden Gate Bridge is no longer run by the United States Army.
It has been taken over by the National Park Service.


Who Shot Matthew Hope?
THERE WAS A LITTLE GIRL By Ed McBain. 352 pp. New York: Warner Books. $21.95.


Islanders Beat the Clock and Reach Terms With Lindros
At least the Islanders beat their deadline.
On what was supposed to be the first day of hockey's regular season, the Islanders announced that they came to terms late Friday with Brett Lindros, their top choice in this year's draft.
Had they not met the midnight deadline, Lindros would have had to spend the season with his junior league team in Kingston, Ontario.


Christine Carpenter, Michael T. Hill,
Christine Ellen Carpenter, the daughter of Marcia and Walter Carpenter of Benton, Pa., was married yesterday to Michael Thomas Hill, a son of Anne Marie and Arthur Hill of York, Pa.
The Rev.
Joan Kahn-Schneider, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Appel Inn in Altamont, N.Y.
Ms.
Carpenter, 28, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the State University College at New Paltz, N.Y., and is studying for a master's degree in education at the College of St.
Rose.
Her father owns the W. E. Carpenter Rod Company, which makes split-bamboo fly-fishing rods in Huntington Mills, Pa.
Her mother is a sales agent at Phillips &amp; Gray, a real estate agency in Cambra, Pa.


Next Studio 54, Where Are You? In the Basement
The sleek elegance of the Paramount Hotel lobby, with its polished marble and understated modern gray decor, gives no hint of the treasure hidden in the cavernous basement below.
There -- amid piles of rubble, dangling wires, protruding pipes and gaping holes -- the dim light reveals fluted columns, a glittering arch over a stage and a swirling sculptured ceiling.
These are the neglected ruins of the Diamond Horseshoe, the world-famous club created half a century ago by the legendary showman Billy Rose.


Isolated Immigrants Aim of D.W.I. Drive
FOR some in Long Island's growing Hispanic population, living isolated in a culture very different from their own can make alcohol seem an escape.
And the authorities say that has shown up on the road, with accidents and arrests for drunken driving.
Although there are many programs intended to stop drunken driving, such programs often miss those who speak Spanish and have come from a different culture, leaving a growing need for special programs to help Hispanic residents deal with alcohol abuse.


Study to Track Health of Aging Women, Most From Bronx
The Albert Einstein College of Medicine was awarded $9 million last week to research health problems of women between 50 and 79 years old, as part of a 10-year study expected to draw 3,600 participants, the majority from the Bronx.
The grant from the National Institutes of Health, one of 40 awarded nationwide, is for one of the largest studies of women's health ever commissioned, officials said.
And the study in the ethnically diverse Bronx, with its widely varying neighborhoods, is expected to illuminate socioeconomic and cultural causes of certain diseases.


New Direction (and Mood) on 64th St.
Patricia Ryan looked out her eighth-floor window last week onto West 64th Street and nodded.
"Slowly, slowly, you see?" she said.
"A few cars at a time. I remember when you had to run to get across that street alive."
After nearly two years of complaints, a letter campaign and a community board resolution, several residents of the street, between West End and Amsterdam, got their wish: traffic engineers recently flipped the one-way signs from west to east.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL
P.S.A.L.
KNIGHTS DRIVE TOWARD CROWN: Andre Wyatt (15 carries for 140 yards) rushed for 3 touchdowns while Henry Gonzalez (36-yard return) and Frank Duporte (15-yard return) each returned interceptions for scores as KENNEDY (4-0) continued its pursuit of the P.S.A.L. 'A' title, knocking off BROOKLYN TECH (0-3), 43-0.


Susan Mayer, Seth Berlin
Susan Mayer, a daughter of Joy Mayer of East Brunswick, N.J., and the late Irwin Mayer, is to be married today to Seth Berlin, the son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Donald Berlin of Baltimore.
Rabbi Fred Reiner is to perform the ceremony, in which the bridegroom's father is to take part, at Temple Sinai in Washington.
The bride, 29, is an environmental analyst with the Congressional Research Service of the Library of Congress.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Rochester, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and from which she later received a master's degree in public policy.
Her father was a vice president and the chief financial officer in New York of the McCrory Corporation, the retail chain.


And Here's How Paul Taylor Dancers Grow
Paul Taylor does not look much like a patriarch.
For one thing, his beard is a little too short, and he tends to amble through life in blue jeans rather than a flowing robe.
But over the years he has produced a number of choreographic offspring, most notably Twyla Tharp, Senta Driver, David Parsons and Christopher Gillis.
And now a whole new crop of choreographers is about to be unleashed on the world in an unusual work created by Mr.
Taylor and six of his dancers.
Called "Funny Papers," it will be seen during the Paul Taylor Dance Company's two-week season, which opens Oct. 11 at City Center.
Mr.
Taylor has taken chunks of dance choreographed by Mary Cochran, Patrick Corbin, Sandra Stone, Andrew Asnes, David Grenke and Hernando Cortez and woven them into "Funny Papers," which is performed to pop songs mostly of the 1940's and 50's.
The piece is dedicated, Mr.
Taylor said, to newspaper readers who turn to the comics first.


Catering to the Market for Family-Sized Apartments
A DESCRIPTION by the Landmarks Preservation Commission of an 1887 mansion at Eighth Avenue and Union Street in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn pays it this compliment: "The building is interesting from any angle."
Credit that to the mansion's gables and corner turret, some of the "picturesque details" that modify the building's Romanesque Revival style, according to the report written for the designation of the Park Slope historic district.


Manhattan Minute
ZIPPER STICKING: Here "Today," gone tomorrow?
There's a challenge to the 38-foot-long "zipper" sign that displays moving headlines in the new sidewalk studio window of NBC's "Today" at Rockefeller Center.
Brenda Levin, a City Planning Commission member, questions whether it violates zoning laws.
Buildings Commissioner Joel Miele Sr. has his staff researching the issue. . . .
SEOUL SEARCHING: There's Chinatown, Little Italy and Little India -- so why not recognize booming Korea Town?
The New York Society of Korean Businessmen is proposing to Community Board 5 that "Korea Town" be posted in English and Korean on signs along Broadway from 25th to 32d Streets, where Korean businesses and restaurants have flourished for decades. . . .
A RIVER RUNS BY IT: The East River Esplanade, which has been closed from 90th to 94th Streets since July, will open next month with new pavement, black fencing, new benches and landscaping, the Parks Department says. . . .
NEW GREENMARKET: The old Gansevoort Street greenmarket, one of the city's oldest, closed at the end of July, but a new one is opening this weekend on Abingdon Square. . . .
HOW INTERESTING COULD A BUS SHELTER BE?: The Department of Transportation will call for bids for new bus shelters next month, and Community Board 2 is urging the agency to consider 18-month limits on the franchises to encourage "more creative uses," like combining them with phone booths and installing folding chairs, says Keith Crandell, author of the resolution.


Don't Manipulate Haiti's Politics
It does not make sense to occupy a country in order to guarantee its citizens the right of political self-determination and then unleash the Central Intelligence Agency to meddle in the nation's political affairs.
That is what the Clinton Administration is doing in Haiti.
This fresh contortion in an already twisted policy is a throwback to the kind of arrogance that typified American intrusions during the cold war.
For reasons of principle and prudence, the United States should not be in the business of covertly manipulating political debate in other countries -- especially in countries where some 20,000 U.S. troops are supposed to be conducting a limited mission of restoring constitutional rule and giving way to an international force at the earliest possible date.


Haiti Action Shows Unwise Use of U.S. Power; Nonpolitical Church?
To the Editor:
Your news article on the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide's troubles with Haiti's church establishment (front page, Sept. 28) underscores the double standard held by so many defenders of the status quo, not only in Haiti but also everywhere.


Marc Leo Bik, Nina Marie Rach
Nina Marie Rach, a geophysicist, and Marc Leo Bik, a mining engineer, are to be married today in Millburn, N.J.
The Rev.
Ronald Johnson is to perform the ceremony at the Wyoming Presbyterian Church.
The bride, 32, is a production geoscientist at Exxon in Houston.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in geology and geophysics from Duke University.
She is studying for a law degree at the University of Houston.


Now You See Him, Now You Don't
MICHAEL JORDAN tried to maintain a low profile yesterday when he joined the Scottsdale Scorpions of the Arizona Fall League.
Jordan would not give interviews or sign autographs for the cluster of about 50 fans who arrived at the training complex before security guards closed the parking lot.
Scorpions third baseman CHRIS SNOPEK, a Chicago White Sox farmhand who played with Jordan at Double-A Birmingham this summer, said Jordan snubbed reporters out of consideration for his teammates.
"He knows he's the main attraction here for you guys, but he doesn't want to take the attention away from us," Snopek said.


CML Group Inc.(CML,N) reports earnings for Year to July 31


The Nation; Air Chortle Is Now Boarding
TRAVELING by air was once glamorous, with stewardesses in pillbox hats and white gloves serving full meals to passengers who had room to stretch in their best suits and dresses.
But after the industry was deregulated in 1978 and new airlines like People Express rushed in with cheap fares that attracted hordes of passengers, many flights seemed more like flying buses, with harried attendants doling out peanuts and Pepsi to cramped travelers in wrinkled track suits.
Now many passengers may feel like they are headed to a convention for camp counselors.


BENEFITS
Katherine Dunham  TODAY -- Katherine Dunham, the dancer and choreographer, will be honored at a 3 P.M. tribute at Town Hall.
Sponsored by the Caribbean Cultural Center in New York, the program will benefit the Katherine Dunham Museum and Collection in East St.
Louis, Mo.
Danny Glover, the actor, will be one of the hosts of the event, which will also feature musical performances by Tito Puente, Mongo Santamaria and Max Roach and a dance program that will include the Roots of Brazil troupe, Philadanco and others.
A cocktail buffet will follow at Le Max Restaurant, 147 West 43d Street.
Tickets, $150 at the door, or $25 to $35 for the performances alone.
Information: (212) 840-2824.
An Autumn Dance Party  TUESDAY -- The Associates Division of the Jewish Guild for the Blind is sponsoring a dance at Nell's, 246 West 14th Street, from 7 to 11 P.M.
Cash bar.
Tickets, $35, at the door.
Information: (212) 769-6239.
Letterman in the Park  WEDNESDAY -- David Letterman will be the headliner at a benefit for the Nature Conservancy, the nonprofit environmental organization, in a tent on the Great Lawn in Central Park.
Tom Brokaw, Peter Jennings and Dan Rather will serve as masters of ceremony for the evening, which will begin with a cocktail buffet at 6:30, followed by dinner and dancing.
Diane Sawyer will speak, Carly Simon will perform and Robert Redford will be honored.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 245-6570.
A 'Show Boat' Evening  WEDNESDAY -- The 8 P.M. performance of "Show Boat" will be a benefit for the theater collection of the Museum of the City of New York.
A 6:15 p.m. cocktail reception at the Time &amp; Life Building will precede the show at the Gershwin Theater.
Tickets, $175, from (212) 534-1672, extension 253.
For Cancer Research  WEDNESDAY -- Jerry Vale and Joy Behar will perform at Carnegie Hall in a benefit for the National Foundation for Cancer Research.
Mr.
Vale will be honored.
The 8 P.M. show will be followed by an 11 P.M. reception at the Russian Tea Room.
Tickets, $150, or $100 for the show alone, from (718) 836-1902.
Other seats, $35 to $75, from (212) 247-7800.
Conserving Landmarks  THURSDAY -- The New York Landmarks Conservancy will honor Hugh L. Carey, John Guare, Philip Johnson, Mary McFadden, Bobby Short and George C. Wolfe at the Plaza.
Cocktails, at 7 P.M., will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 921-9070.Cosmetics Industry Ball  THURSDAY -- The American Cancer Society is to benefit from a dinner-dance sponsored by the cosmetics industry.
The black-tie evening at the Pierre will begin with cocktails at 7.
Olivia Newton-John will speak, and Simon J. Critchell, the president of Cartier, and Gene Kahn, the president of Filene's, will be honored.
Tickets, $850, from (212) 237-3872.
Autumn Wine Tasting  THURSDAY -- Hartley House, a settlement house at 413 West 43d Street, will hold a wine tasting from 6 to 8 P.M.
Tickets, $75, or $50 for those 30 years old and younger, from (212) 246-9885.
Jobs for Youth  THURSDAY -- Jobs for Youth, a New York City organization that trains and finds jobs for young inner-city adults, will celebrate its 35th year with an evening at the New York Hilton.
A 6 P.M. cocktail reception and silent auction will be followed by dinner and performances by Lilianne Montevecchi and the Boys Choir of Harlem.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 643-6600.
To Save a Forest  FRIDAY -- The Drifters will perform at a benefit for the Friends of Opal Creek, an environmental group that is seeking to save the 35,000-acre Opal Creek forest in the Cascade Mountains of Oregon.
The fund-raiser, from 6:30 to 10:30 P.M. at the St.
Bartholomew's Church auditorium, 109 East 50th Street, will include refreshments and a talk by George Atiyeh, an environmentalist who is heading the campaign.
Tickets, $20, from (212) 986-2480, or at the door.
A Chocolate Tasting  FRIDAY -- Share Our Strength, a hunger-relief organization, will benefit from a tasting of chocolate desserts prepared by 15 top New York pastry chefs, from 7 to 10 P.M. at the New York Marriott Marquis.
Tickets are $75.
The chocolate weekend, organized by the New York Women's Culinary Alliance, will continue at the Marriott on Saturday, from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M., with a series of cooking seminars ($45 each).
The events will conclude with a $45 Sunday brunch at the Essex House, beginning at 11:30 A.M.
All tickets from (212) 675-5525.
Honoring Jane Alexander  SATURDAY -- The actress Jane Alexander, the chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts, will be honored at Montefiore Hospital's annual Monte Carlo fund-raiser for research on strokes and brain tumors.
The evening, held at the Overlook Farm Estate, 1177 King Street in Greenwich, Conn., will begin with a black-tie dinner at 6:30 P.M., followed at 9 by games of chance and a silent auction.
Tickets, $175 for the entire evening, or $100 for admission at 9, from (718) 920-4328.
A Paul Taylor Debut  Oct. 11 -- The Paul Taylor Dance Company will celebrate its 40th anniversary with a gala benefit for the company at City Center, where it is beginning a two-week engagement.
The 7 P.M. performance will be followed by a black-tie dinner-dance at the Plaza.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 431-5562 A Dada Ball  Oct. 11 -- Webster Hall, 125 East 11th Street, will be the setting for a re-creation of a Dada ball patterned after one organized at Webster Hall by Marcel Duchamp in 1917.
The event is to raise money for two AIDS organizations, Housing Works and Visual AIDS.
There will be dance performances by Robert LaFosse of the New York City Ballet and Bill T. Jones, the choreographer.
The evening will begin with dessert at 9 P.M.
Tickets, $125, or $35 for entry after 11 P.M., from (212) 431-3770.


SUNDAY, October 2, 1994; Too Many Tires
The good news: Unique Tire Recycling of British Columbia is gearing up to recycle almost 900,000 tires a year.
Its new facility in Kamloops will digest some tires into crude oil, steel and carbon black to be sold as raw materials.
The company already flattens and links truck and bus tires together in portable, artificial roadbeds for construction sites.
Another plant, planned for the Toronto area, would recycle a similar number.
The bad news: North America produces 250 million used tires each year to add to 3 billion already in dumps like the one at left in Tracy, Calif.
That's a lot of tires to digest.


Habitats/Park Avenue at 86th; Making Space for Living
NAZEE and Joseph Moinian like to entertain every Friday night.
A few close relatives -- 40 or 50 -- stop by for shabbat evening dinner and conversation.
The problem was that their three-bedroom apartment on East 68th Street was too small.
"We started looking along Park Avenue," said Mr.
Moinian, who still speaks with the faintest trace of his native Iran, which he left 24 years ago ("way before the revolution," he says).
"Our children go to the Ramaz School, the yeshiva school on 85th Street, and we were particularly keen to find something nearby.


Tough Old Thing
CODA  By Thea Astley. 188 pp. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $19.95.


No Headline
There's something spiritual about it.
It connects you to the old order.
And rituals.
Yet, it's leavened by such common sense and humor.
And yet there's a sense of awe about the complexity of it all.
The garden has everything.
Sex, drama.
Life and death." DROTHY KALINS, rhapsodizing about gardens.  [ 41:1. ]


Roquefort or Mascarpone, Cheese Agrees With Pears
PEARS and cheese are among the more felicitous culinary combinations.
And now that fresh autumn pears are in season, they can be twinned with all sorts of cheeses in a host of recipes, savory and sweet.
Consider adding pears to a salad that will be enhanced with cheese or a cheese dressing.
Parmesan and Roquefort or some other variety of blue-veined cheese are obvious choices.
But sturdy ricotta salata, farmhouse cheddar or a strong goat-milk cheese, can also be used.
Pieces of fresh pear are good in a Greek-style salad made with feta cheese.


The Nation: Still Critical; Ills of Health System Outlive Debate on Care
REALITY often seemed to be just another subject for debate in the health care struggle, but it has a way of reasserting itself when the shouting is over.
As Congress and the White House move on to lobbying reform and trade issues, a variety of experts are quietly noting that the problems that prompted the health care struggle are still, ahem, very much here.
The debate of the past 18 months was often as stylized as a Kabuki play, with as little to do with the real world: Conservatives talked of a country that was, by and large, happily ensconced in a fee-for-service system with full freedom of choice over which doctors people see, and full access to the wonders of modern technology.
Liberals countered with a portrait of middle-income Americans teetering on the brink of medical and financial catastrophe.


BEST SELLERS: October 2, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
2
5
2
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
3
2
3
THE BODY FARM, by Patricia Cornwell. (Scribners, $23.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates the kidnapping and murder of a small North Carolina girl.
4
3
31
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
5
6
15
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
6
4
10
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's casual visit to a small town changes the lives of many of its inhabitants, as well as her own.
7
8
112
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
8
7
5
A SON OF THE CIRCUS, by John Irving. (Random House, $25.) Returning to his native India, a Canadian physician encounters a murderer he once knew.
9
9
17
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
10
10
9
DISNEY'S THE LION KING, adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The coming of age of animal royalty, told in words and pictures.
11*
14
3
HALF ASLEEP IN FROG PAJAMAS, by Tom Robbins. (Bantam, $23.95.) Three perilous days in the life of an inexperienced, not entirely ethical stockbroker.
12
15
2
BROTHERS AND SISTERS, by Bebe Moore Campbell. (Putnam, $22.95.) The loyalties of a black woman are tested by colleagues' behavior in a Los Angeles bank.
13
12
4
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
14*
1
HOLLYWOOD KIDS, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) The tribulations of the privileged adult children of legendary movie stars.
15
1
ONE TRUE THING, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) A woman who cared for her fatally ill mother is charged with killing her.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
3
3
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the present.
2
1
4
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
3
2
73
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
4
4
41
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
5
5
30
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
6
13
2
BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An illustrated history of the game.
7
6
10
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Addison-Wesley, $23.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
8
1
ALL'S FAIR, by Mary Matalin and James Carville with Peter Knobler. (Random House/Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The 1992 Presidential campaign as experienced by a pair of romantically involved consultants.
9
1
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.
10*
7
7
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Villard, $27.50.) Five generations of an American family.
11
12
3
TRUE NORTH, by Jill Ker Conway. (Knopf, $23.) The memoir of an Australian woman: from graduate student at Harvard to president of Smith College.
12
8
2
BRANDO: Songs My Mother Taught Me, by Marlon Brando with Robert Lindsey. (Random House, $25.) The memoirs of the actor.
13
15
2
BETTER THAN SEX, by Hunter S. Thompson. (Random House, $23.) The 1992 Presidential campaign as seen by the gonzo journalist.
14
1
THE LAST BUS TO ALBUQUERQUE, by Lewis Grizzard.
Edited by Gerrie Ferris. (Longstreet, $20.) A collection of essays by the late syndicated humorist.
15
9
7
OCTOBER 1964, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $24.) The season in which the Cardinals beat the Yankees, reflecting great changes in baseball and society.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
71
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
2
23
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
1
MAGIC EYE III, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
4
3
23
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Oscillating designs.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 17, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A FACE, by Lucy Grealy. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A poet's memoir of a truly harrowing childhood: attacked at 9 by a bone cancer that consumed her face, she spent 18 years in surgical reconstruction; her moral and psychic survival is miraculous.
BREAKUP: The Coming End of Canada and the Stakes for America, by Lansing Lamont. (Norton, $25.) An admonitory speculation by a well-informed American journalist: if Quebec secedes, Canada will disintegrate; American involvement will be unavoidable and embarrassing.
CHINA WAKES: The Struggle for the Soul of a Rising Power, by Nicholas D. Kristof and Sheryl WuDunn. (Times Books/Random House, $25.) Two correspondents for The Times report from a nation whose ruling classes, having chucked Communism, seem to run on sheer meanness.
CLOSING TIME, by Joseph Heller. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Yossarian lives!
But not forever.
The soldiers are old now; gravity and joking are inseparable in this sequel to "Catch-22," and a vision of hell in Manhattan is joined to elegies for Coney Island yesteryears.
ELLA FITZGERALD: A Biography of the First Lady of Jazz, by Stuart Nicholson. (Scribners, $23.) A British critic's life of a distinguished interpreter, born in wretched circumstances, whose performances reveal only that she loves to sing.
A big discography comes with it.
IMPERIUM, by Ryszard Kapuscinski. (Knopf, $24.) Poland's pre-eminent foreign correspondent looks close to home and loses his detachment, rendering Russia and its inhabitants as ignorant, joyless, servile and unlikely to come to any good.
THE MORAL ANIMAL: The New Science of Evolutionary Psychology, by Robert Wright. (Pantheon, $27.50.) A journalist's engrossing exploration of our current understanding of the evolution of human moral feelings.
NONE TO ACCOMPANY ME, by Nadine Gordimer. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) Ms.
Gordimer's 11th novel, whose central figure is a progressive white woman in the new South Africa, shows again that the true focus of social concern is on the particular lives of individuals.
OPEN SECRETS: Stories, by Alice Munro. (Knopf, $23.) Bold, ambitious, risky short stories that never stop where stopping would be easy but go on to reach for the most expensive and difficult truths; Ms.
Munro's eighth book of fiction.
SHELTER, by Jayne Anne Phillips. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) Ms.
Phillips's second novel blends regionalism and symbolism in a spiritually charged parable of innocence too young betrayed in a backwoods summer camp for girls in 1963.
WISHING ON THE MOON: The Life and Times of Billie Holiday, by Donald Clarke. (Viking, $24.95.) Mr.
Clarke's thorough and valuable biography of this doomed artist conveys a vivid sense of the forces that shaped her character and made it inseparable from her music.


Sept.25-Oct.1; Campaign Finance Reform Fails, Again
Each senator and representative knows precisely which parts of the existing system of financing Congressional races have helped and which parts have hurt in past campaigns.
That has led to paralysis whenever the words "campaign finance reform" are strung together in the title of a piece of legislation.
Last week, the latest attempt to change the rules died in the Senate, a victim of the same forces that for more than a decade have killed all measures to change the campaign finance system.
The bill would have permitted partial public financing of Congressional campaigns, required candidates who accepted the money to abide by limits on overall spending and lowered the amount political action committees could donate.


The Master of Dramatic Truth
Jule Styne WILL BE remembered in New York show business circles for much more than being the composer of "Gypsy," "Funny Girl" and other Broadway shows.
Everyone who worked with Styne, who died on Sept. 20, has pet stories about the composer's quotable remarks, which often made more metaphoric than literal sense.
Remembering him in her cabaret show the night after his death, the singer Barbara Cook recalled receiving backstage praise from Styne following a 1985 concert performance of "Follies" at Avery Fisher Hall.
"You walked out there and sang eight bars before you opened your mouth," he snapped.


'I Can't Go On Criticizing'
CHRISTINA STEAD A Biography.
By Hazel Rowley.
Illustrated. 646 pp.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $37.50.


Ms. Barlerin, Mr. Farman-Farmaian
Patricia Patterson Barlerin, a daughter of Patricia M. Patterson of Dallas and Michael C. Barlerin of New York, was married yesterday to Alexander Farman-Farmaian, a son of Petronella Farman-Farmaian of Paris and Manucher Farman-Farmaian of Caracas, Venezuela.
The Rev.
Thomas S. Cushman performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Farman-Farmaian graduated from Barnard College.
She is studying for an M.B.A. degree at Columbia University.
Her father is the president of the World Gold Council, a trade association in New York.
Her mother is the president of Patterson Investments, a real estate investment company in Dallas.


Technology; The Homely Phone Proves a Tough Act to Follow
IT may be homely and it may be primitive, but there has never been a more successful communications device than the ordinary telephone.
And that is half the problem.
The telephone is a commodity product, made by legions of companies that compete fiercely on price.
Yet most of the numerous efforts to move beyond the traditional standby -- whether with videophones, screen-based phones or hand-held "personal digital assistants" -- have been noteworthy flops.


Julie Klapper and Charles Sennott
Julie Adele Klapper, a documentary producer in Boston, was married yesterday on Martha's Vineyard to Charles Morgan Sennott, a special-projects reporter at The Boston Globe.
The Rev.
William H. Morgan, a cousin of the bridegroom, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Elizabeth's Church in Edgartown, Mass.
The bride, 32, graduated from the University of California at Santa Barbara.
She is a daughter of Jerome Klapper of Palos Verdes, Calif., and the late Dr.
Zelda S. Klapper.
Her father retired as the director of photography for United Press International in New York.
Her mother was a professor of child psychology at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx, and the clinical director of its Rose F. Kennedy Center.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Catherine B. Klapper.


Prague
To the Editor: Last spring I visited a friend living in Prague.
I agree that Prague is a walking city.
My friend teaches English during the day, so I roamed the city enjoying the antiquity, the sprucing-up and the adventure of discovery.
I purchased four-day passes, which gave me unrestricted rides on the trams and subway.
I had a clearly marked map of the lines and the stops.
Often I'd jump on a tram just to explore whatever part of the city it would take me to: when I had gone far enough, I got off and took the next tram back.
I got to know Prague very well this way.


Deborah Atkin, Bryan Haggerty
Deborah Atkin, a daughter of Mrs.
Donald R. Atkin of Old Saybrook, Conn., and the late Mr.
Atkin, was married yesterday to Bryan Desloge Haggerty, a son of the late Julie D. Hunnewell and the late Joseph J. Haggerty Jr.
The Rev.
Kenneth Coleman performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Ann's Church in Old Lyme, Conn.
Mrs.
Haggerty is a supervisor of advertisement placement at Fidelity Investments, the Boston mutual-fund brokers.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father was the general manager at the London office of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company.
Her mother retired as a protocol officer of J. P. Morgan in New York.


Democrats See Only Negative Numbers
With little more than five weeks until Election Day, the Democratic Party seems to be headed for one of its worst midterm drubbings since World War II, which would present President Clinton with enormous legislative problems in the last two years of his term.
It would also alter the shape of the 1996 Presidential campaign.


U.S. Bans Airlines From Nine Countries
The Department of Transportation has announced it is prohibiting airlines from nine countries from flying to the United States because the countries do not meet international safety standards.
The countries affected by the ban are Belize, the Dominican Republic, Gambia, Ghana, Honduras, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Uruguay and Zaire.


Greedy for More? The 80's Sneak Back
SURE, it's only 1994, the middle of a decade that was supposed to be the low-key, caring antithesis to the greedy and arrogant 1980's.
But the 1980's may be making a comeback already.
Preposterous?
Premature?
Too simple?
Perhaps.
But ravenous popular culture, having recently eaten through the 1960's and 70's, is taking its first nibbles of the 1980's.


THE SPIRIT MOVES, AND SO DOES SHE


On Sunday; One Last Toast Before a Life Of Solitude
WHAT?
Never to hear a Letterman top-10 list again?
Never to learn the O.J. verdict?
Or see if the Carville-Matalin nuptials go pfffft but produce another "gosh weren't they a whacky twosome" best seller?
Never to master E-mail or track the lost Harriman fortune?
Never to accept fresh-ground pepper at the latest hyped bistro?
Or savor that better world we all hope for when Forrest Gump recedes mercifully to video replay?
"I won't miss the auto alarms," said David B. Phillipson before checking himself into a Carthusian monastery this weekend for a life of silence and solitude.
"The alarms go off and they don't do anything," he noted, making his withdrawal to a severe life of godly contemplation all the more poignant in citing a few ineffectual details of city existence.


For Horton Foote The Pictures Speak Volumes
THERE'S A SUBLIMELY FUNNY moment in the second act of the Signature Theater Company production of Horton Foote's "Talking Pictures," now Off Off Broadway at the Kampo Cultural Center.
A subsidiary character named Gladys, who ran off with another man five years earlier, has suddenly returned home expecting to pick up her marriage where it left off.
Willis, the abandoned husband, declines the offer as gently as he can.
She's wounded, then outraged.
"You men are all alike," she screams at Willis.
"Philanderers!" Yet before the act is out, she has already latched onto a new marital prospect.
Like so many characters in Mr.
Foote's work, Gladys possesses remarkable resilience and tenacity.
Though she's noisy and not at all dependable, the grace she displays under fire is genuine.
The Signature Theater Company, which has devoted each of the last three seasons to the work of a single American playwright (Romulus Linney, Lee Blessing and Edward Albee), is thus beginning its Horton Foote season in a way to create exceptionally high expectations.
As directed by Carol Goodheart, with a large, very fine cast headed by Hallie Foote, "Talking Pictures" may well turn out to be one of the most entertaining plays of the new theater year, which has scarcely even begun.


Assessing the Intermediate Schools, District by District
For each measurement, schools are grouped into five categories.
A school with a math score of 5, for example, ranks in the top fifth of all city public schools.
All figures are based on the most recent data, for the 1992-93 school year, provided by the Board of Education.
A High School Scoreboard
For each measurement, schools are grouped into five categories.
In a school with a top score of 5, students ranked in the top fifth of all high school students.
Most figures are based on 1992-93 school year, the most recent from the Board of Education.
Graduation rates are based on 1991-92.


Thousands Return to Indian City Hit by Outbreak of Plague
Thousands of people were streaming back to this city today by rail and road to resume lives disrupted by the outbreak of pneumonic plague that began here two weeks ago, despite a continuing rise in the numbers of people being infected both here and elsewhere in India.
The scene at Surat's railway station was in sharp contrast to 10 days ago, when crowds of people stampeded in an effort to force their way onto trains, only for many to be pushed back by armed police.
Today, the crowds were mainly arriving, many of them among the estimated 400,000 people who had fled to Bombay and other cities.


Charm the Ladies, Kill the Drug Lord
Joaquim de Almeida has appeared in some 30 films, including "Clear and Present Danger," in which he had a major role.
But he is not often recognized in New York, where he has an apartment in TriBeCa.
For the romantic comedy "Only You," which opens on Friday, he was the last major actor cast.
As early as 1992, eight weeks before Marisa Tomei received the Oscar for best supporting actress for "My Cousin Vinny," the director, Norman Jewison, offered her the starring role in the film.
"When she won the award," he says, "that's what tipped the scales at the studio," Tri-Star, which had been unsure she could carry a movie.


Oregon Resort
To the Editor: "Wine and Caviar in the Woods" by Timothy Egan (Aug. 7) was well-written and described the charm and ambiance found in this unusual resort -- Salishan Lodge.


Around Times Sq.: Not Just Theater
BECCO ** (212) 397-7597; 355 West 46th Street; $$; all major credit cards
A spinoff of the opulent Felidia on East 58th Street, this family-style dining establishment has a rustic northern Italian setting, with a terra cotta floor, long pewter-topped bar and colorful wall stencils.
One can go with the daily menu ($16 for lunch, $19 for dinner) consisting of an antipasto platter and three pastas, or order a la carte.
The antipasto platter may include grilled vegetables, a gutsy white bean salad, a garlicky chickpea puree, black beans with yellow peppers, sweet little shrimp and more.
Entrees on the current menu include veal osso buco with barley risotto; roast rack of lamb with couscous and wilted spinach, and grilled swordfish served with a sauce of balsamic vinegar and capers. (Review: 1/8/93) CHEZ JOSEPHINE ** (212) 594-1925; 414 West 42d Street; $$; all major credit cards
This exuberant nightspot, owned by the flamboyant Jean-Claude Baker and dedicated to Josephine Baker, the sultry chanteuse of the 30's, offers solid bistro fare and good music in a delightful setting.
The menu is French-American with starters like fried oysters on slivers of fennel with lime, and a warm napoleon of shiitake and asparagus.
For main courses there are lamb chops with a medley of vegetables and whipped olive-flavored potatoes; roast duckling with a sauce of tart wild cherries and pink peppercorns, and Black Angus steak with a lusty peppercorn sauce. (Review: 6/22/90; revisited: 6/23/94) GRAPPINO


Touch of Prague In New World
SINCE the fall of the Berlin Wall, hordes have been heading off to points east.
And one of the high points is Prague; last year, it counted over 70 million tourists.
Same stuff, a little closer: call it Prague-on-the-Hudson, a two-month celebration of the capital of the Czech Republic organized under the patronage of President Vaclav Havel and Czech cultural institutions, governmental agencies and independent curators.


Players Set for Extended Delay of Game
Bob Goodenow didn't meet with Gary Bettman yesterday, but he met with plenty of other people.
The executive director of the National Hockey League Players Association spent the afternoon in Toronto talking to and listening to 100 players who gathered at a downtown hotel for what turned into a six-hour meeting.
And when it was over, the union leader and his rank and file said they were ready for a battle of undetermined duration.
Goodenow said he expected to be in contact today with Bettman, the commissioner of the N.H.L., and that the two sides would set up a time and place to resume formal negotiations, which broke off last Tuesday.
Because the players and the owners couldn't come to an agreement on a new collective bargaining agreement, Bettman ordered a two-week postponement of the regular season, which was to have begun last night in rinks across Canada and the United States.


Indian Point and the Bottom Line
THE Indian Point 3 nuclear plant in Buchanan is either a dinosaur, unable to compete economically against younger technologies in a changing environment, or it is a valuable asset that is getting much-needed changes in management and worker training so it can resume saving money for its customers.
The New York Power Authority, the country's largest state-owned utility, which owns the plant and takes the second view, squared off last week against critics of the plant -- proponents of the dinosaur theory -- in a legislative hearing here that is likely to be only the first of a series of debates that will take a 30-year dispute about nuclear power in Westchester into a new phase: economics.


Ms. Stancliffe and Mr. Kissinger
Annette Christine Stancliffe, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Curtis J. Stancliffe of Rensselaer, N.Y., is to be married today to Thomas Van Drooge Kissinger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter B. Kissinger of Huntington Bay, L.I.
The Rev.
Jim Wentz, a Unitarian minister, is to perform the ceremony at the Head of the Bay Club in Huntington Bay.
The bride, 32, is a director of marketing for Intercontinental Hotels in Stanford, Conn.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is the vice president of sales and marketing at the Pallette Stone Corporation, road builders in Saratoga, N.Y.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Time to Tuck In Surprises for Spring
PETUNIAS are looking lanky and losing their oomph.
Marigolds are waning.
Tree leaves are turning color; some have even started to litter the lawn.
Peony foliage is yellowing.
Everything suggests that the gardening season is over.
Wrong.
Fall gardening has just begun.
Even as things appear to come to a halt above ground, important things are happening below.
The earth is still quite warm and with enough moisture roots are growing.
Gardeners are wise to take advantage of this and plant, plant, plant all they can.


P. W. Dharamsey, Joshua L. Lee
Pamela Wilson Dharamsey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hoosain Dharamsey of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to Joshua Lawrence Lee, a son of Dr.
Stephanie LaFarge of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., and Ralph Lee of New York.
Claire Eder, a friend of the bride and a civil marriage celebrant, officiated on Lieutenant Island, in South Wellfleet, Mass.
The bride is an artist in residence at the Touchstone Center for Children, an arts-education organization in New York.
She graduated from Washington University.
Her father is the president of Hawkeye Courier Systems, an air-freight company in Larchmont.
Her mother, Carol Dharamsey, is the coordinator of the mental health service at Mount Vernon (N.Y.) Hospital.


Cellstar Corp.(CLST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Reducing Property Taxes
PROPERTY-TAX relief is traditionally won when an assessment appears out of line with comparable properties -- not simply because taxes are high.
But homeowners need to be alert to special conditions that can also lower taxes.
These include abatements for personal circumstances and environmental factors that may have altered the appeal of the property.
First, personal circumstances.
Those over 65 should check to see if there is a program in their community for them.
Taxes can often be lowered, suspended or frozen, although the specifics vary by municipality.


Laura Auerbach, Dominic LaPierre
Laura J. Auerbach, the daughter of Drs.
Arleen and Robert Auerbach of New York, was married yesterday evening at her parent's country house in Redding, Conn., to Dominic L. C. LaPierre, a son of Dr.
Paula J. LaPierre of Montreal and Dr.
Laurier L. LaPierre of Ottawa.
Rabbi Albert Sturmer performed the ceremony, and the Rev.
Paul LaPierre, a Roman Catholic priest who is also an uncle of the bridegroom, took part in it.
The bride, 29, graduated from Cornell University.
She and her husband, 31, received master's degrees in architecture from Yale University and are architectual designers in New York.
She works at the firm of Weintraub &amp; Di Domenico.
The bridegroom, a graduate of Middlebury College, works at Buttrick White &amp; Burtis.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
VOICES OF THE HOMELESS
Two artist-members of the Silvermine Guild Arts Center in New Canaan have collaborated on an unusual exhibition called "Bedtime Stories," opening at the guild galleries, 1037 Silvermine Road, on Saturday and continuing through Nov. 6.


U.S. Forces to Widen Role In Curbing Haiti Violence
Facing increased violence in Haiti, the Clinton Administration has decided to expand the American military's role in curbing paramilitary supporters of the junta, though stopping short of using the troops to disarm them, Administration officials said today.
Hoping to reduce the chance of any American casualties, the Administration is not yet willing to abandon the arrangement worked out by former President Jimmy Carter under which United States troops entered Haiti peacefully and are to work with the military Government and Haitian police in maintaining order.


Housing Court Deadbeats Manipulate the System
To the Editor:
The Sept. 25 Soapbox essay by Catherine T. Brody -- "In Housing Court: Not a Clue" -- was almost entirely devoted to the tenants' side.
There are tenants who are true victims of bad fortune, but many are professional deadbeats who dwell rent-free in other people's property for as long as they can and then seek delays by manipulating the court system and playing on the sympathies of the judges.


Drusilla M. Saal, Albert S. Belman
Drusilla Mary Saal, a marketing associate at Harry N. Abrams Publishers in New York, was married last evening to Albert Samuel Belman, an information technology associate at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, the investment bank in New York.
Rabbi Daniel Alder performed the ceremony at the Brotherhood Synagogue in New York.
The bride, 27, graduated from Wellesley College.
Her parents, Hubert Saal and Rollene W. Saal, both of New York, are writers.


SHANNON FAULKNER, ONE OF THE BOYS
As I read the article, I wondered why any woman would want to spend her college years at such an institution?
Just to prove a point?
Come on.
REBECCA ROSETO Stockholm, N.J.


Makarov and Larionov Agree to Terms
The San Jose Sharks agreed in principal to contract extensions with right wing SERGEI MAKAROV and center IGOR LARIONOV on Friday and signed the rookie forward, JEFF FRIESEN.
Terms of the contracts were not released.
Larionov and Makarov, who teamed with VLADIMIR KRUTOV on the former Soviet national team's famed KLM line in the 1980's, agreed to extensions that will pay them a reported $1 million each a season.


A Belated College Inauguration
THERE is a simple reason why Bill Lacy waited 16 months to be inaugurated as president of Purchase College.
"I couldn't find the time to do it before," said Mr.
Lacy, who will be sworn in Saturday morning in the Performing Arts Center here.
"I was so engaged doing all the things I wanted to do that I didn't have time to do it properly."
The inaugural ceremony, an invitation-only event, is the formal centerpiece of a festive weekend planned to highlight the college's many facets.


A $25 Prix Fixe in Port Washington
A FEW weeks ago a first-time visitor to Chez Noelle, who was eating the fixed-price meal, said, "This is probably the best food I've ever eaten in an Island restaurant."
Well, maybe yes and maybe no, but it certainly is in the running and it can be said that Chez Noelle, an unpretentious understated French spot in Port Washington, is almost surely serving Long Island's most outstanding $25 meal.


New York Vista Hotel Reopens Next Month
The New York Vista Hotel is scheduled to reopen Nov. 1, more than a year and half after the World Trade Center explosion.
The Vista initially opened in 1981 and was being extensively renovated when it was damaged in February 1993 by a bomb placed in a parking garage beneath the hotel.
A major restoration has encompassed all public spaces of the hotel, the two restaurants, fitness center and the 820 guest rooms.
The main entrance on West Street has been redesigned with a three-story glass canopy.
Meeting areas, conference rooms and banquet space have been increased and refurbished.


Ms. Armstrong, Mr. McCoy
Alexandra Armstrong, the chairwoman of Armstrong, Welch &amp; MacIntyre, an investment advisory firm in Washington, was married there on Friday to Jerry J. McCoy, a tax lawyer in Washington.
Judge Joyce H. Green of the Federal District Court in Washington performed the ceremony in her chambers.
Ms.
Armstrong, who is keeping her name, graduated from Newton College of the Sacred Heart.
She is a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Armstrong.


Budget History of the Motel Wars
To the Editor:
Your article on the continuing segmentation of the motel industry ("A Market-by-Market Battle to Tuck the Nation In," Sept. 4) was right on the mark.
I'd like to point out, however, that my partner, Patrick Guarini, and I built the first Luxury Budget Inn in Scranton, Pa., in 1974.
We invested our money in our rooms and a small lobby instead of public areas, pools and the like, which were used by only a small percentage of our guests.
The bulk of our guests were business travelers on their own accounts, families and other travelers looking for clean, comfortable and convenient rooms with no frills.
We subsequently developed motels in the Northeast and in Florida, most of which are now known as Wellesley Inns, part of the Prime Hospitality chain.
DAVID M. EPSTEIN  Chinchilla, Pa., Sept. 8  The writer is a partner in the Wellesley Group.


Powlus's Passing Prowess Propels Notre Dame to Victory
Notre Dame 34, Stanford 15
Ron Powlus threw three touchdown passes and set up another one with a 44-yard run as Notre Dame beat Stanford, 34-15, yesterday at South Bend, Ind.


Sept.25-Oct.1: A Faulty Door; More Than 900 Lives Lost As Ferry Capsizes in Stormy Seas
In one of the worst maritime disasters of modern times, more than 900 people were feared dead after the ferry Estonia capsized off the Finnish coast last week.
Only 141 people are believed to have survived.
Many of the victims were asleep in their cabins and had no chance to escape because the ferry sank in minutes.
On Friday, Swedish authorities said they believed the bow door was at fault, enabling water to flood the decks carrying trucks and cars and destabilizing the vessel in high seas.
However, they stopped short of identifying the door as the precise cause of the sinking.


Enchanted Moments Preserved for the Ages
FOR MORE THAN THREE DECADES, MARTHA SWOPE'S name has been synonymous with memorable images of the performing arts -- particularly the glamorous worlds of theater and dance.
Now she has reached a watershed.
Although she is not retiring, she has closed her studio on West 43d Street in Manhattan and signed over her collection of nearly a million photographs to the Time Inc.
Picture Collection to be catalogued and preserved.
Eventually, it will be available in digital form.
Ms.
Swope will continue to work on projects that strike her fancy.


Expressive Images and Signs of the Times
IT is "Grass Roots" time for the Gallery at Hastings-on-Hudson and the six Westchester artists chosen by its anonymous jury.
The show has three curators -- Jane English, Barbara Campo and Audrey Wilner.
The artist Maureen Mullarkey writes on art and culture for various publications so it is no surprise to find that she errs toward the topical, making the homosexual demimonde her principal subject.
Sizable canvases in confectionary colors applied with a slanting brush stroke depict men with mournful faces reminiscent of those in Arshile Gorky's portrait of his parents.


Russia Fights A Rising Tide Of Infection
Frightened by the staggering increase in infectious diseases across Russia, the nation's chief sanitary officer is warning that without emergency action epidemics here could soon spread out of control.
Rates of cholera, dysentery, diphtheria, tuberculosis and many sexually transmitted diseases have exploded in the past year.
The rise is due largely to sharp reductions in funds for public health, a flood of often sick refugees from former Soviet republics, poor hygiene, and severe shortages of antibiotics.
"We are doing everything we can to protect the health of this country," said Yevgeny N. Belyayev, head of Russia's State Committee for Sanitary-Epidemiological Surveillance.
"But the facts are not encouraging and time is short."


A HOPLOPHOBE AMONG THE GUNNIES
Your portrait of N.R.A. members was, er, masterful but left me confused on one point.
How is it that we N.R.A. members, who are willing to trust ordinary citizens with weapons, are "paranoid," while Weiss, who isn't, isn't?
JOHN K. LUNDE Orono, Me.


As Haytaian Pushes a Flat-Rate Tax, Lautenberg Runs Like an Incumbent
Senator Frank R. Lautenberg has a well-earned reputation as a fierce campaigner.
In his two previous campaigns, he ran aggressive, often personal races against his Republican opponents.
But this year the Democratic incumbent appears content thus far to sit on an early lead that public opinion surveys report and leave it up to his lesser-known opponent to make a fight of it.


Corrections
An article on page 8 of the Travel section today describes the Walt Disney Company's plans for an American history theme park in northern Virginia.
After the section was printed, the company announced that it had dropped plans to build the park at that site.


Business Diary: September 25-30
COMPANIES At the Epic Battle of Virginia, Historians Rout Disney  In this sprawling circus tent that is America, there's certainly room for many things -- a bit of history here, a bit of slicked-up entertainment there.
But what bothered some people about Disney's grand idea for a theme park in northern Virginia was that with authentic history so close by -- Civil War battle sites galore -- the glitz could drown out the real stuff.
Most Virginians supported the park -- the Governor, after all, had visions of 19,000 jobs and $47 million in annual revenues for the state.
But opponents -- including some vocal historians and environmentalists -- made enough noise to get their way, and last week Disney dropped plans to build Disney's America at its chosen site.
It vowed to seek another site in Virginia, but given all the regulatory hoops it must jump through, it'll be years after 1998 -- the original target -- before it opens.


'World Within World'
To the Editor:
It seems to me that Sir Stephen Spender has gone well past the stage of protesting too much.
No one would condone plagiarism, and while David Leavitt certainly did not repeat the appropriation of Borges's Pierre Menard, he may have gone too far in replicating details, and Spender was right to question the alleged plagiarism.


Susan Gallagher, Michael Williams
Susan Kennedy Gallagher, a vice president of the Allied Capital Corporation in Washington, was married yesterday in Newport, R.I., to Michael Cunningham Williams, a partner in Hogan &amp; Hartson, a Washington law firm.
The Rev.
Robert J. Rokusek, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony in the chapel at St.
George's School.
Mrs.
Williams graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. degree from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard C. Gallagher of Concord, Mass.
Dr.
Gallagher is the chairman of the obstetrics and gynecology department at Emerson Hospital in Concord.


Corrections
A map with an article last Sunday about plans to open a vendors' mall in Sara Roosevelt Park in lower Manhattan gave incorrect locations for that market and some others proposed for Manhattan and Brooklyn.
A corrected version appears on page 8.


Stanford Unveils A Five-Star Lineup
Think back to age 12.
Maybe your first crush, or the last time you got into the movies for half price.
It is an age when the biggest decision in a given month may be, simply, cherry or grape.
That is provided you don't qualify as a child sports phenom, in which case the Stanford University athletic department may know where you live and what cartoon you believe still has social relevance.


7 Get Payoff Charges Dropped
Kickback and extortion charges against seven of the 23 New York City plumbing inspectors indicted in Manhattan last year were dismissed in State Supreme Court in Manhattan last week on the grounds that the payoffs occurred in other boroughs, outside of the jurisdiction of the Manhattan District Attorney.
In dismissing the charges on Thursday, Justice Bernard J. Fried also revealed secret grand jury testimony in which building contractors explained how they were forced to make payoffs or risk having their construction sites shut down.


Sports of The Times; 1 Fighter From 5 Equals Sweetpea Whitaker
TEN years ago they were boxing's gang of five, but only one has endured as the best and the brightest.
In a masterpiece of movement, Pernell Whitaker retained his reputation as "pound for pound, the best" as well as his World Boxing Council welterweight title with a unanimous 12-round decision over Buddy McGirt after surviving a flash knockdown in the second round.


Dingle's Enduring Delights
WE were driving along the narrow road that hugs the southern coast of the Dingle Peninsula when we found ourselves slowed to a crawl by a donkey that was ambling in front of us, pulling a rough cart.
The farmer who walked beside it nodded amiably to us but seemed disinclined to make the animal move any faster.
Behind us, a snake of cars was forming.
My husband, Paul, shrugged: "Dingle traffic jam."
He and I lived in the town of Dingle, in southwestern Ireland's County Kerry, for eight months in the mid-1980's, and we knew that on roads all over the peninsula confrontations between the four-legged and the four-wheeled were rarely settled to the advantage of the latter.
Some of our most nostalgic memories of living there, in fact, were of being awakened early by the daily clattering of horses, pulling their loads of milk and cream to the creamery, or of flocks of sheep being driven along the main street while cars and their irritated drivers sat marooned amid those bobbing woolly bodies.


Haiti Action Shows Unwise Use of U.S. Power
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis asserts in "Question of Power" (column, Sept. 23) that many Americans "have essentially turned isolationist, opposing any use of U.S. force abroad." Mr.
Lewis appears to be confused about the difference between using power and using force.


Unbeaten Cornell Keeps It on the Ground to Beat Mistake-Prone Lehigh
Cornell 21, Lehigh 17
Cornell tailback Chad Levitt rushed for 143 yards and 3 touchdowns to lead the Big Red to a 21-17 victory over the defending Patriot League champion, Lehigh, yesterday in Ithaca, N.Y.


Mistakes And Miami Mean Loss For Rutgers
Because Miami is an unforgiving team, and because it was a three-touchdown favorite against Rutgers, the many mistakes that the Scarlet Knights made this afternoon took away any chance they might have had of pulling an upset.
The Hurricanes outgained Rutgers by 409 yards to 310, led by 14-3 at halftime and rolled to a 24-3 victory.
Rutgers had two wounding turnovers and 13 penalties totaling 116 yards.
Miami had 2 turnovers and 7 penalties for 55 yards.
But the Hurricanes could afford them.


Laurie Davidson, Larry Medvinsky
Laurie Sue Davidson, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Kenneth H. Davidson of Pittsford, N.Y., was married last evening to Larry Paul Medvinsky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Medvinsky of North Miami Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Marc Gruber officiated at Temple B'rith Kodesh in Rochester.


An Opening Night at the Opera
The Met opens its 1994-95 season with performances and parties, Sept. 26.


Janet B. Korins, Joseph Kaufman
Janet Beth Korins, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy M. Korins of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday evening to Joseph Harris Kaufman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Mark F. Kaufman of Indian Wells, Calif.
Rabbi Melvin Sirner performed the ceremony at Beth El Synagogue in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Ms.
Korins, who is keeping her name, is an associate at the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore.
She received bachelor's and law degrees from Harvard University.
Her father is a partner in Esanu Katsky Korins &amp; Siger, a law firm in New York.


Marriott International(MAR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 9


When the Music Stopped and the Pain Began
"I LIKE being a cog on the wheel," said Toni Lipton, "which is perfect for the second bassoon. I like the low parts, the resonant tones. I don't have to have solos. I like to be the one who blends.
"To be surrounded by wonderful sounds, to hear incredible brass, is just so exciting. It's like being inside your stereo. And then to be part of it. There's a physical sensation to playing, it's more athletic than a mind thing. If you've got a good reed and you have a good night, it's like running a great race. So sure, I was terrified that it might be over."


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
MORNINGSIDE HEIGHTS Bless 'Em All, Big and Small: Animals March to the Altar
Animals are not even allowed in many places in New York City.
But, today, St.
John the Divine will be welcoming them.


Jean M. Simko, William Mainente
Jean Marie Simko, the daughter of Michael Simko of Linden, N.J., and the late Geraldine Simko, was married yesterday to William Francis Mainente, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor Mainente of Garden City, L.I.
Msgr.
George Billy officiated at St.
George Church in Linden.
The bride is the director of management development in New York at Sterling Winthrop, a pharmaceuticals company.
She graduated from Rider College and received an M.B.A. from Pace University.
Her father retired as a sales representative at the Middlesex Tobacco Company in Perth Amboy, N.J.


Getting Their Due, Finally
ONE ROUTE TO stardom in today's jazz world is to work in semiobscurity for decades, then to get "discovered" at an age when most people file for Social Security.
This is a trend born of necessity: most of the field's top money-making legends have died, forcing record labels to look for long-neglected artists like Abbey Lincoln, Joe Henderson and Jimmy Scott to take over.
With new albums, Shirley Horn and Carole Sloane, two of the wisest voices in jazz, stake out an important place in that company.
Ms.
Horn knows how it feels to be a musician's delight and a commercial unknown.
When Verve Records signed her in 1988, the singer and pianist had spent 30 years as a cult figure in Washington.
Then the label went to work on an artist whose disarmingly slow tempos and moody introspection demand close listening.
Three of her albums in a row hit No. 1 on Billboard's jazz chart.


At Tiananmen, China Celebrates 45 Years of Communism


Time to Tuck In Surprises for Spring
PETUNIAS are looking lanky and losing their oomph.
Marigolds are waning.
Tree leaves are turning color; some have even started to litter the lawn.
Peony foliage is yellowing.
Everything suggests that the gardening season is over.
Wrong.
Fall gardening has just begun.
Even as things appear to come to a halt above ground, important things are happening below.
The earth is still quite warm and with enough moisture roots are growing.
Gardeners are wise to take advantage of this and plant, plant, plant all they can.


Special Today: Home Design/Magazine Part 2
Public spaces are becoming more homelike; residences are incorporating elements from public life.


Killing Him Wasn't Enough
WHAT'S WRONG WITH AMERICA By Scott Bradfield. 196 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $18.95.


Finally, Bruce Willis Gets Invited to the Ball
FIRST HE HAS TO RUN THE gantlet of photographers along the red carpet outside Lincoln Center.
Then it is high intensity time in the greenroom of Avery Fisher Hall as Bruce Willis threads his way through a crush of stars and satellites -- Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Jeffrey Katzenberg and assorted hangers-on -- who are gathered for a screening of "Pulp Fiction."
A premiere gala on opening night of the New York Film Festival isn't the usual milieu for Mr.
Willis, a party animal who is more often found posing for paparazzi at Planet Hollywood.
Mr.
Willis, in black tie, beams with pleasure and his wife, Demi Moore, clings to his arm.


Modern Pied Piper Needed To Stem a Scrambling Tide
To their horror and embarrassment, residents of portions of Gravesend are fighting an escalating battle against rats.
While the rats have yet to invade homes in the area, they have been spotted constantly -- and in droves -- in gardens, at bus stops and on the streets.


Camp Can Do
Before the Clinton era, my idea of a good New Year's Eve involved silver high heels, Tattinger, Gershwin and a designated driver.
Now I realize that was frivolous.
In the Dockers meritocracy, a good New Year's Eve involves panel discussions on technology, self-improvement and money management.


Father and Son Reunion Is Held on Opposite Sides of Field
Maybe it was a much simpler time in football when Don Shula started coaching in 1963.
Maybe that is why Shula was able to get off to such a fast start and has amassed more victories than any coach in the history of the National Football League.
It's not so easy in the 90's.
Just ask Shula's son, David, the coach of the Bengals, who is 8-28 in little more than two seasons and is in danger of losing his job if he doesn't quickly turn things around in Cincinnati.


Mind Products
To the Editor:
As a musician who maintains a memorized repertory of tonal, atonal and serial music in his head, I offer the following rough analogies to characterize my experiences of tonal and atonal music vis-a-vis Richard Taruskin's article "Does Nature Call the Tune?"  [ Sept. 18 ] .


Creating a Somewhat Peaceable Kingdom in a Dog-Eat-Squirrel World
A new one for the annals of neighborhood diplomacy: Among the dog people, the squirrel people and the people people who have been fighting over Madison Square Park for years, a wary truce has been crafted.
After many meetings -- among community board members, city parks officials, the 23d Street Association, Councilman Thomas Duane and contentious neighbors -- a fenced dog run was installed last month.
Last week, park workers fenced the center oval and began reseeding the tattered lawn.


The Dawn of SimNews
All was not lost on that dark summer day when baseball stopped, because overnight the strike gave birth to a novel journalism.
At a dozen imaginative newspapers across America, the editors sent computers onto the field and let them pretend to play a full slate of major-league games each day.
They overcame dull reality with a new, fantastic kind of news: fiction.
Well, Virginia, almost new.


Mr. Schrager and the Ghosts of Billy Rose


'Small Town' Gets Its Own Paper
Growing up in Oklahoma, Carl Glassman always dreamed of creating a small-town newspaper.
"Then last March, it suddenly dawned on me that I'm living in a little town," he said, "and my dream became an obsession."
His small town is TriBeCa, a chunk of lower Manhattan that in 1970 had a resident population of 370.
Now a fashionable, family-oriented enclave of about 9,000, the Triangle Below Canal has its own schools, a little league, a gazebo for summer concerts, bookstores, dry cleaners, florists and real-estate offices.


Sheri Bompey, T. C. W. Devereux
Sheri Ann Bompey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart H. Bompey of Larchmont, N.Y., was married last evening at the University Club in New York to Townsend Christopher Wagner Devereux, the son of Lelia W. Devereux of Virginia Beach, Va., and the late Duncan R. Devereux.
Rabbi Charles Lippman performed the ceremony, in which the Rev.
James Dorsen, a Roman Catholic priest, took part.
Mrs.
Devereux, 28, is a senior associate in the public affairs department of the Oppenheimer Management Corporation, the mutual fund company, in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University and received a master's degree in public and private management from Yale University.
Her father is a senior partner of Orrick Herrington &amp; Sutcliffe, a law firm in New York.


Some Call Street Feasts Indigestible
Spurred by a growing number of problems and public complaints concerning the San Gennaro Festival, which closed last weekend, city officials and West Village leaders are looking into changing the rules governing street fairs.
The decision came after a spot check of vendors at the 11-day-long San Gennaro fair by members of the Mayor's Community Assistance Unit.
Not one of the vendors they questioned had a license, and many were selling counterfeit Ray Ban sunglasses and pirated audiotapes.


It's Never-Ending
To the Sports Editor:
In this crazy world of sports as big business, Sterling Sharpe's new Packer contract requiring him to be the highest-paid receiver in the National Football League raises an interesting question.


The Gumshoes and Their Day Jobs
Nick and Nora Charles were rolling in dough, Harriet Vane married into the aristocracy and a small fixed income was adequate to support Miss Marple's modest life in St.
Mary Mead.
In one way or another, the amateur sleuths of yesteryear could well afford to play detective for the sheer fun of the mental exercise.
Today's amateur detectives have to hustle for a buck -- most commonly as teachers, journalists and lawyers, with fanciful excursions into the glamour professions of film and television.
Try matching up the following amateur detectives with the day jobs that pay the rent and the authors who invented them.
All are series sleuths and each is currently employed.


The Nation; New York Democrats Mourn Health Care Reform. (Whew!)
IF many in Congress breathed sighs of relief last week at the collapse of health care reform, members of the New York delegation exhaled more deeply than most.
For them, it meant being spared an especially painful dilemma.
Here is the paradox: New York is home to some of the poorest, sickest people in the country, and it is a liberal redoubt where President Clinton remains more popular than he is almost anywhere else.
But his plan for reshaping the nation's health care system, and virtually every alternative proposal, would have left New York a net loser, at least in the short term.


Terminal Ignorance?
To the Editor:
As the executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, I felt like Yossarian when I read Barbara Gelb's interview with Joseph Heller ("Catch-22 Plus: A Conversation With Joseph Heller," Aug. 28).


The Master of Dramatic Truth
Jule Styne WILL BE remembered in New York show business circles for much more than being the composer of "Gypsy," "Funny Girl" and other Broadway shows.
Everyone who worked with Styne, who died on Sept. 20, has pet stories about the composer's quotable remarks, which often made more metaphoric than literal sense.
Remembering him in her cabaret show the night after his death, the singer Barbara Cook recalled receiving backstage praise from Styne following a 1985 concert performance of "Follies" at Avery Fisher Hall.
"You walked out there and sang eight bars before you opened your mouth," he snapped.


Word for Word/The Freedonia Gazette; Hello, We Must Be Going To Excerpt the Marx Brothers
THE late Groucho Marx, who was born 104 years ago today, wasn't entirely thrilled about birthdays.
"This can't be much of a party if I'm the guest of honor," he said on turning 85 in 1975, two years before his death.
"I may leave early."
His fans have no such ambivalence toward him and his similarly wacko, libidinous siblings.
Among the most ardent Marxists is Paul G. Wesolowski, whose day job is controller for a Pennsylvania equipment-leasing company but whose passion and Marxian authority are reflected in The Freedonia Gazette, named after the Groucho dictatorship of the 1933 movie "Duck Soup." For the past 16 years he has published the journal quite irregularly (about two times a year, although it has lapsed since 1991) for a dedicated audience of several hundred that does not include you-know-who as a member.
Take it away, Freedonia Gazette.
TOM KUNTZ


Giuliani 'Quiz Show' Seeks City Answers
With his endorsement held out as the elusive prize, Rudolph W. Giuliani, New York City's Republican Mayor, has done his utmost in recent weeks to turn the governor's race into a local referendum on whether Mario M. Cuomo or George E. Pataki will do more for New York City.
Each day, Mr.
Giuliani poses a new question as if he were running his own local edition of "Quiz Show." Where do the candidates stand on a state takeover of local Medicaid costs?
Who agrees that New York City "does not receive its fair share from Albany" for building new schools?
Will State Senator Pataki, the Republican candidate, supplement his tax cut plan with the elimination of state mandates that tell the city how it must take care of its homeless and welfare recipients?


Son Envisions a Multimedia Martin Luther King
Dexter King, the youngest son of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., has proposed creating a high-tech, multimedia museum here to make his father's message and legacy, as well as the history of the civil rights era, more accessible to young people.
Associates say the 33-year-old Mr.
King, head of the family group that controls the use of Dr.
King's name and likeness, envisions using an array of devices like interactive computers and holograms.
The aim is to create a time-machine effect, transporting visitors back to the days of Freedom Summer in Mississippi, the Selma-to-Montgomery voting rights march in Alabama and the clashes with Eugene (Bull) Connor's police in Birmingham, Ala.


A YOUNGER COURT FACES OLD SPLITS AS ITS TERM OPENS
The Supreme Court, its members collectively younger and newer than Justices have been for many years, opens its new term on Monday confronted by the legacy of its recent past.
Issues on which the Court has yet to achieve closure or even much coherence are prominent on the docket, including significant challenges to Federal affirmative action programs and to long-running Federal court supervision of school districts that were once segregated.


Cleaning Up in the 30th Precinct


How Sporting a Business?; Repeal That Antitrust Exemption
In 1922, the Supreme Court made a big mistake.
It ruled that professional baseball was an "exhibition," not a business, and as such was exempt from the antitrust laws.
This 72-year-old mistake has ruined the 1994 season and robbed the fans of a World Series for the first time in 90 years.
We had better stop it before it kills again -- before we lose the 1995 season too.


Searching for Pro-Aristide Guns, U.S. Raid Finds Dancers Instead
The first major arms raid by American troops was searching not for weapons hidden by attaches, the armed thugs propping up Haiti's military government, but for guns supposedly held by supporters of the man the Americans had come to put back in office, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
There were no arms.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
AK Steel Holding Co., Middletown, Ohio, $200 million of stock appreciation income-linked securities.
CS First Boston.


New Life for an Old Bridge


Hillary Clinton Says Administration Was Misunderstood on Health Care
Hillary Rodham Clinton says she is willing to take some of the blame for the death of national health insurance legislation this year, for failing to anticipate the intensity and effectiveness of the opposition and for not realizing that the complexity of the Administration's original plan could work against it.
But the most frustrating failure she acknowledges is not getting the country to understand that the plan that the Clintons offered a year ago was an opening offer, "constructed to be deconstructed." Instead of being a basis for negotiations, she said, "it was described as an ultimatum by our opponents and therefore used to undermine the process of reaching agreement."


Environmental Downs and Ups; A Sad Death for Mining Law Reform
Efforts to rewrite a destructive relic known as the 1872 Mining Act came to naught on Thursday.
This was a victory for the mining industry and a disappointment for Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt.
But more than anything else it reaffirmed that the U.S.
Senate, at least on environmental matters, is becoming increasingly deaf to public sentiment and hostile to common sense.
Mining-law reform seemed a cinch.
Since 1872, mining companies have been given almost unlimited rights to extract gold, copper and other minerals from Federal land without paying a royalty the way oil, gas and coal producers do.
They have been allowed to take title to that land for as little as $2.50 an acre.
And they have not been required to restore violated acreage to its original condition.


Pope Opens Synod On Religious Life
Pope John Paul II opened a synod today that will address what some Catholics believe to be an increasingly pressing issue: the disparity between the number of women leading a religious life within the Roman Catholic Church and their lack of influence over its decisions.
That very dichotomy was illustrated by the make-up of the synod, which is to run to Oct. 29 -- 348 men and 59 women.


Martha Graham on Film
"The Martha Graham Centennial Celebration: Her Television Legacy," a two-month festival of films, documentaries and television programs about the choreographer, opened on Friday at the Museum of Television and Radio, 25 West 52d Street, Manhattan.
The opening program in the seven-part series includes the television tape of the 1979 Kennedy Center Honors salute to Graham and a 1994 film biography, "Martha Graham: The Dancer Revealed." Screenings are daily at 3:30 P.M.
Admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly; $3 for children under 13.
Information: (212) 621-6800.


A.L.'s New President Is in Charge of Nothing
Gene Budig may be in the most peculiar position in major league baseball.
As the president of the American League of Professional Baseball Clubs, formally speaking, he has come into the major leagues and immediately had the most important element in his title snatched away.
There's simply no baseball there for Gene Budig.
Not since Aug. 12, when the players in the American and National Leagues went on strike.
For Budig, it was like being appointed as Gary Cooper's deputy at one minute past high noon, like being hired as Nero's chief violin maker after the smoke was, indeed, followed by fire.


Mandela Returns to New York


Eagles Embarrass 49ers' Defense
Eagles 40, 49ers 8
Randall Cunningham and a newcomer, Charlie Garner, rode roughshod over San Francisco's supposedly stellar defensive cast in a 40-8 beating yesterday that got so bad the 49ers basically threw in the towel.


Civilization Discovers A Wild Child of the Sea
Chalk up another coup for the less-is-more brigades.
While NBC's overproduced "Seaquest DSV" lumbers along with top-heavy sets and lightweight scripts, a relatively modest series called "Ocean Girl" covers similar territory and ideas far more imaginatively.
The series was made in Australia, off the Great Barrier Reef, and begins a 13-week run on the Disney Channel tonight.
The girl of the title is Neri (Marzena Godecki), who lives on a tree branch on a deserted island.
Not only can Neri swim to extraordinary depths at extraordinary speed, but she can also communicate telepathically with a 40-ton humpback whale she calls Charley.
Neri's spiritual family obviously includes Tarzan, who could chat up elephants, Francois Truffaut's wild child and, in her aquatic mode, Esther Williams.


Heroes and Antiquity Endowed by Mozart With Flamboyance
Few operas work better than Mozart's "Idomeneo," yet we scarcely know what to do with it.
Situated near the beginning of the Mozart operatic canon (he was 24 when he wrote it), "Idomeneo" is grand, mythic, potentially tragic and, above all, serious: deeply serious.
It catches us by surprise.
Our everyday Mozart can be solemn and mystical ("The Magic Flute") but tempered by whimsy and the absurd.
"The Marriage of Figaro" is roiling social politics, but it is also charm and sexual fallibility.
"Cosi Fan Tutte" puts on a funny face, but deep sadness lurks behind it.
Ambiguity, Mozart's trademark, exists nowhere in "Idomeneo." Humor, amid the Cretans, Greeks and Trojans about which he was asked to write, finds no place.


A Small Rebound for Investors in a Still Disappointing Year
MUTUAL funds bounced back in the third quarter, but not enough in most cases to make up for the losses suffered earlier this year.
To be sure, 1994 has been profitable for investors lucky enough -- or smart enough -- to have most of their assets overseas or in funds that specialize in narrow market sectors like technology or gold.
But most investors would have been better off in money markets; a 2.5 percent return has rarely looked so good.


Health care in New York City's Neighborhoods
One of every four hospitalizations in New York City -- and more than half in some of the city's poorer neighborhoods -- could be avoided with timely outpatient care, according to a report released last month by the United Hospital Fund.
The 1994 New York City Community Health Atlas shows the wide variations in the availability of primary health care and its effects in different parts of the city.
While just 15 percent of the hospitalizations on the Upper West Side in 1992 were considered preventable, 40 percent of those in nearby Harlem and Morningside Heights were for conditions that could have been treated earlier.
Graphs: "Health care in New York City's Neighborhoods" shows preventable hospitalizations, office based physicians and medicaid hospitalization for New York City. (Source: United Hospital Fund)


Pope's Canceled Trip a Wild Card for Knopf
When Pope John Paul II announced that he was canceling his fall trip to the United States because of poor health, he did more than just disappoint the many American Catholics who were passionately counting on his visit.
He also put a glitch into the plans of Alfred A. Knopf, the American publisher that recently paid nearly $9 million for the chance to publish a book of his religious and philosophical musings.
Though the Pope was in no way planning to hawk his forthcoming book, "Crossing the Threshold of Hope," by appearing on talk shows or signing copies at bookstores, his very presence would have drawn constant attention to the book and its message and would have been one of the best built-in marketing campaigns a book could have.


Cuomo Claims A Pataki Plan Would Plunder State Lottery
Squabbling over state lottery funds like two winners with the same ticket, the leading candidates for governor escalated their battle over the budget yesterday, with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo accusing his Republican opponent, State Senator George E. Pataki, of planning to "rip off" the lottery.
The Governor's comments were in response to a new television ad by Mr.
Pataki, in which the Republican announced an undetailed plan to "reduce local property taxes by using state lottery funds."


Upset on the Avenue: An Also-Ran Does It
On a day when a 91-year-old man ran ramrod straight into the crowd's heart and 31-year-old Regina Jacobs gave a 20-block demonstration of why she is the queen of American milers, the 14th Fifth Avenue Mile turned into a gusty detour yesterday for a cluster of elite men.
Jason Pyrah, a second-tier runner who spent the summer in an often vain quest for a place in races reserved for his betters, turned the tables on them as he powered home to an unexpected victory in the event, the first Discover Card Mile on Fifth Avenue.


Berbers March in a Show of Unity in Algeria


Voters Back Ex-Premier In Slovakia
After six months of stability, Slovakia appeared headed toward political disarray today after voting results showed that the man twice ousted as Prime Minister had far outstripped other candidates in the country's first national elections.
But the former Prime Minister, Vladimir Meciar, an ardent nationalist, won only 35 percent of the vote and will not be able to form a government on his own.


Ask the Cuban People
To the Editor:
Elliott Abrams and others ask President Clinton in an advertisement on Sept. 26 to tighten the United States chokehold on the people of Cuba, and to forward free elections under international supervision.


3 Teams' Players Call Themselves Informed and United
The Rangers rented a room at the Rye Town Hilton yesterday.
The Islanders gathered at Troy Loney's place.
The Devils were over at Scott Stevens's house.
Three separate meetings. One distinct purpose.


From Repression to Respect, Russian Church in Comeback
Security guards bowed, secretaries crossed themselves and the Mayor of Moscow humbly kissed his hand.
In what has become a ritual of Russian power politics, the Patriarch of the Russian Orthodox Church, Aleksy II, made a slow, solemn entrance into the temporal world of doting bureaucrats and elected officials.
This time, they offered him a cathedral.


Neil J. Walsh, Executive, Dies; Ex-City Commissioner Was 65
Neil J. Walsh, an insurance executive and former city commissioner who helped bring the 1976 Democratic National Convention to New York, died on Saturday at New York Hospital.
He was 65 and lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said his son, Jamie, through a spokesman.


Corrections
A chart on Friday about State Senator George E. Pataki's proposal to cut New York's state income tax misstated one example of the tax prospects under existing law.
After the last stage of a tax reduction that is to be completed by April 1, 1996, a taxpayer earning $13,000 would get a refund of $590, not $509.


Balet &amp; Albert Gets Accounts
Balet &amp; Albert Inc. in New York has been chosen to handle advertising for four accounts with combined billings estimated at $3 million.
Goldpfeil, the German maker and retailer of luxury leather goods, picked the agency to handle its account in the United States, previously inactive.
On the other three accounts, Balet &amp; Albert is the first agency.
They are: the designer Cynthia Rowley, for local television commercials and outdoor ads in New York; Crunch Gear in New York, to advertise its fitness wear, now available in department stores like Macy's and Nordstrom, and Dish, a restaurant on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.


A Volcano's Plume as Seen From the Space Shuttle


Rich and Poor Nations Split on Aid Plan
A serious new political rift between the world's rich and poor nations opened tonight after finance ministers from 21 nations were unable to agree at a meeting here on a plan to create billions of dollars in development aid.
The aid is intended to help Russia, other former Communist countries and the poorest developing nations build up trade and participate in the emerging world economic recovery.


For the Love of Fish


French Dailies Struggling in an Uncertain Market
Having the first issue of his redesigned morning newspaper distributed at 2 P.M. last Monday was not what Serge July, the editor of Liberation, had in mind when he set out to overhaul the left-of-center tabloid.
But a day later, with the technical problems ironed out, Mr.
July was able to turn his attention to his main goal: capturing more readers and advertising.


Revealing Secrets by Sorting Through Memories
In the beautiful and mysterious opening scene of Park Kwang Su's film "To the Starry Island," a boat bearing a coffin makes its way across a rain-swept bay to the remote island of Kwisong, off the coast of South Korea.
As members of the funeral party watch aghast, inhabitants of the island meet the visitors and angrily refuse to let the body be buried there.
One of the travelers, Kim Chul (Ahn Sung Ki), falls into the water and nearly drowns while trying to mediate with the islanders.
A poet who was born on Kwisong and educated in Seoul, he has not seen his native soil in many years.


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING  Arc de Triomphe Is Won by Carnegie  Carnegie was the best of five horses hitting the wire less than a length apart yesterday in the prestigious Arc de Triomphe in Paris, Europe's top horse race.
Carnegie, ridden by Thierry Jarnet of France, took the lead in the final quarter-mile.
Second was Hernando, ridden by Cash Asmussen of the United States, just a head off the lead.
Third was Apple Tree, followed by Ezzoud and Bright Moon.
Favored White Muzzle, second in the race last year, finished sixth.
The winner covered a mile and a half at Longchamp in 2 minutes 30 seconds, earning $755,000 from the $1.1 million purse. (AP) GOLF  Forecast: Rain and Victory for Elkington  Steve Elkington won the Buick Southern Open in Pine Mountain, Ga., when the final round was rained out yesterday, giving him his fourth victory on the PGA Tour.
The Australian secured the lead at the halfway mark when he posted his second consecutive six-under-par 66 on the Callaway Gardens Mountain View course and had a 68 on Saturday, giving him a 54-hole total of 16-under 200. (AP) TENNIS  Pierce Is Toppled by Novotna  Second-seeded Jana Novotna defeated top-seeded Mary Pierce of France, 7-5, 6-1, yesterday to win the $400,000 Volkswagen Grand Prix in Leipzig, Germany.
Novotna, of the Czech Republic, fell behind in the first set 2-5, but battled back to tie it at 5-5, then swept the next two games to close out the set. (AP)


A Fusion of Punk and Reggae That Has Lasted
In England at the end of the 1970's, punk-rockers and reggae bands found common cause in battling racially motivated violence.
The musical result was the so-called "two-tone" movement.
It spawned integrated bands that revived the fast oompah beat of a 1960's Jamaican style called ska, added the raw fervor of punk and laced the resulting party music with messages.
Checkerboard graphics, close-cropped hair and natty black-and-white outfits, including skinny ties and porkpie hats, completed the package.
The music came and went like other pop fads in Britain, but it found a lasting audience in the United States.
On Friday night, Irving Plaza was packed with checkerboard-accessorized, hyperactive dancers for a concert by the Specials, one of the first two-tone bands.
A younger, more purist ska band, Let's Go Bowling, opened the concert.
Fifteen years after they released their first single, "Gangsters," the Specials sound more robust than they did in their heyday.
Four members of the current seven-piece Specials were in the original band: Neville Staples (vocals), Roddy (Radiation) Byers (guitar), Lynval Golding (guitar) and Horace Panter (bass).
Instead of Terry Hall's yelping lead vocals, the band now has Mr.
Byers and Mr.
Staples harmonizing with the other band members.
The band's music is a ska fusion, with elements of reggae, surf-rock, punk-rock and English football cheers.
And years of propelling dancers have toughened up the already limber rhythm section.


Best Fighter in the World? Whitaker Taking a Jab at It
Seth Abraham's roadies were already cleaning up the television cable on Saturday night when his marquee Home Box Office fighter, Pernell (Sweetpea) Whitaker, stepped up to speak.
"It was as if he were a pitcher, hitting the black of the plate with each pitch," the HBO president said with a genuine look of astonishment, sitting in the second row at the post-fight news conference.


INSIDE
Different Take on Trade Pact While the U.S. is hailing the trade agreement with Japan as a breakthrough, Tokyo's view is much more restrained.
Page D1.
Taking Health Care Blame
Hillary Rodham Clinton says she is willing to take some of the blame for the failure of health insurance legislation.
Page A12. 'Show Boat' Opens
Harold Prince's re-examination of the indestructible classic opened on Broadway.
David Richards's review is on page C11.
A2 Arts


Classic Musical With a Change in Focus
In the popular consciousness, "Show Boat" is the great American musical about the tumultuousness of love, played out against the majestic Mississippi River and the big-shouldered city of Chicago.
Its characters -- Gaylord Ravenal, the rakish riverboat gambler in the top hat; Magnolia, the sweet innocent he marries, then deserts, and even Julie, the mulatto whose life spirals into the gutter after she is barred from the show boat -- have long passed for the most romantic of figures.


A Lesson For Brown; A Loss For Giants
A day like today can define a quarterback's career.
How do you bounce back from a horrible two-interception first half?
How will Dave Brown recover from a day where instead of looking like the bright young talent he is, he looked as if he woke up on the wrong side of the bed?


Advisers Post Gains In Model Portfolios
AFTER struggling for a year in a choppy stock market, five investment advisers zipped ahead in the third quarter, with three chalking up gains on par with the previous four quarters combined in their hypothetical retirement portfolios.
Sheldon Jacobs, editor of The No-Load Fund Investor of Irvington, N.Y., widened his lead with a gain of 5.52 percent, bringing his original $50,000 portfolio up to $58,938, an increase of 17.88 percent since the contest began in July 1993.


Foes Line Up To Do Battle Over GATT
An eight-week delay in the Senate vote to ratify a global free trade pact has galvanized a broad range of opponents, who vow an all-out campaign this fall in their uphill fight to stop the 123-nation agreement.
A final vote on the pact, which would cut tariffs around the world and expand the free trade rules of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to cover farming and services like accounting, has been delayed until after the November elections.
This gives the opposition extra time to organize but may also insulate some senators from public pressure.


In Performance; DANCE
Shades of Martha Graham In a Tap-Dance Company  Woodpeckers Tap Dance Center
If Martha Graham had been a tap dancer, she might have resembled Rhonda Price in "Twister," which Anita Feldman Tap presented on Friday night.
"Twister" served as the title for both an exciting solo and this refreshingly experimental tap-dance company's entire program.


Iranian Exile Faction Disdains Democracy
To the Editor:
Re "Listen to All Iranian Voices" (editorial, Sept. 26): As an Iranian-American, I believe that the United States should lend ears to groups that are democratic in action as well as in words.
Truly democratic movements are those that engage in critical self-evaluation, show a high degree of internal openness and demonstrate an ability to enter into substantive dialogue with others.


India's City of Plague: A Caldron of Urban Ills
Driven by a breeze from the muddy Tapti River, the smoke spiraling from Lilaben Mensuklal's funeral pyre wafted suddenly across the courtyard at the open-air crematory here on Friday evening, prompting weeping men to clutch homemade masks of cotton cloth more tightly to their faces.
"It is a sad business, sir, a sad business," said Mahendra Modi, caretaker at the Ashwini Kumar crematory, who has overseen dozens of similar cremations since an epidemic of pneumonic plague began sweeping this ancient city two weeks ago.
Like others at the funeral, he moved sharply back as the smoke moved in his direction.


Market Place; A Chinese Utility Is Facing A Big Test on Wall Street
China wants to finance the expansion of its cash-starved electric power industry by selling part of the business directly to foreign investors.
Whether that strategy will succeed may depend a lot on what happens this week when American depository receipts for shares in Huaneng Power International Inc. begin trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Huaneng Power is only the second Chinese utility to be listed overseas -- and its biggest obstacle is its predecessor, which has the similar name of the Shandong Huaneng Power Development Company (Hua neng means China power).


Hope Fading for Holocaust Survivor's Reparations; Denied German Compensation on Technicality, Camps' Victim Is Also Blocked by U.S.
Had it not been shattered years ago in a concentration camp, Hugo Princz's heart would surely be breaking now.
Not at the imminent death of his 40-year battle to extract reparations from the German Government, but at the fact that it is his own beloved America that stands in the way.
"I cannot understand how they could side with the German Government," Mr.
Princz said in an interview in his home here in the still suburbs of northern New Jersey.
"I just cannot understand. One American should help out another American, especially in a case like this."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  HAITI MISSION'S COMPLEXITIES
American troops raided a facility in Haiti that they had been told was a terrorist training camp for Aristide supporters, but it turned out not to be, and that points up the difficulties of the American assignment.
A1


Upstate Forecast for Cuomo: Chilly Mood North and West
There's a sour mood abroad in the land and it has not escaped the notice of Allen Cecchi, who for 50 years has tracked the fortunes of this overlooked region from behind a well-situated barber's chair.
As Mr.
Cecchi sees it, times are hard in this corner of western New York.
Recession lingers; people are hungry for hope.
Their favorite target is the Governor, and the race for his job has become their emotional vent.


American Clinics Battle in Moscow
Clinics, especially expensive, private ones, are supposed to have a healing effect.
But a bitter rivalry and a costly lawsuithave infected the two main American medical centers that cater to Moscow's growing community of expatriate Americans and newly rich Russians.
In a competition as fierce as any against its archrival Coca-Cola, Pepsico opened a clinic in Moscow this month that is intended to compete with the services of the American Medical Center, an outpatient clinic opened in 1991.


Core of Tax Cut Debate: New York's Self-Image
WITH just over a month to go before New York elects its next governor, it would help to get one thing clear: the tax cut debate between Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and his Republican opponent, State Senator George E. Pataki, is not, at its core, about cutting taxes.
It is about New York's definition of itself.
Because unless New York is prepared to change dramatically what it is and long has been, it will never have low taxes.
Lower?
Yes.
But low?
Not likely.
Put simply, New York has vast obligations and historically high standards.
The state is home to a lot of needy people and helps care for them because Federal dollars do not go far enough.
But New York does not stop there.
It spends more than most other states, and not just on the poor.
New Yorkers have always had expensive tastes.
Even Republican New Yorkers.


Preston Townley, 55; Headed Organization Of Business Research
Preston Townley, president and chief executive of the Conference Board, a not-for-profit business-research organization, died on Friday at Baptist Medical Center on Amelia Island, Fla.
He was 55 and lived on Manhattan's Upper East Side.
He suffered a heart attack on a tennis court on the island, where he was attending a business meeting, said his daughter, Alison.


Steamy Brazil Helps Emerging Markets
VOLATILE emerging markets funds, which suffered big losses earlier this year, regained all of their lost ground in the third quarter as stock markets strengthened in Latin America.
Although many speculative or skittish investors fled the funds during the first half of the year when Mexico and some Asian markets plummeted, it now looks like the smart money was with investors who held onto their shares or who saw a buying opportunity.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the closing of the New York law firm Lord Day &amp; Lord, Barrett Smith referred incompletely to a Philadelphia firm whose New York office is acquiring many Lord, Day lawyers.
It is Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius.


In '94, 'Vote for Woman' Does Not Play So Well
When Dawn Clark Netsch pulled an upset and won the Democratic primary for governor of Illinois last March, she seemed well on her way to following the trail blazed here two years ago by Carol Moseley-Braun, who rode the sex card to the United States Senate.
Not only is Ms.
Netsch the first woman nominated for governor by either major party in Illinois, she is the first woman in the nation with a female running-mate, Penny Severns, as well.
Yet Ms.
Netsch rarely talks to voters about the historic nature of her ticket, and her candidacy has generated little enthusiasm among women or men.
Unlike Ms.
Moseley-Braun, a Democrat who drew support from Republican women, Ms.
Netsch is having trouble winning over women in her own party and is stalled as much as 30 points behind Gov.
Jim Edgar in local polls.


Israel and Tunisia to Begin First Official Ties
In another sign that it is shaking off its role as Middle East outcast, Israel agreed with Tunisia this weekend to exchange low-level representatives as a first step toward eventual diplomatic relations.
Technically, the step was a small one.
The two countries announced on Saturday night at the United Nations that they would appoint economic liaison officers, who would work out of the Belgian embassies in Tunis and Tel Aviv.


Too Many Cooks Can Spoil the Fund
IT was one of those ideas easily sold but not as easily executed: start a mutual fund that relies on not just one manager but five, chosen for their skills.
Add incentive fees so that those managers are paid more if they do well and paid less, or even nothing, if they do badly.
The Advisors Fund, as it was called, was an immediate hit for Shearson Lehman Hutton, as the brokerage firm was then known. (The firm is now part of Smith Barney.) Begun on June 28, 1990, it took in $164 million of assets in its first two days, generating commissions of $7.8 million for Shearson brokers.


Corrections
An article in some copies on Saturday about a walkout by Legal Aid lawyers in New York City misstated the service time required for such lawyers to reach a salary of $64,000.
It is 13 years, not five or six years.


Youths Take Officer's Gun and Beat Him
An off-duty veteran transit police officer who awoke to a loud disturbance early yesterday and went to investigate was savagely beaten on a Brooklyn street by a group of young men who took his gun from him, the police said.
The gun was recovered by the police.


Why We Still Need Health Care Reform
To the Editor:
On Jan. 1, 1986, I retired from my job in the school system of Woodbridge Township in New Jersey after 21 years.
The contract between the Board of Education and the union to which I belonged let me continue my hospital and major medical insurance coverage at my own expense as a supplement to Medicare.


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Named John Hall director of public affairs.
Hockey  National Hockey League
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Signed Brett Lindros, right wing, to a five-year contract.


Collaboration Or Coincidence?
Jim Quinn, a players lawyer who has been involved in landmark litigation in football and basketball, sees it as the ultimate dream.
"We could sue them all at once," he said, fantasizing about the idea of mounting a mammoth antitrust case against professional sports.
Shaking himself out of his courtroom reverie, Quinn added, "It may or may not be the seeds of a great lawsuit, but it's interesting that people who purport to be competitors are cooperating."


Kantor Vows Pressure On Japan Will Continue
America's top trade negotiator said today that he planned to initiate talks with Tokyo in the coming months about opening its restricted markets in computers, wood, paper and financial services, now that the two nations have agreed that Japan will open its markets in glass, insurance, medical equipment and telecommunications.
The United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, said in an interview that he understood the Japanese Government would need some time to digest the agreements announced on Saturday, which came after 15 difficult months of negotiations.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; Dick Steinberg Finds Himself on the Spot
HIGH in the Cleveland Stadium press box, Dick Steinberg, in a blue sport shirt and khaki slacks, suffered in silence.
Every so often during the Jets' 27-7 disaster, their general manager glanced at a television replay or peered through his binoculars, but he seldom reacted.
Not a grunt nor a groan.
Not a word, not even to James Harris, the assistant general manager, sitting next to him.
When the Jets' third consecutive loss after a 2-0 start was over, Steinberg put on a blue windbreaker, took the elevator downstairs and walked unrecognized against the tide of celebrating Browns fans to his team's locker room.


NBC Cancels the Pause Between Shows
Whatever happened to the station break?
That longtime tradition of network television -- a batch of commercials between shows surrounding a station-identification announcement ("You're watching Channel 13 in Indianapolis!") -- has disappeared from NBC this fall and is an endangered species on every network.


Electronic Newspaper
The Gainesville Sun, a Florida newspaper owned by The New York Times Company, has agreed to publish an electronic edition in cooperation with the College of Journalism and Communications at the University of Florida.
Students will prepare the electronic paper, which will offer versions of articles to be published in The Sun the next day.
The service, known as SUN.ONE, will have advertising and will be offered at no charge for 30 minutes a day.
Unlimited usage can be purchased for flat fees starting at $6.66 a month.
Customers must have a personal computer and modem.


Treasury to Auction Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to bills, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.64 percent, traders said, while the six-month issue was at 5.20 percent.


Fallon McElligott Spreading Out
Fallon McElligott will open an office in Chicago, its first outside Minneapolis.
The office is meant to help serve an important client based in Chicago, the Ameritech Corporation; other Fallon clients there include the Amoco Oil Company and the Jim Beam Brands Company.


A Cynical Turn on Bosnia
The U.N.
Security Council's latest maneuverings over the Bosnian arms embargo appear technical and arcane.
But future historians may cite this as the moment the Clinton Administration finally yielded to Europe's cynical policy of keeping Bosnia defenseless, forcing it to submit first to ethnic cleansing, then territorial partition and finally to NATO peacekeepers enforcing a surly peace.
Washington's own policy, though never pretty and never pressed aggressively enough, was far better than this, and more sensibly prudent than many of its critics allowed.
It consisted of fending off the worst European arm-twisting while pressing Europe to agree to lifting the arms embargo so that Bosnia could at least try to defend itself.


Few Environmental Laws Emerge From 103d Congress
As the 103d Congress winds toward a close, there is a surprisingly strong possibility that lawmakers will go home for the midterm elections without having passed one major piece of environmental legislation in two years.
Most of the Administration's environmental initiatives have not succeeded, and the three main bills that remain alive -- dealing with drinking water, hazardous waste dumps and wilderness protection -- are in the legislative equivalent of intensive care.


Abroad at Home; Suffer the Children
Dr.
Esma Zecevic is chief pediatrician in the children's clinic of the largest hospital still functioning in Sarajevo.
Her hospital usually has no electricity or running water; she and her colleagues practice by candlelight.
They eat one meal a day.
I heard about Dr.
Zecevic from Dr.
Jane Green Schaller, a leading Boston pediatrician who has just returned from a visit to Bosnia.
We all know about the cruelties of the Serbian war on Bosnia.
But the reality of life there was somehow brought home to me more tellingly as Dr.
Schaller spoke in a matter-of-fact voice about what she saw.


Accounts
*
Seattle Supersonics to Wong Doody, Seattle, to handle broadcast and print advertising for the National Basketball Association club, previously at Livingston &amp; Co., Seattle.
Billings were estimated at $2 million. *
Anheuser-Busch Inc., St.
Louis, to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, St.
Louis, to introduce Red Wolf Lager, a red-colored premium-priced beer to be distributed nationally.
D.M.B.&amp; B. already handles advertising for other Anheuser-Busch brands like Budweiser.
Billings were not disclosed.


Law Change Urged to Aid In Police Cuts
After the Giuliani administration's call for the Police Department to share in the latest round of budget cuts, some city officials recommended yesterday that the Mayor seek to modify a state law mandating the number of officers on the force.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani asked the Police Department last week to cut $60 million, or 3 percent, as part of an effort to close a hole in the city's budget that administration officials estimate to be as large as $1 billion.
The department, which has largely escaped the budget cuts demanded of other agencies, faces its deepest spending reductions yet.


CHRONICLE
Add PATTI LABELLE, the rock and soul singer, to the list of celebrities who have their own clubs.
She is opening Chez LaBelle on Thursday in Philadelphia.
"It will be a 30-seat cabaret theater designed to showcase undiscovered talent," Ms.
LaBelle said the other day.
The first production will feature seven unknown -- so far -- actors, singers and dancers.


Redskins Turned Over by Cowboys
The first time the Washington Redskins got the football, on the opening kickoff, they fumbled.
They quickly recovered.
And then they ran four offensive plays.
And fumbled again.


China Gives Its Ailing Leader a Last Send-Off, Again
In a week of political choreography, China's Communist Party leadership has for the second time in five years given a grand send-off to Deng Xiaoping with fireworks, political tributes and thousands of dancers in Tiananmen Square.
The huge celebration on Saturday, on the 45th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic, is widely regarded among Chinese officials as the last Mr.
Deng will see.
He turned 90 in August and is suffering from advanced Parkinson's disease.


Graham on Themes as Old as Time Itself
"Clytemnestra," Martha Graham's three-act dance treatment of the Oresteia, is nothing short of epic drama, and it received an astonishingly integrated performance on Saturday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Christine Dakin, magnificent and complex in the title role, and the other members of the Martha Graham Dance Company must not be missed when "Clytemnestra" has its repeat performance on Friday.
Nor should, for different reasons, anyone pass up the sections of "Chronicle" that were revived on Friday night for the first time since the 1930's.
If "Clytemnestra," choreographed in 1958, is a brazen panorama imbued with overt sexuality and a fragmented modernist structure, "Chronicle" is a stark social-protest piece from 1936, smoldering in the crucible of its very purity.
To see Terese Capucilli rise up as a towering red specter of war is to shudder at the apocalyptic height of Graham's vision.


City of Angels Makes Peace in Water Wars
Clusters of pale, delicate limestone spires, stranded in the sagebrush that surrounds a shrinking, million-year-old lake, help tell the story of decades of water wars in which California's thirsty south has sucked dry some of the lakes and rivers of the north.
These brittle fingers, aquatic stalagmites as tall as a man or taller, have been left exposed as the briny lake in which they grew, Mono Lake, has contracted to half its volume and dropped about 45 feet.
Since 1941, the waters of four creeks that fed the lake have been diverted, through tunnels and aqueducts, to Los Angeles, 340 miles to the south.


What Would F.D.R. and Einstein Do in Smoke-Free New York?; Stop the Bidding War
To the Editor:
With all the talk of businesses leaving New York City, the move of the Swiss Bank Corporation, with its 1,500 workers, to Stamford, Conn., was reported as a "blow to the city" (news article, Sept. 22).


A Backup Is Thrown For a Troubling Loss
On that very first play today, Jack Trudeau thought it was going to happen in the beautiful way it does for the backup quarterback in his imagination.
The Cleveland Browns had gone three downs and out, and now Trudeau had come in to lead the Jets.
Boomer Esiason was now his backup, hobbled by an injury to his left ankle.


METRO DIGEST
UPSTATE MALAISE HURTS CUOMO'S CHANCES
There's a sour mood abroad in the land, a mood evident in Cattaraugus County.
As some see it, times are hard in that corner of western New York, with recession lingering and people hungry for hope.
Their favorite target is Governor Cuomo, and the race for his job has become their emotional vent.
The depth of Cattaraugus's dissatisfaction is striking: It hints at how enthusiastic his supporters will have to be in New York City and its suburbs to counteract the anti-Cuomo sentiment he is facing in the state's vast rural reaches.
A1.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Key account changes are made by marketers of cigarettes, liquor and a restaurant chain.
SMOKE, drink, eat.
Marketers of cigarettes and distilled spirits, as well as a restaurant chain, made changes last week on important accounts.
Philip Morris U.S.A., the tobacco unit of the Philip Morris Companies, consolidated its cigarette accounts at two agencies, Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago and Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York, by eliminating Bates USA in New York from its roster.


Dividend Meetings


Ghosts Who Bring Less Fear and More Decorum
Women and Ghosts  By Alison Lurie  179 pages. Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $21.
It's true that in each of the nine stories in Alison Lurie's new fiction collection, "Women and Ghosts," some sort of specter appears to the protagonist.
But these are not so much tales of ectoplasmic terror as stories of right and wrong and of character disorder.


A First for Father vs. Son Coaching But Not a First Victory for Bengals
There was a warm embrace between Don Shula and his son Dave about an hour and a half before the start of tonight's game between Miami and the Bengals.
The historic moment -- the first time a father and son coached or managed against each other in major pro sports in America -- was duly recorded by television cameras, and then the two men parted and went their separate ways.
It didn't take long for Don Shula's warm familial feeling to dissipate.
He coolly stood on the sideline and taught his son a valuable lesson: He who has the best quarterback and makes the fewest mistakes usually wins.
Miami's Dan Marino, who completed 26 of 35 passes for 204 yards, threw 2 touchdown passes and was not intercepted.
The Bengals' David Klingler, who completed 16 of 30 passes for 188 yards, was intercepted three times in the second half and lost a fumble.


Mexico Links Assassination To Legislator
Law enforcement officials said today that a governing party legislator ordered the killing of a powerful Government official last week to prevent him from pushing forward sweeping political reforms.
The legislator, Manuel Munoz Rocha, is being sought by the police.
Investigators say they also believe that other killings may have been planned to block attempts to modernize the Institutional Revolutionary Party, the PRI.


Pensacola Trial to Be First Test for Clinic Access Law
A four-month-old law designed to curb violent and disruptive demonstrations at abortion clinics will get its first legal test on Monday when a 40-year-old former minister, who also faces state murder charges, goes on trial in Federal court here.
The trial of Paul J. Hill comes just two months after he was arrested in the deaths of Dr.
John B. Britton, 69, and James H. Barrett, 74, who were killed with a shotgun as they sat in a parked car outside the Pensacola Ladies Clinic on July 29.
And it comes well before the state trial on murder charges, in which a guilty verdict could mean the death penalty.





Forty-Five Seconds of Giants Misery
If you are looking for a turning point in the Saints' 27-22 upset of the Giants today, look no further than a 45-second span late in the second quarter.
It started with Jim Everett's 59-yard completion to Michael Haynes.
It ended three plays later with Everett's 4-yard touchdown pass to Quinn Early.


Canadian Violinist Wins Indianapolis Contest
Juliette Kang, a 19-year-old violinist from Canada, has been awarded first prize in the fourth International Violin Competition of Indianapolis.
She is to receive $25,000, a gold medal, a Carnegie Hall recital debut and 50 recital and orchestral engagements.


No Headline
"You get the feeling that there is a whole lot of discontent about a whole lot of elected people, not just the Governor. We've had program after program to deal with problem after problem, and we still have problem after problem." -- RONALD HACKETT, Commissioner of Social Services in Cattaraugus County.  [ B4:5. ]


Environmental Downs and Ups; New Life for the Everglades?
The exploding population of southern Florida and the threatened ecosystem of the Everglades need more water.
Various approaches to the needs of both have been set out in impressive detail by a Federal task force, the Army Corps of Engineers and state authorities.
Their reports provide groundwork for an enormously ambitious undertaking.
What is needed now is a sign of genuine commitment to proceed by President Clinton.
For more than a century, the people of Miami and its environs and the cane sugar interests inland have taken more and more of the water that once flowed southward unimpeded from Lake Okeechobee to the plants and wildlife of the Everglades, and then into the fertile fishing grounds of Florida Bay.
Environmentalists' efforts to prevent further erosion have had off-and-on success.


'Quiz Show' Plays With Facts of TV Scandal
To the Editor:
Robert Redford's "Quiz Show" is a good piece of moviemaking depicting a 1950's television quiz show scandal.
Through a believable but flawed screenplay about the show, "Twenty-One," its fixing, the deception of the public and the Congressional hearings that followed, the audience is led to believe this is an accurate representation of events.


CHRONICLE
LEON KIRCHNER won first prize on Saturday in the annual Friedheim Awards competition for new symphonic works awarded by the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.
Mr.
Kirchner, who won a Pulitzer Prize for music in 1967, took top honors for his "Music for Cello and Orchestra." He received a $5,000 prize.
Second place, and a $2,500 prize, went to TISON STREET for "Bright Sambas." Two composers, JOHN ANTHONY LENNON and JAY ALAN YIM, tied for third place.
Mr.
Lennon won for "Zingari," a concerto for guitar and orchestra, and Mr.
Yim for "Rain Palace," a piece for oboe and orchestra.


What Would F.D.R. and Einstein Do in Smoke-Free New York?
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 26 front-page report that Philip Morris will consider leaving New York City if the City Council bans smoking from nearly all public places was framed in terms of health versus business.
You left little doubt that you were in this instance pro-health and against business.


Japanese Skepticism On Trade
The trade agreements reached on Saturday by American and Japanese negotiators were heralded in Washington as a significant breakthrough in opening Japan's markets for insurance, telecommunications, medical equipment and glass.
But the view here was that the end results scarcely justified the 15 months of bitterness, name-calling and mistrust required to achieve them.
Japan's financial markets also reacted to the trade settlements calmly.
The dollar rose to 99.25 yen in morning trading in Tokyo, up from its Friday close of 98.59 yen.
One currency trader said the market was expecting an agreement and had already discounted the weekend's news.


In Performance; THEATER
About a Manipulative Woman, Her Own Worst Enemy  Greenwich Street Theater
George Kelly's play "Craig's Wife" is among theater's more puzzling oddities.
This remorseless story of the self-destruction of a manipulative woman is an imperfect mixture of comedy, satire and psychological drama, with a touch of murder mystery thrown in, which critics did not much like when it opened in 1925.
But it won a large audience then, especially -- and surprisingly -- among women, and a Pulitzer Prize.
And occasional revivals prove it still durable.


The Year's First Winning Quarter
Is it time for American investors to pay the piper yet?
Not according to the summer's stock market, where results for the third quarter show that comeuppance will have to wait.
Despite only moderate overall gains, the leading stock exchanges provided an even richer field of lucrative stocks from which to pick and choose gingerly.
For the first time this year, according to figures compiled by Media General Financial Services, there were more winners than losers, and by a wide margin.


In Performance; POP
An Eclectic Folk-Based Style Reminiscent of a Gentler Time  Mercury Lounge
Eddi Reader's songs hark back to a more innocent pop era: the mid-1960's, when a clear voice and a buoyant chorus promised that even the direst romantic setback would have a happy ending.
On Wednesday night, Ms.
Reader honored the rules of well-made pop with songs that neatly allocated instrumental hooks and catchy choruses.
Her voice, which soars from a girlish, breathy mezzo-soprano to operatic high notes, had a smile behind every sob.


Patents; A Prison That Looks Like a Suburb Enclosed in Barbed Wire
AS prison populations have more than doubled in the last decade, the public debate over what constitutes appropriate and effective incarceration has intensified.
Now Andrei Moskowitz, an inventor and freelance writer in Manhattan, has come up with a radically new approach that he calls "self-sufficient isolation."
The Patent Office has notified Mr.
Moskowitz that he will be granted a patent tomorrow -- apparently the first ever issued in the United States for the overall design of a prison.


A New Press Role: Solving Problems
At more than a dozen news organizations across the country, journalists are experimenting with coverage aimed not only at providing accounts of events but also at provoking people to get involved in public issues.
Often called public or civic journalism, the movement is so young that some of its proponents say they are still defining it.
But some editors who are experimenting with public journalism say that instead of emphasizing conflict, they want news coverage to spur people to find solutions to political and community problems.


For Kennedy, Tenure May Help and Hurt Him
Michele Radley and her sister, Alice Gibbons, were window shopping at the Burlington Mall, and arguing about Senator Edward M. Kennedy.
"Kennedy's fourth on the seniority list," said Ms.
Radley, 35, explaining why she thought the 62-year-old Democrat deserved another Senate term.
"He's got 32 years in the Senate."


Bridge
Considerable confusion marked the conclusion of the NEC World Championships here Saturday afternoon.
It was known that the World Women's Pair title had been won by Carla Arnolds and Bep Vriend of the Netherlands, the silver medals going to Veronique Bessis and Catherine Saul of France and the bronze to Lynn Deas of Schenectady, N.Y., and Beth Palmer of Silver Spring, Md.
What was not known, for a long time, was the result of the World Open Pairs.
It appeared at first that the title had been won by Marek Szymanowski and Marcin Lesniewski of Poland, but they were involved in a crucial appeal on the diagramed deal that had the potential to deprive them of the title.


BUSINESS DIGEST
No Rest on Trade
The U.S. hailed the trade agreement reached with Japan as a breakthrough in opening selected Japanese markets.
But Tokyo's view was much more restrained.  [ Page D1. ]  The U.S. trade representative said he planned to talk with Tokyo about opening markets in computers, wood, paper and financial services.  [ D8. ] An eight-week delay in the Senate vote on a global free trade pact has galvanized its opponents, who vow an all-out campaign.  [ D1. ]


What Would F.D.R. and Einstein Do in Smoke-Free New York?; Think of the Workers
To the Editor:
I can't imagine why curbs on smoking would cause Philip Morris to move from New York City (news article, Sept. 26).


Trudeau and Jets Get Trounced at Every Turn
It has happened so many times before to so many of them: the surge, then the failure.
The Jets today played like a team imprisoned by its past without a hint of how to improve.
Again.


CHRONICLE
WHOOPI GOLDBERG married a movie-industry union representative during a weekend ceremony at her home in the Bel Air section of Los Angeles, The Associated Press reported.
Ms.
Goldberg exchanged vows Saturday afternoon with LYLE TRACHTENBERG , 44, whom she met on the set of "Corrina, Corrina," a 1950's drama in which Ms.
Goldberg stars with Ray Liotta, said the news agency, citing a source who witnessed the ceremony and requested anonymity.
It said 350 guests attended, including the actors ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER and MATTHEW MODINE and the director STEVEN SPIELBERG .


High Technology Forces A Fumble by Florida
So there you were, thinking that for the first time in this college football season, a sense of order was developing at the top.
You were ready to use the word "consensus." You were going to add up those points, just as the bowl people do in anticipation of their New Year's matchups, and look for the increasing distance between Florida, after a business-as-usual weekend, and Nebraska, after the loss of quarterback Tommie Frazier.
And as Penn State turns its attention toward its game at Michigan on Oct. 15 following a bye this week, with the possibility of having tailback Ki-Jana Carter back following surgery on his dislocated right thumb, there remains the possibility that the Nittany Lions could be part of the championship picture.


Transit Officer Kills Himself In Subway Station Bathroom
Yesterday afternoon, Officer Robert Smath of the transit police was in full dress uniform, marching with his fellow officers in the Pulaski Day Parade up Fifth Avenue.
A few hours later, he was dead by his own hand.
At 8 P.M., civilian transit workers found Officer Smath, 25, lying on the floor of an employee bathroom in the subway station at 145th Street and St.
Nicholas Avenue in Harlem, on the IND line, said Chief Michael O'Connor of the transit police.
He said the officer, clad in uniform pants and a civilian shirt, had shot himself once in the head with his 9-millimeter service gun.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Construction Spending . . .
Aug.
Tuesday  Leading Indicators . . .
Aug.
Auto Sales . . .
Sept.
Wednesday  Factory Orders . . .
Aug.
Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Retail Sales . . .
Sept.
Friday  Employment . . .
Sept.
Consumer Borrowing . . .
Aug.


6 Young Executives Are Honored
The American Advertising Federation in Washington has elected six advertising and media executives to its Hall of Achievement for people age 40 and under.
They will be honored at a luncheon on Nov. 7 at the Plaza Hotel in New York.


Vote Today Could Give Brazil a Lift
With a seasoned former Finance Minister leading in all opinion polls, political analysts and economists say that the Brazilian presidential election on Monday should strengthen democracy in Latin America and help restore Brazil to its role as the region's economic locomotive.
Confident of a victory by the former minister, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, foreigners have already invested billions of dollars in the country, pushing the Sao Paulo stock exchange index up 90 percent in dollar terms this year and making it the world's fastest growing exchange.


On Their Watch
Dozens of sergeants, lieutenants and captains supervised in the 30th Precinct in Harlem in the late 1980's and early 1990's, when the station house decayed into a den of drug dealing, extortion and perjury.
The arrests of the first two police sergeants this week in what has become the largest scandal involving a single precinct in the 146-year history of the Police Department raises the question of whether other supervisors and even more senior officers should be held accountable.


Corrections
A chart on Saturday about a television commercial for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's campaign referred incompletely to the rating given to Mr.
Cuomo's opponent, State Senator George E. Pataki, by the Christian Coalition.
The 100 percent rating, made in 1993, was based on votes concerning Medicaid funds for abortions; a bill that finances the Medicaid program through aid to local governments; the section of the budget postponing scheduled tax cuts, and a bill on child pornography.
This year Mr.
Pataki received an 83 percent rating from the group.


Two O. J.'s, Antique Dolls and Elvis: Collectors Snap Up Decorated Phone Cards
Prepaid telephone calling cards were conceived as a convenience.
Callers would buy one for, say, $10, and then have $10 worth of phone time.
No coins.
In recent months, collecting them has become a fad, not least because of the vivid pictures with which the cards have come to be decorated: images of sports heroes and superheroes, bouquets of daisies, O. J. Simpson's dour mug shot, the likeness of the late Lubavitcher Rebbe, Menachem M. Schneerson, and personally signed copies of Peter Max paintings.


Essay; No Yanks Need Apply
Politicians in Boston and New York, eager to solicit the vote of American Irish Catholics, gave a hero's welcome to the Irish Republican Army's political spokesman, who recently helped arrange cessation of terrorist bomb attacks on Britons.
This second tour of the U.S. by Gerry Adams went down badly in the United Kingdom.
Most people here do not think anybody deserves lionization and a fresh infusion of funds for stopping, or perhaps only suspending, a policy of systematic murder, and resent the portrayal of Northern Ireland as a place occupied by British soldiers to prevent the inevitable unification of the Irish people.


Terms of Endorsement
Holding out his endorsement as the elusive prize, Mayor Giuliani has tried to turn the governor's race into a referendum on which candidate will do more for New York City.
Political Memo, page B4.


Volume of New Issues Plummeted in Quarter
The total volume of new securities issues in the United States plummeted 51.5 percent in the third quarter and 29 percent in the first nine months of the year as rising interest rates and fears of inflation led investors to take a more cautious approach.
Because of such a sharp drop in almost all classifications of new stock and bond issues, underwriting fees continued to plunge, with securities firms suffering a 56.6 percent decline in the third quarter and a 32.7 percent fall in the nine-month period.


Dividend Funds Glow In a Ho-Hum Market
LOOKING for bright spots in what has been a dismal year thus far for stock funds?
Try two relatively conservative categories, growth-and-income funds and equity-income funds.
These funds, which tend to concentrate on large dividend-paying stocks, have eclipsed their flashier and more aggressive cousins, the growth and small-company funds.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Prokofiev's Fifth Symphony:  A Look on the Bright Side or the Dark?  Avery Fisher Hall
The Fifth Symphony is often described as the work in which Prokofiev definitively left behind the industrial sonorities of his Parisian phase and embraced Soviet optimism.
It is nothing of the kind.
Under a veneer of tonal lyricism, the same glinting gears grind away, most particularly in the infernal-machine music of the finale.
I cannot comprehend how people hear unambiguous uplift in this work; to my ears, it is a far darker piece than the Shostakovich Fifth, whose ambivalence is so often touted.


Washington Ignores Repression in Ethiopia
To the Editor:
On Sept. 20, according to Amnesty International, hundreds of Ethiopians were beaten and illegally imprisoned following peaceful witness against the imprisonment of Dr.
Asrat Woldeyes, a distinguished surgeon and former professor and dean at Addis Ababa University.


Mandela Begins U.S. Visit With a Side Trip to Harlem
On his first visit to the United States as President of a reborn South Africa, Nelson Mandela took a sentimental side trip to a Harlem church yesterday morning to be with people he feels were with him spiritually during the long struggle against apartheid.
Gone were the thickets of ticker tape and the throngs that jubilantly lined parade routes during Mr.
Mandela's first visit to the United States four years ago, shortly after his release after 27 years in prison.


In Performance; POP
Nerd Chic as a Stage In Musical Evolution The Academy
Most punk rockers, whether they be Johnny Rotten or Kurt Cobain, were once nerds.
Transforming from a nerd to a punk means changing from being a person without fashion to one against fashion, moving from the bottom rung of the social ladder to off it altogether.
In the cynical 1990's, there is no anti-fashion.
It's now rebellious to have no fashion: in other words, to be a nerd.
It may have been hip to be square for Huey Lewis in the 1980's, but for Blur and Pulp, two English bands that performed on Thursday night, it's punk to be square.
The two bands look back to that brief period of musical history when punk turned into new wave, when cynicism and romanticism met for a brief, shining moment.


Business-Friendlier at City Hall
Movie projectors have not used combustible nitrate film for decades, so the safety risk is long gone.
But an obsolete city regulation still requires projectionists to obtain a license from New York City's Department of Consumer Affairs.
Likewise anyone who holds a masquerade ball, works in a pool hall, or drives a laundry truck.
These are among the 21 license categories that Mayor Rudolph Giuliani now proposes to eliminate as part of his larger effort to "re-engineer" the city's regulatory process and remove unnecessary burdens on businesses.
The City Council will have to determine whether any of the licenses on the City Hall hit list, like the one now required for used-car wholesalers, still make sense as a matter of consumer protection or public safety.
But in general Mr.
Giuliani's approach to cutting the city's daunting, expensive -- and often mindless -- red tape is both welcome and overdue.


Not the Same Berlin Without the G.I.'s
To the Editor:
In your Berlin Journal (Sept. 27), you write, "After conquering a city, the Americans conquered hearts."
Berlin was conquered by Soviet troops.
The American troops took over their sector in West Berlin on July 3, 1945, in accordance with the Yalta agreements.
They were greeted as liberators after the horrors of the Soviet occupation.


Sludge Still Causes a Stink in Sunset Park
The Brooklyn industrial community of Sunset Park, tucked under the thunder of the Gowanus Expressway, won a stunning political victory last year when it thwarted a plan to build a 100-acre sludge composting plant along its two-mile waterfront.
The decision, which saved 400 jobs and 20 businesses, was viewed as a sign of the growing political clout of an immigrant neighborhood that had long seen itself as the dumping ground for many of the city's nuisances.
But little by little, the neighborhood began to realize that sludge was coming anyway.


N.H.L. and Union to Go Back to Bargaining Table
Having each executed a nifty public relations step in the days before the scheduled start of the season, the two sides in the National Hockey League dispute will resume talks tomorrow aimed at getting the season started Oct. 15.
Bob Goodenow, the players' labor leader, spoke with Gary Bettman yesterday and, the league said in a news advisory, told the commissioner he was prepared to meet tomorrow.
They will talk again today to set a time and place.


A Questionable Call That Unquestionably Hurt
Giants wide receiver Chris Calloway stood at his locker after the Giants' 27-22 loss to New Orleans and didn't mince words about a controversial call during the game.
Risking a fine by the National Football League, Calloway blasted a call that may have changed the game's outcome.
Calloway and Coach Dan Reeves were both fuming about what may have been the biggest play of the game.
It happened early in the fourth quarter with the Giants trailing, 27-13.
After recovering a Derek Brown fumble at the New Orleans 38, the Giants would eventually find themselves in a third-and-17 situation at the Saints' 45.


REPORTS DESCRIBE WIDESPREAD ABUSE IN FARM PROGRAM
Federal investigators have uncovered far-reaching fraud and mismanagement in the Agriculture Department aid program that provides billions of dollars to farmers who suffer crop losses in disasters like the Midwest floods of 1993 and Hurricane Andrew in 1992.
Many farmers have collected excessive payments by inflating crop losses, misstating the acreage they planted or failing to harvest crops when market prices fell below the amount paid in disaster assistance, according to sweeping new reports by the Agriculture Department and Senate investigators.


Remaking of the Simpson Prosecutor
Marcia Clark emerged from the fluorescent gloom of the Los Angeles County Superior Court on Friday into the soft California sun.
She was instantly surrounded by the roving band of reporters, cameramen and technicians who alight on all celebrities in the O. J. Simpson drama.
Then, only a few miles from where Richard M. Nixon gave his "last" news conference, Ms.
Clark gave her first.
Ever since Ms.
Clark first appeared on the scene, shortly after Mr.
Simpson was charged with double murder and she was told to try him, she had appeared grim, humorless, even angry.
But magically, her voice had warmed up.
She smiled often, and incandescently.
She laughed, even giggled, repeatedly.
She rolled her eyes, cocked her head and shrugged her shoulders.
And instead of terse no comments, she spoke about her harried new life, her shopping trips, her children.


14-Year-Old to Try Pro Tennis
Venus Williams, the 14-year-old tennis prodigy who hasn't played competitively since she left her humble beginnings in Compton, Calif., three years ago to train in Florida, will make her professional debut at the end of this month in Oakland, Calif., at the $400,000 Bank of the West Classic.
"She wants to test the waters and see where she is on a professional level," said her father and coach, Richard Williams, last night from the family's home in Pompano, Fla.
"It's my feeling that a 14-year-old shouldn't play, but this is her decision, so she's going to turn professional on her home ground in California."


In Performance; DANCE
Within 'Prince Igor,' Damian Woetzel Choreography  New York State Theater
Borodin's "Prince Igor" is blessed with one of the most stirring dance episodes in the operatic repertory: the savage second-act revel in the camp of the Polovtsian warriors.


Calm and Confidence Are Rising in Cap-Haitien
Two weeks after 1,900 American marines landed in this northern city, signs of ordinary life are returning and people are gaining optimism.
After the marines shot and killed 10 members of the Haitian security forces in a clash on Sept. 24, many Haitians here appeared to grow more confident.
This contrasts with the situation in Port-au-Prince, where American forces have been less willing to intervene to stop political violence.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Program of Minor Works By a Major Black Composer  Symphony Space
On Wednesday night, the Manhattan Chamber Orchestra honored William Grant Still, the pioneering black composer who broke down multiple barriers facing black musicians early in this century.
His "Afro-American Symphony" was the first major work by a black composer to be performed by an American orchestra (by the Rochester Philharmonic in 1933), and his opera "Troubled Island," performed by the New York City Opera in 1949, made a parallel step in the field of opera.


Bicycles Built for Two


Market Place; Analysts seem willing to overlook new hiring at G.M.
AS workers prepare to resume normal operations at idled General Motors Corporation components and final-assembly plants, securities analysts say the auto maker's third-quarter profit will not be greatly reduced because of lost production of cars and trucks in the three-day strike at its Buick City complex in Flint, Mich., last week.
More significant, the investment community seems convinced that John F. Smith Jr., president and chief executive of G.M., has not backtracked on his pledge to make the company as productive as its rivals when he agreed to add 531 permanent employees to the Buick City work force -- after eight years of no blue-collar hiring.


Times Names Friedman To Write Op-Ed Column
Thomas L. Friedman, a two-time Pulitzer Prize winner at The New York Times and now its chief economic correspondent, will become the newspaper's Foreign Affairs columnist on the Op-Ed page in January.
His appointment was announced yesterday by Arthur Sulzberger Jr., the publisher of The Times.
The Foreign Affairs column began in The Times in 1937 and has been written by Anne O'Hare McCormick, C. L. Sulzberger, Flora Lewis and Leslie H. Gelb, who left the newspaper last year.


Hambrecht &amp; Quist Combines Chief's Post
Hambrecht &amp; Quist, the San Francisco securities firm known for its close ties to high-technology companies in the Silicon Valley and elsewhere, named Daniel H. Case 3d, a 37-year-old investment banker, as its sole chief executive yesterday.
Mr.
Case, who has spent his entire career with the company, had shared the chief executive's title with William R. Hambrecht since 1992.
Mr.
Hambrecht, who is 59 and the largest shareholder of the privately owned firm, will remain as chairman with special emphasis on working with the firm's venture-capital investments.


Stairmasters and the Internet Invade a Staid World; To Attract Younger Alumni, Particularly Women, University Clubs Try to Modernize
All along Clubhouse Row in midtown Manhattan, university clubs are trying to knock their stuffiness out.
The Princeton Club asked recent graduates if dropping the coat-and-tie requirement in the Tiger Bar and Grill would persuade them to join.
The Harvard Club formed a committee to find portraits of female graduates after the overwhelmingly male membership realized that not one of the dark oil paintings lining its dark, wood-paneled walls depicts a woman.
And at the Yale Club, members can sign up for an evening class that teaches them "to play the blues instantly."


High Court Lets Stand Dinosaur Fossil Ruling
IN an action that could have far-reaching effects on the excavation and sale of dinosaur fossils, the Supreme Court yesterday let stand an appeals court's decision that the Federal Government had acted correctly in seizing a tyrannosaur skeleton from a private dealer two years ago.
The case involves a tyrannosaur nicknamed "Sue," which was found and excavated in 1990 near Faith, S.D., by the Black Hills Institute of Geological Research, a commercial dealer in fossils based in Hill City, S.D.
Paleontologists say Sue is the most complete and best preserved tyrannosaur fossil ever found.


Workers Scarce but So Are Raises
Pressure is building on Corporate America to bid up wages to attract machinists, computer specialists and other skilled workers increasingly in short supply.
But companies are resisting the pressure with numerous tactics, from turning away business to hiring the unskilled at low wages and then training them.
No one knows how long this effort can keep hourly wages from rising faster than inflation for millions of production workers, especially if the economy continues to grow at a brisk pace.
Already wages are rising in a few cities, most spectacularly in Phoenix.
But mostly, executives say, companies are holding the line -- an assertion that is backed up by some Labor Department data and Federal Reserve surveys.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
From an Art-Song Singer In French, German and English  Weill Recital Hall
Sanford Sylvan's art seems to refine itself with every passing year.
The American baritone, known widely for his intelligence and character as a Mozart principal, has made himself into an art-song singer of unusual versatility.
If Mr.
Sylvan, who sang French, German and American repertory on Friday night, has had a problem, it may be a tendency to overdo right things: a too-fanatic care for the perfect vowel and consonant or the unequivocal meaning of a word.
Friday's recital, with David Breitman as pianist, made the meticulous appear natural and unforced.


By Design; Real Fall Colors
This is one year when shopping for fall clothes doesn't mean drifting through a sea of black and gray.
You'll find shots of day-glo to spice up the dark colors that prevailed for so long.
Saks Fifth Avenue has everything from mohair scarfs to scuba-fabric dresses.
The scarfs, in neon-bright pink, green, yellow or orange, are $60.
The scuba styles include a tank dress in pink, green or yellow ($168); a scuba top styled like a T-shirt ($118), and a cropped top ($128).
All by Anna Sui.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; For its overseas service, a package delivery company evokes humorous 'terra incognita' fears.
WHERE once "Here be dragons" filled people with fear of foreign shores, today the phrase "Send this package overseas now!" has a similar effect.
A big campaign for DHL Worldwide Express, the first from its new agency, seeks to exploit those anxieties in a humorous fashion.
The campaign, which begins this week in local markets, hopes to raise doubts about the abilities of DHL's rivals among the executives who decide which express service can be trusted with their companies' precious parcels.
Broadcast commercials and print advertisements, carrying the theme "DHL or else," focus on delivery to international destinations -- a shrewd strategy for DHL because its strength has long been in overseas markets.


Inspection Halts Disassembly of A-Bombs
The Department of Energy has shut most operations at its sole plant for handling uranium from disassembled nuclear bombs, after outside inspectors found hundreds of safety violations last month and the plant managers failed to correct them.
The plant, Y-12 in Oak Ridge, Tenn., disassembles and stores the uranium from 800 to 1,000 warheads a year, after the plutonium parts have been removed at another plant.
The most serious violations at Oak Ridge, independent inspectors said, involved packing the uranium parts together more closely than safety rules allowed, a practice that could accidentally create a critical mass.


In Performance; THEATER
Male Prostitute With AIDS Is a Stand-In for Jesus  McGinn/Cazale Theater
The two characters in "Mother and Child," a new play by Matthew Lombardo, are named, simply enough, Mother and Child, and the action takes place in Child's hospital room on his birthday, which just happens to be Christmas Eve.
If anyone has missed the allegory, Child is dying on his 33d birthday and Mother discloses that her own mother justified her pregnancy with Child (achieved in the back seat of a Pontiac) by calling it an Immaculate Conception.


Sister Mary Margaret Johanning; Lecturer and Consultant Was 57
Sister Mary Margaret Johanning, a lecturer and consultant on theological affairs and the former international community leader of the School Sisters of Notre Dame, died on Saturday at St.
Marys Health Center in Jefferson City, Mo.
She was 57 and lived at St.
Peter's Convent in Jefferson City.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, the Roman Catholic Diocese of Jefferson City said.


N.H.L. and Players Agree! On Where to Hold Their Next Meeting
They weren't debating the shape of the table, but the principals in the National Hockey League labor negotiations seemed to have a bit of a difficult time agreeing yesterday on a site for their meeting today.
That sort of problem doesn't bode well for their chances of reaching an agreement that will trigger the start of the season in 11 days.
On what was supposed to be the fourth day of the season, N.H.L.
Commissioner Gary Bettman and his aides will meet at league headquarters in Manhattan at noon with Bob Goodenow, the union leader, and assorted players.


High Court Refuses Review in Libel Case Against The Times
Acting on a libel lawsuit against The New York Times, the Supreme Court yesterday let stand a ruling in favor of The Times that gave a book review wider legal latitude than that given to a news article.
The Court's decision against reviewing the case meant the end of the suit by Dan E. Moldea, an author who contended that he was libeled in a review in The New York Times Book Review in 1989.
The review described a book he wrote as "sloppy journalism."


World News Briefs; India Says Spread Of Plague Is Halted
Indian health officials said today that the spread of plague across the country had been checked.
"We have reached the point of the curve when the cases will now start coming down," said M. S. Dayal, the Health Secretary.


Move Over, Rockefeller, G.O.P.'s Got A New Idol
"I'm a Christie Whitman Republican," Bernadette Castro told a radio audience last summer.
"What Christie is doing is what we should all be doing," George E. Pataki said last month.


No Headline
"It was an unbelievable experience. No one had seen them for 50 years. No restorer had touched them for 70 years. Many of them came from the private collection of Otto Krebs, near Weimar, that had virtually never been seen at all." -- MIKHAIL PYOTROVSKY of the Hermitage, recalling his first sight of a secret trove of Impressionist paintings.  [ C16:3. ]


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about a ruling in the bankruptcy case of the New Valley Corporation referred incorrectly to negotiations between the company and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation.
A spokeswoman for the Federal agency said yesterday that no agreement had been reached with the company on its pension obligations.


Serbs Claim Ownership Of Airport At Sarajevo
Sarajevo's main lifeline, its airport, has been closed for 11 days because Bosnian Serbs refuse to guarantee its safety unless the principle of Serbian ownership of the airfield is established, United Nations officials said today.
The demand by the Serbs, who ceded the airport to United Nations control in June 1992, has posed a sharp new threat to Sarajevo and again confronted United Nations military commanders with the issue of how to respond.
Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, commander of the United Nations forces, has chosen negotiation, but NATO pressure to adopt a tougher stance is growing.


Chiefs' Smith Fitted for Thumb Brace
Kansas City defensive end NEIL SMITH, the league's sack leader last season, is being fitted with a special thumb brace that he will likely wear for the rest of the season.
He injured his right thumb during Kansas City's Sept. 25 loss to the Los Angeles Rams when he caught the thumb in an opponent's jersey and strained ligaments.
The surgical procedure to implant a pin in the thumb was scheduled for today. (AP)


Pataki: Promising Tax Cuts
CANDIDATE George E. Pataki  PRODUCER Russo, Marsh &amp; Associates, Alexandria, Va., and Sacramento, Calif.


Andre Lwoff, 92, Biologist, Dies; Shared Nobel for Study of Cells
Andre Lwoff, who with two colleagues at the Pasteur Institute in Paris, shared the 1965 Nobel Prize in physiology and medicine, died in Paris on Friday at the age of 92, according to that institution.
He was the sole survivor of those who shared the prize, the others being Dr.
Francois Jacob and Dr.
Jacques Monod.


Israel Takes New Steps With Jordan
After meeting with President Clinton today, Jordanian and Israeli officials announced a series of cooperative steps, including a marine park and a new border crossing, as they pushed toward their goal of a full peace treaty by the end of this year.
At a White House ceremony, Mr.
Clinton hailed the new steps, which could include construction of a canal connecting the Dead Sea and the Red Sea, and a free trade zone spanning two ports, Eilat in Israel and Aqaba in Jordan.


Vivra Inc.(V,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Oakley Likely to Report
After his productive meeting with Knicks management last week, Charles Oakley will likely report to training camp Friday, according to a person familiar with negotiations.
"I believe Charles will be there," he said.
"The meeting was positive. It's always good when you meet face to face."
Oakley has threatened to hold out, unhappy that he is locked into a contract with four years remaining that will pay him $2.2 million this season.
For months, Oakley has sought a contract extension, a one-year balloon payment of about $10 million.


Clinton Lifts Ban on Contacts With Sinn Fein
President Clinton lifted a generation-old ban today on official contacts between the United States and Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army.
The White House said its view now is that an organization condemned by successive Administrations as terrorist is seeking to advance its objectives "by peaceful means."


Bush Discovers, and Enjoys, a Life After Politics
Back home it is five weeks before Election Day, and many candidates are running for their lives, and both parties are humming with intrigue.
But for the first time in a very long time, the ultimate party man, former President George Bush, is on the sidelines.
Quite happily, he says.
He is spending this day, a Sunday, in Guatemala, rumbling through the Central American countryside in a bus on a relief mission for Americares, a Connecticut-based charity that his wife, Barbara, serves as "ambassador at large."


Finish Line Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Hurricanes In a Rare Position: Underdogs
On Sunday, his day off, Tirrell Greene pulled out a tape of last year's Miami-Florida State game and watched the whole unhappy mess, a 28-10 Hurricane loss.
"Remembering helps you to rededicate yourself and to focus that much more," Greene, a senior offensive tackle at Miami, said today.


Confidence In South Africa Debt
South Africa won a long-sought prize from Wall Street yesterday: an investment-grade rating from a major credit-rating agency that is certain to make it less costly for the country to borrow money to build roads, provide electricity and create jobs for millions of poor black citizens.
Moody's Investor's Service, one of the two major firms that judge the ability of corporations and governments to pay back what they owe, awarded South Africa a rating just above subinvestment, or junk bond, status.


Frustrated Carroll Promises to Realign the Lineup
Until today, Coach Pete Carroll had decided to let the Jets try to play themselves into a victory.
But this was one of the worst morning-afters following one of the worst Sundays of the season.
The status quo is over.
In the wake of their third straight loss, Carroll told his players today at a team meeting: "Some starters won't be playing as much."


Some Qualities Are Beside the Point
Some musicians have no need for virtuosity; it would only get in the way of their music and performing style.
When the Jesus Lizard, a quartet based in Chicago, performed on Saturday night at Irving Plaza, its singer, David Yow, dived into the audience repeatedly and sang entire songs while propped up on the arms and heads of his fans.
Remarkably, Mr.
Yow rarely missed more than a line or two of each song, even when he was accidentally dropped on the floor.
Mr.
Yow didn't care much about sound quality when onstage either.
He often cupped his hands around the microphone to muffle his voice and dropped the microphone on the ground with a thud.
The music was much less freewheeling than Mr.
Yow's antics.
The Jesus Lizard plays hard, heavy rock in which the guitar, bass and drums are strictly syncopated, providing structure behind Mr.
Yow's distorted lyrics about death and mayhem.
The bassist, David Wm.
Sims, is the lead instrumentalist, plucking his bass incessantly and melodically over the loud, precise drumming of Mac McNeilly and the low-pitched chiming of Duane Denison's guitar.
The result is the muddy mixture of industrial music, Southern rock and heavy metal that the Jesus Lizard has been performing almost peerlessly for more than five years.


Conserve Medical Supplies, and Lower Costs
To the Editor:
As a volunteer at the Children's Hospital in Manizales, Colombia, I recently spent six weeks in observing that country's health care system.
I learned many things about medicine in a developing country, but what impressed me most was the sense of conservation of supplies.


New Puzzle Arises on Universe's Age
TWO teams of astronomers have independently arrived at new estimates of the size and age of the universe, one of the fundamental puzzles of cosmology.
Their estimates disagree, and both give ages for the universe that are younger than the oldest observed stars -- an apparent paradox in need of an explanation.
In one calculation of the universe's expansion rate, by which its size and age can be derived, a team led by Dr.
Michael J. Pierce of Indiana University in Bloomington reached an estimate of 7 billion to 11 billion years.
The astronomers made a more precise measurement of the distance to the Virgo cluster of galaxies, 50 million light-years away, as the basis for computing the rate at which the universe is expanding.
A faster expansion rate means less time has elapsed since the expansion began with the Big Bang, the theorized moment of cosmic creation.


Judge Named By Whitman To Top Court
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman today nominated to the New Jersey Supreme Court James H. Coleman Jr., the son of a sharecropper who in three decades as a state judge has earned a reputation as a judicial moderate.
If approved by the State Senate, he would be the first black judge to serve on the state's highest court.
The Governor described Judge Coleman, who currently sits on the Appellate Court, as a man of solid credentials who has brought a balanced approach to his decisions.


Legal Aid Society Plays a Big Role in New York's Courts
Unlike most American cities, New York relies heavily on the Legal Aid Society to represent the indigent not just in civil matters, but in criminal cases as well.
The strike by the private nonprofit organization will affect the gamut of cases: everything from criminal prosecutions and appeals to tenant disputes, immigration hearings, child abuse and neglect proceedings, prisoners' rights suits, and unemployment and welfare benefits cases.


Long-Term Rates Highest in 2 Years
Long-term interest rates rose yesterday to their highest levels in more than two years as fresh evidence of economic strength and rising inflation reverberated through the bond market.
By late in the day, the price of the 30-year Treasury bond fell 13/32 , to 95, while its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from its price, rose to 7.85 percent, from 7.81 percent on Friday.
It is the highest yield on a 30-year bond since June 1992, when yields were at 7.87 percent.


Robb Beams as President Joins Him for Fund Raising
Bucking a wave of Democratic candidates running away from President Clinton, Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia appeared downright radiant tonight, as Mr.
Clinton gave him a warm and robust endorsement, imploring Virginians not to let Oliver L. North win a Senate seat in November.
In the first of two appearances tonight for the incumbent, Mr.
Clinton used a 20-minute speech to criticize Republican tactics in Congress and on the stump, as well as to energize a campaign that has often seemed moribund against the more dynamic style of Mr.
North.


Corrections
The Music column in the Westchester Weekly on Sunday misstated the time of a concert next Sunday by Gary Rosen, a folk singer, at the Rosenthal Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. in Pleasantville.
It will be at 1 P.M., not 2.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about former President George Bush and his brother, Prescott, and their decisions to support competing candidates for governor of Connecticut, carried an erroneous byline.
The writer was Kirk Johnson, not Dirk Johnson.


INSIDE
Hartford Schools Go Private
Hartford became the first community in the nation to put its entire school system under private management.
Page B1.
U.S.
Ends Ban on Sinn Fein
1
The United States ended a ban on contacts with the Irish Republican Army's political arm, recognizing its new commitment to peace.
Page A8.


Disputes on Deep Bacteria
THE reported discovery of living bacteria in ancient rocks buried deep under Virginia evokes memories of bitter disputes after similar reports in the past.
Mindful of this history, the experimenters have resorted to heroic efforts to avoid contamination.
In the mid-1960's, Dr.
Bartholomew Nagy of Fordham University and colleagues reported extracting five types of "organized elements," resembling fossil bacteria, from within a meteorite that had fallen on France in 1864.


Ron Wikberg, Prison Reporter And Author, 51
Ron Gene Wikberg, who became an award-winning journalist while serving a life term for murder, died on Sunday at his home in Rohrersville, Md.
He was 51.
The cause was cancer, said Dave Isay, a friend in New York City.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the challenges faced by female candidates this year referred incompletely to races involving women who have female running mates.
Besides the ticket of Dawn Clark Netsch, the Democratic nominee for governor of Illinois, with Penny Severns, the campaign for governor of Connecticut includes the independent ticket of Lieut.
Gov.
Eunice S. Groark and Audrey Rowe.


In Mamet's First Novel, They Speak Mametese
THE VILLAGE  By David Mamet  238 pages. Little, Brown &amp; Company. $21.95.
At first glance, David Mamet's first novel, "The Village," has a lot in common with his plays.
Like "American Buffalo," "Sexual Perversity in Chicago" and "Glengarry Glen Ross," it's an ensemble piece, featuring several characters caught up in a common condition.
Like "Speed-the-Plow" and "Glengarry," it probes the Darwinian rules that govern man's existence.
And like all of Mr.
Mamet's plays and screenplays, it boasts the author's by now patented language: an almost musical idiom made up of silences and short-cuts, innuendoes, ellipses and repetitions.


High Court Blocks Rent-Control Evictions
The United States Supreme Court yesterday ordered a lower court to restudy a decision that would have allowed the Federal Government to evict tenants from rent-regulated apartments acquired from failed savings institutions in New York City.
The order vacated the decision and sent two cases back to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which had undercut the rent regulations with a decision in March that affected nine apartments at 444 East 57th Street in Manhattan.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Loose and Fleet-Fingered To Sizzling and Driven  Frick Collection
Jon Kimura Parker ended his piano recital on Sunday afternoon with an audacious style-hopping suite.
It began with a wonderfully loose, fleet-fingered rendering of Chick Corea's "Got a Match?" and ended with a sizzling, driven account of the Fugue from the Barber Sonata.
Between them were vignettes by John Adams, Alexina Louie and Walter Buczynski, brief essays in Minimalism, mystically atmospheric tone painting and mildly atonal pointillism.
Oddly enough, the progression worked so well that objections to the truncating of the Barber evaporated.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball Association  CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Named Sidney Lowe assistant coach.


Smaller Asian Markets Did Well in 3d Quarter
After favoring Japanese stocks early in the year, international investors moved toward other Asian markets in the third quarter.
Markets were tepid in Europe, but strong in Latin America.
"It's sort of a reversal of what happened in the first quarter," said Steven Nagourney, chief global strategist at Lehman Brothers.
"We're moving into a new paradigm here."


Under Gergiyev, The Kirov Serves A Russian Feast
Nearly every performance by Valery Gergiyev that I have heard in New York City has left behind an afterglow, a sound or texture or effect or idea that remained in the ear and mind long after the performance.
Just last season, Mr.
Gergiyev, music director of the Kirov Opera, led the New York Philharmonic in a stunning survey of Mussorgsky's "Pictures at an Exhibition" that was full of daring, imaginative brushstrokes.
He also made his Metropolitan Opera debut conducting Verdi's "Otello," and in his empathetic shaping of the score proved to be an ideal accompaniment for the contemporary master of the title role, Placido Domingo.
Last weekend at Carnegie Hall, Mr.
Gergiyev brought the Kirov Opera's orchestra here from St.
Petersburg as part of a 12-city United States tour, and again showed why he inspires the sort of wonder that used to be reserved for touring Russians during the Iron Curtain days.
Mr.
Gergiyev (born in 1953) has established the Kirov Opera as the most significant musical organization in Russia (at least for Westerners).
Despite flaws in some performances in these two sold-out concerts, he proved again to be one of the most impressive contemporary performers of the Russian orchestral repertory.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.81
5.44
3.11
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.92
4.64
2.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.38
5.20
3.08
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.65
7.60
5.32
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.85
7.81
6.00
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.70
8.66
7.04
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.59
6.58
5.43
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Drillers Find Lost World of Ancient Microbes
FICTION writers have fantasized about it.
Prominent scientists have theorized about it.
Experimentalists have delved into it.
Skeptics have ridiculed it.
But for decades, nobody has had substantial evidence one way or another on the question of whether the depths of the rocky earth harbor anything that could be considered part of the spectacle of life -- until now.
Two teams of scientists, drilling deep beneath land and sea, have independently come up with tantalizing clues that swarms of microbial life thrive deep within the planet, the evidence in one case coming from a depth of nearly two miles.


Station Buyer Says Revenge Is Motive for NBC's Challenge
SF Broadcasting, whose license to operate a Wisconsin television station has been challenged by NBC, asserted yesterday that NBC was trying to derail the company's expansion plans and to get revenge against the Fox network for upsetting the status quo in the broadcasting industry.
Thomas R. Herwitz, the president of SF Broadcasting, said yesterday that NBC had no legal basis to challenge the license.
The station in question, WLUK in Green Bay, is now an NBC affiliate and would switch to Fox if the sale to SF is permitted.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  U.S.
RAID ON HAITI GUNMEN  Cheered on by people in the street, American troops raided the headquarters of the main group of civilian gunmen who have been terrorizing Haitians and carried out other arms searches.
A1


Clinton Talks About Religion As His Anchor
Sounding alternately introspective and frustrated by attacks on his Administration, President Clinton told religion journalists today that he read the Bible and other religious books for guidance and to cope with the isolation of the Presidency.
He defended his Administration's stand on abortion rights and on homosexuals in the military, saying he had read Scripture that had been cited by religious conservatives who are opposed to abortion and found the passages ambiguous, at least in terms of guiding a legal response to the issue.


New Valley Dissenters
Some shareholders of the New Valley Corporation, the holding company that owns Western Union, asked a Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday to reconsider her decision that the only reorganization plan to be considered by creditors would be the one devised by the company's management.
A group of shareholders has proposed an alternative reorganization plan that seeks to oust New Valley's chairman, Bennett S. LeBow.


Delivery Man Is Shot Dead On His Route
After making his regular Monday delivery at a Brooklyn market that had been on his route for 15 years, a 60-year-old milk delivery man was shot and killed yesterday as he returned to his truck parked across the street, the police said.
The victim, Gerald Goldberg, 60, struggled with two assailants who approached while he was crossing Myrtle Avenue in Fort Greene, said a police spokeswoman, Detective Kim Royster.
One of the two demanded the cash Mr.
Goldberg was carrying, then shot him in the stomach with a handgun, she said, but it was not clear whether the assailants made off with any money after the shooting.


Pepsi Venture By Ex-Officer Of Coca-Cola
Ian R. Wilson was passed over in 1980 for chairman of the Coca-Cola Company, which selected Roberto C. Goizueta instead.
Yesterday, with a touch of revenge, Mr.
Wilson joined executives from Pepsi-Cola at a news conference in New York promoting Pepsi and its return to South Africa as a product in sync with the new politics of a country it left in 1985 amid concern over sanctions.
Mr.
Wilson, a white South African who joined Coca-Cola as an accountant in 1956 and rose to become vice chairman, even tried to vilify Coca-Cola as having established its dominance in the $1 billion soft-drink market in South Africa under the rules of the old regime.


Observer; The Visionary Son
When he was little my son used to scoff at me.
"Someday," I used to say, "when I am used up and decrepit and hovering between life and death I want to be able to call for my son the doctor, who will then come and save my life."
"Hah!" he would scoff.
"Hah! 'My son the doctor,' eh? A fat lot of good he'll do you in that future someday of your decrepitude, old-timer-to-be."


Proving a Specialized Need All Over Again
Gerard Schwarz and his New York Chamber Symphony, which opened their 19th season over the weekend, are at a challenging pass.
The 92d Street Y, the ensemble's founding patron, has made clear its intention to get out of the orchestra management business and to cut back on its arts presentations generally.
The orchestra's response was to form its own board and to start raising money for its budget.
There has even been talk of moving to Carnegie Hall or Alice Tully Hall, but cooler heads on the board have argued against severing the umbilical cord precipitately.
The orchestra has a long association with the Y and its concert hall, and it has a loyal subscriber base there.
For Mr.
Schwarz and his musicians, this new independence means having to prove anew that there is a need for them in New York, a city rich in orchestras of all sizes and specialties.
From a utopian perspective, this should not be a problem: the orchestra has always played well, and Mr.
Schwarz has often used its youthful vigor and the transparency afforded by its chamber proportions to present illuminating views of familiar scores.


Report Finds Shortage of A.T.M.'s in Poor Areas
Bank branches in the Bronx, Brooklyn and Queens are less likely to have automatic teller machines than branches in Manhattan, and the disparity is much greater between middle-income and poor areas within each of the boroughs, a new study has found.
The problem is fear of crime, both by banks and their customers, according to the study released yesterday by the staff of Mark Green, the city's Public Advocate.
And a simple, if limited, solution offered in the report is to put the machines inside or in front of police precinct houses.


The Finalists Are Selected For National Book Awards
The fifteen books of fiction, nonfiction and poetry chosen as finalists for the 1994 National Book Awards include "A Frolic of His Own," by William Gaddis; "How We Die: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter," by Sherwin B. Nuland, and "Like Most Revelations," by Richard Howard.
The three winners are to be announced on Nov. 16 and receive $10,000 each.
The awards, administered by the National Book Foundation, are given for books written by American citizens and published in the United States between Dec. 1, 1993, and Nov. 30, 1994.
In its announcement yesterday, the foundation said that 165 publishers had submitted a record 740 books for consideration this year.


A G.M. Test of Productivity: Making Parts 24 Hours a Day
Two General Motors components plants in the Midwest are operating round the clock seven days a week as part of a broad effort to wring greater productivity from the company's high-cost workers, a G.M. executive said today.
The highly unusual pace of production, a one-year experiment, is proving efficient, the executive said, and G.M. may put other plants on similar schedules as it hunts for ways to increase capacity on the cheap.


New Shock for CBS: Sunday Movie Ratings
CBS continued to receive bad news from its prime-time schedule yesterday.
It endured some of the lowest ratings for a Sunday movie that the network has ever received, and it was forced to concede defeat in a showdown of new, highly praised medical dramas.
CBS's Sunday movie, "The Gambler V," a fourth sequel to a cowboy story starring Kenny Rogers, averaged only an 8.1 rating on Sunday night in the preliminary figures from the 32 biggest cities measured by the A. C. Nielsen Company.
Last year, CBS's Sunday movies averaged a 16.2 national rating. (Each national rating point last year represented 942,000 homes.)


Haiti's Attaches: Deadly Heirs to the Tontons Macoute
In one form or another, all of Haiti's paramilitary gunmen, known collectively as "attaches," are descendants of the dreaded Tontons Macoute, set up a generation ago by the dictator Francois Duvalier.
Many , like the armed forces commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, are the sons, nephews or grandsons of leaders or members of the Tontons Macoute, and for that reason continue to be referred to by many Haitians simply as "Macoutes."
The largest and most important of these paramilitary groups is the Front for the Advancement and Progress of Haiti, or Fraph, founded after the military coup that overthrew the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide on Sept. 30, 1991.


2d Trial in Libel Case Opens With Blocks and Interview Tape
A set of wooden alphabet blocks and a comically incomprehensible section of a tape-recorded interview animated opening arguments today in the second libel trial brought by Jeffrey M. Masson against the writer Janet Malcolm for a 1983 New Yorker article she wrote about him.
Ms.
Malcolm's lawyer, Gary L. Bostwick, used the tape recording to suggest her difficulties in making sense of a quarter of a million words of colorful but disjointed conversations with Mr.
Masson, and the child's blocks to spell out the word "story" and demonstrate her method of organizing her material into themes.


Stride Rite Corp.(SRR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2


Sports of The Times; Calloway O'ersteps The Line
CHRIS CALLOWAY, a professional football player, got so excited at catching a pass Sunday afternoon in New Orleans that when he rose after having been tackled he flung the ball to the earth and appeared to say something, possibly uncomplimentary, to his tackler.
Or maybe he was simply hyperventilating at his accomplishment.
The referee immediately hit his team, the Giants, with a penalty, and the league said yesterday it would hit Calloway with a $2,000 fine.
"You can't do anything anymore," Calloway complained later.
"It's becoming a boring league." He also said: "We need excitement in the league. They're taking away our opportunity to celebrate."


Mandela Thanks U.N. for Apartheid Fight
Nelson Mandela addressed the General Assembly today as South Africa's first black President, thanked the United Nations for its help in overcoming apartheid and asked it to make a new commitment to fight poverty.
"It surely must be one of the ironies of the age that this august assembly is addressed for the first time in its 49 years by a South African head of state drawn from among the African majority of what is an African country," Mr.
Mandela said.


Safety-Kleen Corp.(SK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 10


The N.F.L. View on Taunting
Here is how the National Football League explains rule on taunting:
Taunting of an opponent is a foul under N.F.L. playing rules and will be called by the game officials (15-yard penalty).
In addition, the taunting player will be fined.


Not Just Another First Monday
The Supreme Court that convened yesterday has a rapidly changing membership, a younger and different look and a docket that could quickly define the ideology and personality of the newly constituted tribunal.
The term that opened, by law, on the first Monday in October is thus the subject of greater than usual interest, even suspense, over the developing shape of American law.
Not since President Nixon named four Justices in his first term has the Court's membership changed so dramatically.
Then the Court remained stable for the next 14 years as only two new members arrived.
Now five of the justices, including the Court's second woman, have been appointed in just the past six years.


A New Effort to Stop Illegal Aliens


Beyond the U.S. Raid: Haiti Is Still a Minefield
With the raid today on Haiti's main paramilitary organization, the United States has finally acknowledged that civilian gunmen pose more of a threat to the American presence here than either the uniformed Haitian Army or the police.
Disarming such groups completely and permanently, however, is likely to prove much more difficult, even if American forces are willing to assume the police duties implied by their role in today's attack.
By striking decisively at the headquarters of the most belligerent and feared of those groups, known as Fraph, the American forces that began landing here two weeks ago scored a significant political victory and raised their stock among the populace.
"This is what we've been waiting for," Haitians chanted gleefully as they watched Fraph members being handcuffed, disarmed and loaded onto United States Army trucks.


Cowboys Close to Signing Cleveland Gary
Concerned that EMMITT SMITH's strained right hamstring might not be fully healed by this weekend, the Dallas Cowboys were close yesterday to signing the free agent running back CLEVELAND GARY, who underwent a physical.


Why We're Redesigning Computer Keyboards
To the Editor:
Your Personal Computers column by Stephen Manes on odd-looking keyboards (Science Times, Sept. 27) was colorful and amusing.
While Mr.
Manes makes several important points, his wit belies the seriousness of the issue for millions of keyboard users.
I comment as a Harvard-trained researcher and president of the company that developed one of the keyboards he mentions.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International  South Africa won a long-sought prize from Wall Street: an investment-grade rating from Moody's that is expected to make it easier to raise money to build roads, provide electricity and create jobs.
Standard &amp; Poor's rated the debt below investment grade.  [ Page D1. ] Volvo is facing the stiffest test yet of its ability to survive as an independent company, despite a recent surge in sales and profits driven by economic recovery in its largest markets.  [ D1. ] Global investors moved toward Asian markets other than Japan in the third quarter.
Latin American stocks also did well.  [ D2. ] The Economy Pressure is building on Corporate America to bid up wages to attract machinists, computer specialists and other skilled workers in short supply.
Today's Columns  G.M.'s third-quarter profit will not be greatly reduced because of the lost production of vehicles during the strike at its complex in Flint, Mich., last week, analysts say.
Market Place.  [ D8. ] A humorous campaign for DHL Worldwide Express hopes to raise doubts about DHL's rivals among the executives who decide which express service to use.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D20. ]


METRO DIGEST
MAYOR MOVES TO REPLACE LAWYERS
Mayor Giuliani, setting up one of the biggest labor showdowns of his administration, moved to replace the Legal Aid lawyers who walked off their jobs in a bid for higher wages.
A1.
New York City relies heavily on the Legal Aid Society to represent the indigent.
B3.
BLACK VOTERS KEY TO CUOMO STRATEGY
In his struggle for political survival, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo knows that he needs a huge turnout of black voters on Nov. 8.
Mr.
Cuomo is supported enthusiastically by a large number of black elected officials, but public dissent among black leaders, one Cuomo adviser said, is contributing to a sense that "there's not a propulsive vote out there right now." A1.
The promises of the New York lottery have become an issue in the governor's race. B4.


'Black Harvard' Label Patronizes Morehouse
To the Editor:
Your report on the dispute between Leroy Keith and the board of trustees at Morehouse College (Education page, Sept. 28) makes an unnecessary reference to Morehouse as "the black Harvard." Since I attended Morehouse and Harvard Divinity School, I speak with some assurance when I say Morehouse is not the black version of Harvard or any other institution of higher learning.


Owners 10, Players 0 (in Canada)
The hockey lockout/postponement is making Nordiques fans worry more than ever that this is the team's last season in Quebec.
In Edmonton, the deferral of the season is encouraging Oilers fans to turn friendly to the widely unpopular owner, Peter Pocklington.
In Winnipeg, Jets fans back the position of Commissioner Gary Bettman.
Morley Scott, the Oilers' radio analyst, said, "People thought the lockout was inevitable." He said fans have heard Glen Sather, Edmonton's general manager, say for years that high salaries would "kill the game."


Irvan Is Hoping to Race Again
Ernie Irvan continues his rehabilitation from injuries suffered in a practice crash at Michigan International Speedway on Aug. 20.
"He's making steady progress, gauged by such things as a gradual increase in the amount of weight he can lift with each kind of exercise equipment," said Brian VanDercook, a spokesman for Robert Yates Racing, Irvan's Winston Cup team.
"Judging by what his physical therapist told me yesterday," VanDercook said by telephone from Charlotte Wednesday night, "he's made some significant progress from last Friday."


MAGMA POWER WORKS TO AVERT PARTIAL TENDER OFFERS
The Magma Power Company said yesterday that its board had adopted a stockholder-rights plan "designed to guard against partial tender offers" like a $840 million plan proposed by the California Energy Company of Omaha.
Magma also filed a lawsuit against California Energy in Reno yesterday to block a takeover, contending that under Nevada law such a takeover could not proceed without the approval of Magma's board.
The companies are two of the nation's largest geothermal power developers.
California Energy officers did not immediately respond to telephone messages seeking comment on Magma's shareholder plan.
Magma said preferred stock purchase rights would be distributed at the rate of one right for each share of common stock held on Oct. 14.
Each right will allow stockholders to buy a fraction of a newly issued share of series A preferred stock at a specified price if any one shareholder acquired 10 percent or more of Magma's stock.


Whitman Makes Her Choice for Top Court


A Sound Japanese Trade Pact
The Clinton Administration has negotiated a good trade agreement with the Japanese that should benefit both countries.
By opening up Japanese markets for insurance, telecommunications and medical equipment, the accord will bring lower prices to Japan and higher sales to the U.S.
The U.S. backed down from benighted demands that numerical targets be set for imports into Japan -- and seems willing to turn down the rhetoric that has needlessly inflamed trade disputes.
The economic impact of the accord will be small -- boosting Japanese imports by less than $2 billion, by one estimate, only some of which will come from U.S. companies.
Nor is the agreement novel; in hammering hard at blatantly protectionist rules and regulations in Japan, it mirrors accords that previous Administrations struck on computers and farm goods.


World News Briefs; Brazilians Voting In Presidential Election
Voting for president for only the second time since 1960, Brazilians turned out today for a general election widely expected to produce an outright majority for Fernando Henrique Cardoso, a former Finance Minister and a fiscal conservative.
Officials are to start counting ballots on Tuesday.


For Giants, Sideline Was A Sideshow
Late in the second half on Sunday in New Orleans as the Giants began to unravel, blown apart at the seams by their own mistakes and a hungry Saints team, shouting matches broke out among players on the sideline.
Some defensive players were screaming at one another in frustration at the team's inability to stop New Orleans and some felt others weren't playing hard enough.
For a brief period, frustration, anger and confusion stunned the team.


Separate Trial for 1 In Kidnapping Case
A Hasidic man charged with helping to kidnap a Jewish teen-ager was granted a separate trial yesterday as jury selection began in the trial of two other Hasidim in the case.
The case stems from a battle between the family of the youth, Shai Fhima Reuven, 15, and various Hasidim over the youth's care and religious upbringing.


In Cuomo Strategy, Black Voters Are Vital in Struggle for Survival
The Rev.
Charles L. Norris, a black Baptist preacher, has endorsed Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo from the pulpit of the Bethesda Missionary Baptist Church in Jamaica, Queens, in each of his three previous gubernatorial campaigns.
He says he may not do so this year.
The Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d at the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem is considering even greater heresy: he says he may support Mr.
Cuomo's Republican opponent, State Senator George E. Pataki.


What Controversy? N.F.L. Stands By Call
The National Football League stood by its officials today in what was a controversial -- and the league says, correct -- call during the Giants' 27-22 loss to the New Orleans Saints Sunday.
Thus Giant wide receiver Chris Calloway will be fined $2,000 for unsportsmanlike conduct.
The call is still a sore subject with the Giants, and Coach Dan Reeves spent most of his news conference today talking about it.
While emphasizing that he does not like taunting, he didn't back down from remarks made immediately after the game in which he said the league is legislating the fun out of the game.


Corel Corp.(COSFF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


To Cheers, U.S. Troops Clear Haitian Gunmen's Clubhouse
Cheered by deliriously happy crowds, American soldiers today cleaned out the nest of gunmen bolstering military rule who have scattered pro-democracy demonstrations with guns, clubs and machetes.
"Liberty! Liberty!" the crowds chanted wildly, waving their hands, as the soldiers pushed now-cowed gunmen, their hands tied with plastic manacles, into big trucks and scooped up a miscellaneous assortment of M-1 rifles, Uzi submachine guns, pistols and clubs with nails sticking out.


Female Kicker Fails to Make Duke Team
A first-year Duke student and would-be place-kicker, SUE MERCER, failed in her bid yesterday to become the first female to play for a National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I football team, Blue Devil Coach FRED GOLDSMITH said.
"She's not where she needs to be to kick at this level of football," Goldsmith said.
"The leg strength wasn't there." Mercer won't make the team as a walk-on, but will be offered a spot as a special teams manager, the coach said.


In 'Silk Stocking' Region, Candidates Stress Strengths
In an election year when the Democrats are on the defensive in many parts of the country, the race for New York's 14th Congressional District stands out.
In a debate yesterday, Representative Carolyn B. Maloney, a Democrat seeking re-election in the district that includes the Upper East Side of Manhattan and parts of Brooklyn and Queens, boasted about the accomplishments of her party during the last session.


Merrill Replaced as Manager
Stump Merrill's managerial career probably ended for good yesterday when the Yankees removed him from the helm of their Class AAA Columbus Clippers and reassigned him to an unspecified position within the organization.
Merrill, who managed the Clippers the last two seasons, was replaced by the organization's Class AA manager, Billy Evers.
While the 50-year-old Merrill had expressed a willingness to remain the Columbus manager until he retired, the Yankees decided to promote the 40-year-old Evers, who managed Class A Greensboro and Class AA Albany for the last two years, posting a combined record of 150-128.
Merrill managed the Yankees for most of 1990 and 1991, succeeding Bucky Dent and being replaced by Buck Showalter.
He has an overall minor league record of 936-674.


Mr. Espy Resigns
Mike Espy resigned under pressure as Secretary of Agriculture yesterday at a news conference remarkable for its brevity and general absence of whining.
For that he deserves credit.
He said he had been rendered ineffective by suspicions that he had been too cozy with industries he is supposed to regulate.
Quite true.
The only thing he might have added was that these suspicions were not doing his fellow Democrats much good either, especially with a midterm election only a month away.
Some of what Mr.
Espy has been accused of consists of small corporate favors like Super Bowl football tickets and free trips from Tyson Foods, the big Arkansas poultry producer.
Tyson also gave Mr.
Espy's 37-year-old girlfriend a $1,200 college scholarship.
The personal checks he has been busily writing to cover past expenses and eliminate what he called "any appearance of impropriety" amount so far to around $7,500.


Newborn Is Found Dead
The body of a newborn baby, its umbilical cord still attached, was found in a trash can in the Melrose section of the Bronx yesterday, the police said.
A man looking for soda cans found the infant's body about 10 P.M., near the intersection of 151st Street and Union Avenue, the police said.


Information America
Shares of Information America, which is based in Atlanta and offers on-line data searches for commercial transactions and business litigation, rose sharply yesterday after it agreed to be acquired by West Publishing, an Eagan, Minn., legal publisher.


Bassett Furniture Industries(BSET,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


CHRONICLE
Paddy Chayefsky remains a towering figure in the annals of television and movies even 13 years after his death.
Tomorrow evening, the Museum of Television and Radio will show a new BBC/WNET production of one of his works from the early 1950's, "The Mother." The new production stars Anne Bancroft and Joan Cusack.
Afterward, a panel of speakers will assess his contributions to modern drama.
Among them will be his son, DAN CHAYEFSKY, himself a writer.


No Review of Court Ruling That Let Demjanjuk Return
The Supreme Court today struck what could be a fatal blow to the Government's 17-year effort to banish John Demjanjuk, the World War II figure whom the Justice Department once described as one of the most barbaric Nazi figures of the Holocaust.
Without comment, the Court refused to review a Federal appeals decision that had found that Justice Department lawyers had mishandled the case and fraudulently deceived both the courts and the defense team when they accused Mr.
Demjanjuk of being the notorious Ivan the Terrible, a sadistic gas chamber operator at the Treblinka death camp in Poland.


Defendant in Clinic Attack Wins a Ruling on Evidence
Lawyers for the former minister being tried here in the killing of an abortion clinic doctor and the doctor's bodyguard were given permission today to gather evidence to support their contention that the shootings were justified as a way to prevent illegal abortions.
The ruling, by Judge Roger Vinson of Federal District Court, came on the first day of the trial of the former Presbyterian minister, Paul J. Hill, 40.
A jury was selected today, and opening arguments are expected on Tuesday.


Chess
The Professional Chess Association's semifinal championship matches in Linares, Spain, both ended on Sept. 29 with identical one-sided results.
Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn defeated Nigel Short of England and Vishwanathan Anand of India defeated Michael Adams of England.
Each of the best-of-10-game series to pick a challenger for Gary Kasparov of Russia was decided by a 5 1/2-1 1/2 tally.
Kamsky and Anand will meet each other in the final in London in January.


RESULTS PLUS
ASIAN GAMES Women Pace China to Early Medal Lead China, with a predictably strong start from its female athletes, grabbed the lead yesterday on the opening day of medal competition at the 12th Asian Games in Hiroshima, Japan.
The Chinese women won five golds, two at the swimming pool and three with lifts in weight lifting that broke world records.
China also picked up golds in the men's 200 freestyle swim, men's team gymnastics and in the men's individual foil at the fencing arena.
That gave the Chinese eight gold medals, contrasted with the six won by Japan, which won all four karate events and one each in swimming and in the equestrian team dressage event.
China can increase its lead today when there are more finals at the pool. (AP)


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
Notre Dame Women Six years of methodical building paid the highest of dividends for the Fighting Irish.
They have been the talk of women's soccer since Sunday when they stopped North Carolina's winning streak at 92 with a scoreless tie in a tournament at St.
Louis.


The Case of the Swinging Detective
One thing about Anna Lee, the Arts &amp; Entertainment Network's new detective from the independent service London Weekend Television: no one is likely to confuse her with Miss Marple.
Played by Imogen Stubbs and based on a character from the novels of Liza Cody, Anna is in her sporadically swinging 20's, lives in the trendy Notting Hill section of London and drives a Sunbeam Alpine convertible that has seen better days.
A former policewoman who found the force both too confining and too sexist, she has decided to be a private detective with the small, rather eccentric Brierly Security in Kensington.
Anna and the unconventional adore each other.


CHRONICLE
Never in the darkest moments of her illness did LORI SCHILLER envision herself writing a book that would be optioned for the movies, or appearing on television, or testifying before leaders of the psychiatric profession in Washington.
All that has come about.
In June, Warner Books published her autobiographical book, "The Quiet Room: A Journey Out of the Torment of Madness," which she wrote with Amanda Bennett; it has been optioned by Touchstone Pictures.
The book describes her seven-year struggle with a form of schizophrenia in which she heard voices and for which she was hospitalized eight times, the last time for three years.


As Game Thrills Climb, So Do Costs
DOOMSDAY is coming next week, which is joyous news indeed for thousands of computer game fans.
Since its arrival last December, Doom has become one of the most widely played games for DOS-based personal computers.
The sequel, Doom II, is expected to arrive in stores next Monday, followed quickly by a version for Windows.
Versions for OS/2, Macintosh and Atari Jaguar computers are under development.


Faith C. Davis, 95, Triplet With Record
Faith Cardwell Davis, who with her sisters Hope Cardwell Brock and Charity Cardwell Lawson had been listed in the Guinness Book of Records as the world's oldest complete set of triplets, died on Sunday at Rolling Plains Memorial Hospital in Sweetwater, Tex.
She was 95.
The cause of death was believed to be a heart attack, said Dan McCoy, director of McCoy Funeral Home in Sweetwater.


Judge Declares Mistrial in Hurley Case
A judge in Sacramento, Calif., declared a mistrial yesterday after jurors said they could not decide whether a motorist who collided with Sacramento Kings guard BOBBY HURLEY's vehicle was guilty of reckless driving.
Jurors said they were deadlocked, 10-2, in favor of convicting DANIEL WIELAND, 38.
They got the case Friday, but Judge ROLAND L. CANDEE declared a mistrial.
Prosecutors did not say whether they would seek a new trial.


Patterns
Stow the Spike Heels, Please
Let others pile on the nose-tickling puffs of marabou and other artifacts of glitz.
The designer Zoran would have made his ladies check their stiletto heels at the door had they worn them to see his minimalist visions at his informal presentation here on Sunday night.


After Officer's Beating, Dismay Darkens Bay Ridge, but Views Differ on Gangs
It was an incongruous setting for a savage beating: a street of small shops and neat apartment buildings in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, where serious crime is not epidemic, where people support the police, go to church and fly Italian, Irish and American flags in the breezes off the Narrows of New York Harbor.
But for months there had been signs of trouble.
Rowdy young toughs had been carousing late into the night at 72d Street and Fort Hamilton Parkway and in nearby McKinley Park, drinking beer, smashing bottles, hurling garbage cans and shouting obscenities.
Residents had complained often to the police and dozens of summonses had been issued.


D'Arcy Masius And Amoco Part
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in Chicago and the Amoco Oil Company said yesterday that they had agreed to end their 40-year relationship after Amoco decided to place its account in review and the agency decided not to participate.
Billings were estimated at $30 million.
Hoy McConnell, managing director at D.M.B.&amp; B. in Chicago, confirmed reports of the split in The Delaney Report newsletter and Adweek.
"We're proud of our track record," he said, referring to the agency's work for Amoco gasolines like Amoco Silver and Crystal Clear Amoco Ultimate.


Sale of Ginsberg Papers Requires No Defense
To the Editor:
I wonder what sort of world Stephen Dixon (letter, Sept. 28) lives in to suggest that a writer like Allen Ginsberg should donate his papers to a university, rather than sell them?
Does Mr.
Dixon realize that long-term medical care in this country is not free but expensive?


Review/Fashion; Glamour a la Dietrich From Valentino
Valentino opened the spring fashion season here on Saturday with his Oliver collection.
It featured just one model, and she was enough to get the designer's message across.
The message was glamour, and the model was Nadja Auermann, the blond Valkyrie who seems to be the cover girl of the moment.


AGRICULTURE CHIEF QUITS AS SCRUTINY OF CONDUCT GROWS
Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy, whose ethical conduct has been under investigation for months, resigned under pressure today after it was disclosed that the nation's largest poultry producer gave his 37-year-old girlfriend a $1,200 college scholarship.
The latest disclosure follows a swirl of questions that center on Mr.
Espy's acceptance of transportation, lodging and sports tickets from large agricultural companies like Tyson Foods, which provided the scholarship to Patricia Dempsey, Mr.
Espy's girlfriend.
But other issues have also surfaced, including whether Mr.
Espy improperly charged the Government for personal travel to Mississippi, his home state, and billed taxpayers for vehicles for his personal use.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ROYAL CARIBBEAN CRUISES LTD., Miami, said it had ordered two 2,000-passenger ships from Chantiers de L'Atlantique of St.
Nazaire, France, for a combined cost of of $550 million.
PERKIN-ELMER CORP., Norwalk, Conn., completed the sale of its Metco division to Switzerland's Sulzer Technology Corp. after receiving regulatory approvals from American and European authorities.
Terms were not disclosed.


Executive Changes
CHRYSLER CORP., Highland Park, Mich., named Denis R. Root general manager of its Asia-Pacific operations.
GENERAL SIGNAL CORP.,Stamford, Conn., named Michael Lockhart president and chief operating officer.


Advanced Micro Shares Fall Despite Quarter's Sales Rise
Shares of Advanced Micro Devices Inc. dropped sharply yesterday, despite record sales, after the company told analysts that its fourth-quarter earnings could decline because of rising costs and continued price cuts by its rivals.
Advanced Micro shares fell $3.25, to $26.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.
For the quarter that ended on Sept. 25, Advanced Micro reported earnings of $86.7 million, or 86 cents a share, up 41 percent from $61.3 million, or 61 cents a share, in the comparable period a year earlier.
Analysts had expected earnings of 81 cents a share.
Revenue rose nearly 30 percent, to $543 million.


Italy Moved by Boy's Killing And the Grace of His Parents
It might have been any botched highway robbery in a land where highway robberies are not rare, except that the one who died when masked hoodlums opened fire on the car was an American, and only 7 years old.
The killing last week has inspired a remarkable display of soul-searching among Italians seized by what one newspaper called "our shame."


Truth, Trust and Lobbying Reform
The lobbying reform bill about to hit the Senate floor is not nearly as far-reaching as the campaign finance overhaul that died last week through indifference by the White House, foot-dragging by House Democrats and filibustering by Senate Republicans.
But it deserves support as an overdue swipe at Washington's influence-peddling game.
The bill would bar most of the meals, resort vacations and other gifts that lobbyists now bestow on lawmakers.
Other valuable provisions would close loopholes that now excuse most lobbyists from registering and would require disclosure of clients, fees and issues lobbied.


City to Replace Aid Attorneys Out on Strike
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, setting up one of the biggest labor showdowns of his administration, moved yesterday to replace the Legal Aid lawyers who walked off their jobs in a bid for higher wages.
Just hours after the lawyers formally voted to strike, Mr.
Giuliani terminated the city's contract with the Legal Aid Society, which is the direct employer of the lawyers.
The city pays the society $79 million annually to provide the lawyers to represent about 60 percent of the indigent defendants in the city's packed courts.


High Court Hears Arguments on Allowing Death Row Inmate to Offer New Evidence in Appeal
The Supreme Court over the last few years has erected high barriers to state death row inmates seeking Federal court review of their convictions and sentences.
The question for the Court today, as the Justices heard arguments on the opening day of the new term, was whether to make those barriers higher still.
At issue in a case from Missouri's death row is what standard Federal judges should apply in deciding whether to grant a hearing to an inmate who has already had one round of Federal court review but who asserts that newly discovered evidence now proves his innocence of the crime for which he has been sentenced to death.


Facing Reality in Haiti
Acknowledging the threat from civilian gunmen in Haiti is one thing, but disarming them is another.
News analysis, page A10.


76ers Invite Tate George to Training Camp
Three free agents, including former a Nets first-round pick, TATE GEORGE, have been invited to the Philadelphia 76ers' training camp in Lancaster, Pa.
Also invited were the rookies DERRALL DUMAS, a free agent center, and CHAD FAULKNER, a swingman.
All three have been working out with the 76ers.
George was selected by the Nets in the first round of the 1990 draft and spent three seasons in New Jersey. (AP)


Science Grants by Hughes Institute
An $86 million grant to 62 universities to improve science education will be announced today by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, an organization founded in 1953 by the secretive billionaire to help advance and improve science education.
The gift is the latest contribution to national science education programs at the collegiate level and in public schools by the Hughes organization and other philanthropic groups.
Since 1988, the Hughes Medical Institute has awarded $290 million to 213 research and doctorate-granting universities through its Undergraduate Biological Sciences Education Program.


Ivy Teams Unite for Winning Cause
Seven Ivy League teams won games against nonleague opponents last Saturday and the eighth team, Pennsylvania, was idle.
Nothing like that has happened since the opening Saturday of the 1970 season.
Furthermore, Yale beat Connecticut for the first time since 1987 and for only the second time since 1981.
That victory, coupled with Brown's triumph over Rhode Island the previous week, marked the first time Ivy teams had defeated Yankee Conference opponents since 1989.


Cairo Journal; In Islam's War, Students Fight on the Front Line
The fall semester at Al-Salaam high school has opened with a boisterous demonstration, arrests and finally violence after a dozen girls tried to force their way into the building wearing a traditional Muslim head covering called the niqaab.
The garment, which covers the hair, neck and face, is banned in the schools by the Government, but it has become a symbol of support for Islamic militants fighting to overturn Egypt's secular Government.
The start of the school year in Egypt has brought numerous such clashes with militant students.


If the N.F.L. Lords Build It, Someone May Stay in L.A.
The National Football League is concerned about both Los Angeles teams defecting to other cities and leaving the league without a franchise in the No. 2 market in the country.
That's why league officials have floated the idea of joining with the city, the state and private businesses in building a stadium in the Los Angeles area that would be the site of future Super Bowls on a rotating basis.
An entertainment complex, similar to the interactive N.F.L.
Experience exhibit at Super Bowl sites each year, would also adjoin the stadium.
Greg Aiello, the N.F.L.
Director of Communications, said the idea came up at the owner's meeting in Dallas last week.
N.F.L.
Commissioner Paul Tagliabue was asked about it during a Fox television broadcast on Sunday, making it public for the first time.


Federal Paper Board Co.(FBO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 10


On My Mind; Hunt Them Down
When a nation sets out to persecute a segment of its population, to hound them down, mark them, deprive them of the human care it gives to others, tells them they cannot work to earn their bread, that nation takes a large step toward persecuting other groups who live within its borders.
It follows as blood the wound.
In dictatorships, the first persecution is carried out by command, in full knowledge that other groups are on the list.


One Person's Public Good Is Another's Squeeze Play
SABATINI'S RESTAURANT, short and plain, sits on a prime corner of Pacific Avenue, dwarfed by glittering casinos.
Caesars stands across the street on one side of the two-story brick building.
On the other, gleaming like the head cheerleader, there is Trump Plaza.
Until a little over a year ago, this made business, and so life, easy for Clare and Vincent Sabatini.
They're the mom and pop of the family that has run the restaurant for 30 years.
Most of their business is casino-related; casino employees make up the regulars and casino guests take up the slack.
But the problem with a great spot is others want it.


Klingler May Lose His Stripes
The Bengals (0-5) are one of only two teams without a victory in the National Football League (the Broncos are the other).
But don't be surprised if there are more player changes in Cincinnati than coaching changes at the end of the year.
Quarterback David Klingler could be heading out the door before Coach Dave Shula is.


Hermitage Reveals It Hid Trove of Impressionist Art
After many years of enforced silence, the State Hermitage Museum in St.
Petersburg, Russia, has announced that it has been holding a major trove of French Impressionist and Post-Impressionist paintings from German private collections that were taken to the Soviet Union at the end of World War II and have not been seen since.
The paintings, many of which were widely believed to have been lost, are to be shown at the Hermitage in March.
The paintings, more than 70 works by such artists as Degas, Cezanne, Daumier, Toulouse-Lautrec, Monet, Pissarro, Renoir and van Gogh, were sent there by the Soviet military authorities in Germany, and consigned to the Hermitage, where they remained a strictly guarded state secret until after the regime fell in 1991.
Even after that, their existence was known to only a very few people until a brief news item about the exhibition appeared last week in the St.
Petersburg News.


Cave Filled With Glowing Skulls: A Pre-Columbian Palace of the Dead
THE narrow road into the Honduran rain forest was a mire of black mud, a grinding test for the hardiest four-wheel-drive vehicles.
After fording a wild river, everyone had to get out and hike up a steep slope.
The rocky trail was slippery, crawling with fire ants and bounded by green walls of vines hanging from tall trees.
This was the way to Cueva de Rio Talgua, the Cave of the River Talgua, a haunting place the explorers had taken to calling the Cave of the Glowing Skulls.
It is the site of a new-found archeological mystery.


PIPELINE IN AGREEMENT TO MARKET INTERNET SOFTWARE
The Pipeline Company, an Internet service provider in New York, reported yesterday that it had reached an agreement with Intercon Systems Inc. of Herndon, Va., to market Pipeline's proprietary Internet access software internationally to corporate, academic and commercial customers.
The agreement is one of the most ambitious attempts to establish a standard software control panel for nontechnical users of Internet, the global information network.


U.S. JUSTICES OPEN THEIR NEW SESSION BY REFUSING CASES
This was the day the Supreme Court of the United States said no.
Opening its 1994-95 term, the Court disposed of the new appeals that had accumulated over the three-month summer recess.
The Justices granted review in none of the new cases.
They turned down more than 1,600.


After 'Blue' and 'White,' the Rosiness of 'Red'
In the dense, archly mysterious films of Krzysztof Kieslowski, bold but ineffable patterns shape the characters' lives.
Coincidences, missed opportunities, overbearing visual clues and strange, haunting parallels: all of these contribute to a gradually emerging sense of destiny.
Stories develop like photographs in a darkroom.
They are sharply defined only in retrospect, when the process is complete.
So it is with "Three Colors," the schematic, madly audacious trilogy that is Mr.
Kieslowski's latest work, after "The Double Life of Veronique." (Claiming to be through with film making, the 53-year-old Mr. Kieslowski also insists that it will be his last.)


Two Officers to Serve Time for Illegal Search
Two New York City police officers were sentenced to serve time yesterday for ransacking two Harlem apartments and terrorizing the occupants four years ago in an illegal and futile search for a missing police radio.
"I hope to send a message that police misconduct will not be tolerated," said Acting Justice Bonnie Wittner in State Supreme Court as she sentenced Lieut.
Patricia Feerick to two years in jail and Officer Orlando Rosario to one to three years in state prison.


I.B.M. and Motorola Plan Debut of Power PC Lines
Continuing efforts to establish their Power PC microprocessor chip as a standard in products ranging from home electronics and video games to the most powerful computers, I.B.M. and Motorola Inc. plan separate introductions today of new Power PC machines for the corporate market.
Timed to coincide with an industry trade show in Manhattan, the two introductions seemingly pit the allies, which along with Apple Computer Inc. developed the Power PC technology, against one another.
Each is introducing new machines that range from powerful work stations for individuals to server computers capable of supporting tens or hundreds of workers.


Neighborhood Grocers, Not Big National Chains, Need Support
To the Editor:
Re your Sept. 22 article and Sept. 24 editorial about an effort to build a Pathmark supermarket in East Harlem: A subsidized superstore in East Harlem is neither needed nor wanted by residents and merchants.
There are more than 15 supermarkets in this low-income community.
They are not "overpriced" or "understocked" bodegas.
They occupy the same buildings that were abandoned by the chains that fled with the urban disorders of the 1960's.


Sex Offender Legislation Passes in the Senate
With only token debate and by unanimous votes, the State Senate passed a package of legislation today that would mandate harsher penalties for sex offenders, require community notification before the release of a convicted sex offender and allow authorities to register and track paroled sex offenders.
The 10-bill package, often referred to as Megan's Law in honor of a 7-year-old girl whose rape and murder last summer stirred public anger and spurred legislators into swift action, would replace a related set of bills that were rushed through the Assembly five weeks ago.


COMPANY REPORTS: Name That Baby Bell; Southwestern Chooses A Different Direction
Let other Baby Bells achieve their awkward maturity by finding future-tech names -- Pacific Telesis Group, the Ameritech Corporation, the Nynex Corporation -- redolent of start-up computer networking companies.
The Southwestern Bell Corporation, after two years of studies and nearly $1 million of expense, will henceforth be known as SBC Communications Inc.
If that name may lack a familiar ring, so does the new company logo.
Replacing a bell in a circle is an SBC with what look like radiation rays spewing from the "B." Company image consultants say the rays represent the information highway.


Lottery Company Executive Is Indicted in Kickbacks
A former national sales manager for the Gtech Corporation, the world's largest vendor of government-sponsored lottery game systems, was indicted today on charges of generating kickbacks by paying inflated consulting fees to companies controlled by two men whom the authorities named as co-conspirators.
Gtech has run New Jersey's lottery games since 1984 and is currently seeking a renewal of its contract, which would be worth about $100 million.
Two other companies have submitted competing bids.
The state is expected to decide in about a week which company will be awarded the contract.


Hartford Hires Group to Run School System
The Board of Education here voted tonight to hire a Minneapolis company to manage its 32 public schools, making Hartford the first community in the nation to put its entire school system under private management.
The vote was a huge victory for the company, Education Alternatives, which had staked its future as a corporate manager of public schools on winning a contract for an entire school district this year.


Gun Control
To the Editor:
New York City police officers have now, with very real guns, shot two children who brandished toy guns (news article, Sept. 29).
The fear of the officers is real because there are so many real guns out there, and so much danger.
But our society zealously cherishes the right to bear arms.
The obvious solution is a total and immediate ban on all toy guns.
RICHARD KANTRO  Kew Gardens, Queens, Sept. 30, 1994


Sainsbury Buys Stake In Giant Food
J.
Sainsbury P.L.C., Britain's largest food retailer, announced yesterday that it had agreed to buy a 16 percent stake in Giant Food Inc., the biggest supermarket operator in the Washington, D.C., area, for $325 million in cash.
In addition to 9.5 million nonvoting shares, which are traded on the American Stock Exchange, Sainsbury also bought half of Giant's voting stock, which will allow it to elect three of the seven members of the American company's board of directors.


Let's Also Think of Biotechnology Safety
To the Editor:
Re "Biodiversity Pact on the Ropes" (editorial, Sept. 26): More than just "Republican opposition and Democratic lethargy" are combining to put the Convention on Biological Diversity on the ropes.


A Choreographer Who Also Has Words
Bella Lewitzky has been called the conscience of American modern dance.
And even a few minutes of conversation makes it easy to see why that label has attached itself to the 78-year-old choreographer, whose Los Angeles-based company opens at the Joyce Theater tonight for a weeklong engagement that marks its return to New York after a 15-year absence.
Choreographers often dread being asked to describe their work, but Ms.
Lewitzky displayed no hesitation in an interview yesterday at a friend's New York apartment.
Talking about her dances has recently become very easy for her, she said, after an experience last year in Arizona.
Settling her small, neat frame into one corner of a sofa, she was off and running on a wide variety of topics.


Only 14, but Groomed and Set to Be a Pro
Just after 14-year-old Venus Williams complied with a family rule and went obediently off to bed at 9 P.M. on Sunday, her father and tennis mentor, Richard, confirmed that she has overruled him on the subject of turning professional.
She will do so at a $400,000 WTA Tour event later this month in Oakland.
As a result, when Venus Williams woke up and headed to the practice courts yesterday morning, she was no longer a mere ninth-grade prodigy but a prospective pro with just three weeks left to polish her act for what may become the most previewed and reviewed public debut since Jennifer Capriati hit the circuit at 13.


Debating the Fate of a Payoff Not as Magical as It Seemed
Nearly three decades after it was first approved by New York voters, the magical promises of the state lottery -- ranging from immense payoffs to improved education to lower property taxes -- have again become a heated issue, this time in the race for governor.
Though many of the promises were always illusory, their power remains strong enough to fuel an intense debate.
State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican gubernatorial candidate, revived the issue on Sunday with a similar-sounding promise to use lottery money to reduce property taxes.
He said yesterday that the purpose of the lottery has always been to support education and hold down property taxes -- a promise he said has never been kept.


Volvo, on a Rebound, Faces a Survival Test
Given their reputation for durability, the boxy station wagons and sedans rolling off the Volvo Group's production lines here these days may well be shuttling suburban families and other loyal buyers reliably around for many years, even decades to come.
The question now is whether Volvo itself can last as long.


Some Authors in Medical Journals May Be Paid by 'Spin Doctors'
MEDICAL journals are supposed to be ethically immaculate promulgators of scientific articles of the highest caliber, which have been scrutinized for accuracy by independent experts and written by authors who have disclosed all conflicts of interest.
But a professor has charged that public relations firms hired by drug companies -- furtive spin doctors -- are ghostwriting articles in the journals to suit clients' interests.


Agway Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Incumbency Dogs a Popular Governor of Colorado
In an age when more souls are bared on talk shows than in confessional booths, Bruce Benson, the Republican candidate for governor of Colorado, might have been seeking a sort of electoral hug when he surprised an audience during a debate here last month by revealing that he had been arrested twice for drunken driving in the early 1980's.
His opponent, Gov.
Roy Romer, in a rather lame effort to join in the spirit of contrition at the debate, said that he, too, had "a confession to make -- I'm worried about world population and I've had seven children."


Cuomo: Warning of Tax Cuts
CANDIDATE Mario M. Cuomo  PRODUCER The Garth Group, New York City


Q&amp;A
Intrusive Ivy
Q.
Does ivy destroy the mortar between bricks chemically?
Or is it just a physical intrusion?
How often do you need to cut it down?


Leaving It in the Hands and Voices of the Singers
Eternal hope springs fresh at the start of a new musical season, and the revival of Verdi's "Rigoletto" at the Metropolitan Opera on Wednesday evening, if it did not further expand already inflated expectations, at least left them more or less intact.
The production, directed by Otto Schenk with scenery and costumes by Zack Brown and additional stage direction by Sharon Thomas, was introduced in 1989 and last seen two years ago in its present form, with three sets instead of the original four.
It plays well in conventional terms despite anomalies: the bizarre contrast, for example, between the assassin Sparafucile's abysmal lair and his dowdy get-up.
For the most part, it leaves the fate of the evening squarely in the hands and voices of the characters.


Simpson Judge Sets Hearing On TV and Radio Coverage
Judge Lance A. Ito has proposed pulling the plug on all television and radio coverage of the O. J. Simpson trial, and has asked Court TV and lawyers for the electronic media to tell him why he should not.
Judge Ito, in a terse notice dated Sept. 30, but released only this morning, gave two reasons for his trial balloon: the broadcast -- and re-broadcast -- by a local television station of what he has called false reports about DNA test results incriminating Mr.
Simpson in the June 12 slaying of his former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend Ronald L. Goldman, and televised film footage showing the faces of prospective jurors.


Viruses or Prions: An Old Medical Debate Still Rages
EVER since James Watson and Francis Crick discovered the structure of DNA in 1953, one thing seemed perfectly clear.
DNA or its relative RNA had to be at the core of any infectious agent, whether fungi, bacteria or viruses.
Without DNA or RNA, these organisms could not multiply, and without multiplying in the body they could not cause diseases.
So it was nothing short of astounding when some researchers began claiming that they had found another kind of infectious agent, a tiny protein devoid of genes that could proliferate in the body and make people ill.


Review/Fashion; In Milan, a Trip to the Cabaret and Disco
Only in the philosophically unfettered arena of fashion could New York in the 1970's be paired with Berlin during World War II.
But that's how it is this season so far at the spring and summer shows here.
There was a desperation in the night life of both eras that some people in the 90's can identify with.
In fact, what Milan's designers seem to be offering are cabaret and disco clothes with no place to go.


Corrections
A chart in the Mutual Funds Quarterly Review pages of Business Day yesterday about the performance of stock and bond funds included an erroneous figure from Morningstar Inc. for one category.
Domestic stock funds lost 2.6 percent in the second quarter; they did not gain 2.6 percent.


BE Aerospace Inc.(BEAV,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


CHRONICLE
Only a few more quirky animals -- or humans -- are coming to newspapers from the pen of GARY LARSON.
The cartoonist and creator of the wildly popular "Far Side" is not renewing his contract with Universal Press Syndicate, which distributes the cartoon to more than 1,500 newspapers around the world.
His present contract expires at the end of the year.
Mr.
Larson's editor, JAKE MORRISSEY, said yesterday that the cartoonist was out of the country and was unavailable to comment.
"He chose this opportunity to say goodbye," Mr.
Morrissey said.
"I will miss the weekly batch of cartoons I get from him every Monday morning."


Tailhook Whistle-Blower Recalls Attack
A former Navy lieutenant who was the original whistle-blower in the Tailhook Association case testified today in a civil suit that she feared that her fellow aviators would rape her when she was trapped in the hallway of the Las Vegas Hilton.
"I felt that if I didn't make it off the floor, I was sure I was going to be gang raped," said the former officer, Paula A. Coughlin, describing the scene at the convention in 1991 of the Tailhook Association, an independent group of retired and active naval aviators.
Ms.
Coughlin was among several dozen women who Navy investigators determined were groped or fondled by drunken male aviators in a crowded third-floor "gantlet" on the final day of the convention.


Philip Morris Calls In I.O.U.'s in the Arts
To people in the arts, two of the best words in the English language for more than a generation have been Philip Morris, and never mind if the money comes from tobacco.
The $61 billion maker of cigarettes, food and beer has been one of the nation's biggest supporters of culture since 1958, and unlike many companies, Philip Morris has generally given lots of money and asked nothing in return.
Until now.
Late last month, writhing in dismay over strong anti-smoking legislation pending before the New York City Council, Philip Morris executives telephoned arts institutions that had benefited from their largess and asked them to put in a good word with Peter F. Vallone, the City Council Speaker.
The requests were only a small part of a much larger lobbying campaign Philip Morris has mounted against the bill, which at one point led to threats, later retracted, to move its headquarters out of New York City.


Corrections
A chart yesterday about events that led to the forced resignation of Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy referred incorrectly to a Dallas Cowboys football game Mr.
Espy attended as a guest of Tyson Foods.
The Jan. 16 game, for which Mr.
Espy says he has reimbursed Tyson, was between Dallas and the Green Bay Packers, not the New York Giants.
The error also appeared in articles on Aug. 7, Aug. 11 and Sept. 17.


Woman Tells Of Retaliation For Complaint On Tailhook
Paula A. Coughlin testified today that she had endured almost relentless harassment from male colleagues in the Navy after going public with her account of sexual assaults at the 1991 Tailhook convention in Las Vegas, and that she still considered suicide as a means of ending her misery.
Testifying for a second day in her Federal court lawsuit against the Hilton Hotels Corporation, Ms.
Coughlin, 32, said she had been treated with contempt by fellow aviators who resented her prominent role in the case, and she said her superiors had made no secret of their desire to ease her out of the military.
She resigned and left the Navy on May 31.


CBS's Fight Card Packs Surprising Punch
When CBS Sports started to sign up a boxing series that starts Saturday, it did not plan on spending millions of dollars, so it was unlikely to get marquee match-ups like Pernell Whitaker against Buddy McGirt.
But in the revamping of CBS Sports during the post-National Football League era, snaring a fighter like Oscar de la Hoya, who is 14-0 and the World Boxing Organization lightweight champion, is a programming coup.
So is the chance to showcase Orlando Canizales, who has held the International Boxing Federation bantamweight championship through 15 defenses over nearly seven years and is considered one of the top three or four fighters, pound-for-pound, in the world.


Officer Is Shot in Queens, Probably by Fellow Officer
An off-duty officer of the New York City Police Department was slightly wounded last night by a bullet that was probably fired by a housing officer, the police said, apparently marking the second incident in six weeks in which officers in the city have shot their own comrades.
The wounded officer, Angelo Angelico, 27, suffered a deep graze wound to the head and was conscious when he was taken to New York Hospital Medical Center in Queens, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.


An Unexpected Debate On 'Unexpected' Content In Classroom Materials
The University of Iowa is divided by a policy that requires professors to warn students if course presentations -- from literature to movies -- include anything "unusual or unexpected."
The policy has arisen from debate over sexually explicit films shown in the classroom.
The policy was put together earlier this year by Hunter Rawlings 3d, the university president, who thought he was disposing of a divisive issue by rewriting a proposed policy by the State Board of Regents that would have permitted students to receive alternative assignments instead of reading about or seeing "explicit representations of human sexual acts" in classroom material.


British Labor Party Sheds Marx for Middle Class
Tony Blair took full command of the Labor Party today, charting a course that would eliminate the last traces of Karl Marx and move the party unabashedly to the center, where Britain's middle class resides.
The telegenic 41-year-old party leader, who took over only 10 weeks ago, said in a keynote speech at the party's annual conference that he planned to center the party around issues like education, law and order and a "partnership" between the Government and the marketplace to generate full employment.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about the role of the economy in the New York State campaign for governor misstated State Senator George E. Pataki's position on reducing the number of state employees.
Mr.
Pataki says he would fill only two-thirds of the job openings that occur each year, not that he would cut the workforce by a third.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept 30
Sept 23
Oct 1
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.4
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.4
3.2
Gasoline stocks
211.8
209.6
208.4
Distillate stocks
141.8
142.1
127.4
Crude imports, daily
7.5
7.1
6.4
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.7
1.7
Crude stocks
332.5
328.0
328.9
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.5
6.8
Refinery utilization (%)
93.9
93.6
93.2
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Personal Health; Why the food you eat may be hazardous to your health.
RECENT outbreaks of severe illness and deaths from contaminated food have shaken American confidence in what has long been considered the safest food supply in the world and have drawn attention to the antiquated methods used to inspect foods like meats and poultry.
People who dismissed earlier warnings about the growing hazards from eating raw and undercooked eggs could hardly ignore the nearly 500 cases of illness and four deaths (three of them children) that were traced to undercooked hamburgers at fast-food restaurants in the Northwest last year.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Auto sales surged 7.4 percent in September, as the Big Three auto makers took sales from foreign producers, riding the popularity of sport utility vehicles and light trucks.  [ Page D1. ]


RESULTS PLUS
ASIAN GAMES Chinese Go 1-2-3 in Three Events  Chinese athletes completed sweeps in three sports, including setting two world records in weight lifting, on the second day of the Asian Games in Hiroshima, Japan.
After yesterday's competition, China had 20 golds and Japan was second with 8, with 6 of those coming from karate, in which China isn't competing.
Iran and Syria wrecked Japan's chances of a sweep in karate, however, by winning two of the day's four events.
Of 16 golds awarded yesterday, China won all except the 4 in karate.
Xiong Guoming led the sweep in swimming and became the first triple gold medalist by anchoring the relay team to victory after winning the grueling men's 400-meter individual medley in an Asian record of 4 minutes 19.40 seconds.
The Chinese also dominated in diving.
China's world-record breakers in weight lifting were Chen Xiaomin at 59 kilograms and Tang Weifang at 70 kilograms. (AP) VOLLEYBALL U.S.
Team Moves to Quarterfinals  The United States advanced to the quarterfinals of the 13th volleyball men's world championship in Athens, Greece, yesterday, defeating a weak Cuban team by 3-0 (15-6, 15-13, 15-12).
Other teams to advance were Italy, Russia, South Korea, the Netherlands, which eliminated Japan, 3-0 (15-8, 15-7, 15-5), and 1992 Olympic gold medalist Brazil, which defeated Canada, 3-0 (15-12, 16-14, 15-10).
The quarterfinal schedule will be determined by a draw to be held today.
The quarterfinals start tomorrow, with the finals on Saturday. (AP)


For Smoke-Free Dining
To the Editor:
The likelihood that New York City will ban smoking in all its restaurants has restaurant owners worried, perhaps needlessly.


Striking Legal Aid Lawyers Bow to Mayoral Ultimatum
Faced with an ultimatum by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, striking lawyers reached a tentative contract agreement with the Legal Aid Society late last night and agreed to return to work this morning, union and management officials said.
Neither side would disclose the details of the accord, and it was not clear whether the deal would be acceptable to Mr.
Giuliani, who yesterday demanded that any new contract with the lawyers contain a no-strike clause, with automatic penalties for walking off the job.


New Trend in Clubs: Big, Bigger, Biggest
We have seen the future of golf equipment, and we are certain of one thing: It is big.
It is bulging.
It is bulbous.
The word fat comes to mind.
Corpulent, even.
From the size of the sticker price to the merchandise itself, we are talking Alaska-big, China-big.
There is no minimalist movement on the golf horizon.
No, indeed.
We will need Schwarzenegger to play the golf pro in the futuristic equipment movie.
Get us Arnold.


New G.M. Revamping Focuses on Car Design
The General Motors Corporation announced its fourth reorganization in 10 years today in an effort to streamline its approach to developing cars.
Executives stressed that the latest attempt would not yield cataclysmic change, like the reorganization of 1984, which paralyzed the company.
G.M. said it would merge its four North American car development operations into two, while more closely allying them with its European ones, as a way to achieve economies of scale and to stifle the traditionally fratricidal competition among divisions of the company.


In Milan, Versace and Sander Turn away from flash: C10


Ferry Sinking Recalls Baltic Wartime Horror
To the Editor:
The sinking of the ferry Estonia is an enormous tragedy, but it is not "the worst maritime disaster in modern Baltic history" (front page, Sept. 29).
That occurred Jan. 30, 1945, when the German liner Wilhelm Gustloff was torpedoed and sunk by the Soviet submarine S-13 in the Baltic as it left Danzig.


More Budget Cuts Needed, Hospitals Chief Says
Two weeks after announcing that budget constraints would result in thousands of layoffs at public hospitals, New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation said yesterday that it will cut its budget again, possibly by as much as $95 million, as it grapples with lower financing from the Giuliani administration.
The president of the corporation, Dr.
Bruce Siegel, said it remained unclear how the cuts would be achieved or the impact on service.
And while he and other officials said it was unlikely that any of the city's 11 public hospitals would be closed, they acknowledged that more staff reductions were possible and service could well suffer.


Quit Stalling on Trade Accord
The symbolism was apt.
In the front row at a White House rally this week for GATT -- the international trade accord that the House leadership will try to bring to a vote today -- sat Lawrence Eagleburger, Secretary of State in the Bush Administration, and Brent Scowcroft, its national security adviser.
Free trade is a bipartisan policy and, after the cold war, the country's foremost foreign policy.
Trade binds disparate nations and creates wealth; the GATT accord is expected to raise world income by $500 billion, and American income alone by $100 billion.
That is why it is important for the House to stop stalling and approve the GATT accord today.
The Senate -- because of the unconscionable opposition of a single textile-belt Senator, Ernest Hollings of South Carolina -- must wait until after elections to vote.
Once the U.S. ratifies the treaty, more than 100 other nations are likely to follow soon.
But delay plays into the hands of protectionists abroad.
Besides die-hard protectionists, some environmental and consumer groups also oppose the accord.
These opponents worry that international dispute panels, which oversee enforcement of GATT rules, might undermine U.S. health, safety and environmental laws.
But the threat is mostly fictitious -- as a ruling this week by such a dispute panel convincingly proves.


U.S. Index Suggests Growth Into New Year
The Government's chief forecasting index posted its biggest advance in five months in August, a sign that the economy will grow briskly through the holidays and into the new year.
The advance of six-tenths of 1 percent in the Commerce Department's index of leading indicators was the latest in a series of consistently strong reports since last Tuesday, when the Federal Reserve Board decided it was not yet time to increase interest rates again.


Wine Talk
WHEN it comes to wine, rarity is an asset.
No one pays $300 for a bottle of Chateau Petrus because of the taste; it's a very good wine, of course, but the price is based on the fact that so little of it is made.
There's a good chance that if someone could produce a large quantity of Petrus and drop the price, not a few buyers would wonder what all the fuss had been about.


Russia's Mute and Hidden Loot
The Hermitage Museum in St.
Petersburg, Russia, has given a sardonic twist to Andre Malraux's description of the arts as "the voices of silence." For nearly 50 years the museum has maintained total silence about scores of French Impressionist and Post-Impressionist paintings.
Most were the lawful property of a private collector in Weimar.
Many were listed as lost or destroyed in Germany during World War II, when in fact they lay hidden in the museum.
So closely was the secret kept that Dr.
Mikhail Pyotrovsky, the Hermitage's director, did not see the paintings until 1991.
Creditably, Dr.
Pyotrovksy has now arranged for the public showing in March of such lost masterpieces as Degas's "Place de la Concorde." But on the matter of returning the paintings he is evasive, saying this is "a legal question, to be debated in court."


METRO DIGEST
DISCONTENT HELPS PATAKI, POLL SHOWS
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and his Republican rival, State Senator George E. Pataki, are locked in a tight race because many New Yorkers are so disenchanted with their three-term incumbent that they are willing to support a challenger who remains largely unknown, according to a New York Times/WCBS-TV News Poll.
A1.


Terror and Innocence, an Odd Couple
Nightfather
By Carl Friedman
Translated by Arnold and Erica Pomerans. 133 pages. Persea Books. $18.50.
Tell me a story, the children say, and their father begins.


Dr. Warren Kinzey, 58, Expert On Primate Evolution, Is Dead
Dr.
Warren Glenford Kinzey, a City College anthropologist who was a specialist in the evolution of early hominids and New World monkeys, died on Saturday at his home in Tarrytown, N.Y.
He was 58.
The cause was amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Lou Gehrig's disease, his family said.


Temper Tantrum Results in Suspension
Clemson has suspended men's soccer coach I. M. IBRAHIM for four games for "conduct unbecoming a Clemson coach" near the end of Clemson's 1-0 loss to Loyola (Md.) on Sunday, DWIGHT RAINEY, senior associate athletic director, said yesterday.


D'Arcy Masius Gets Ralston Account
Ralston Foods, the subsidiary of Ralcorp Holdings Inc. that markets the Chex line of cereals and other brands, said yesterday that it had selected D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in St.
Louis to handle its account.
Billings were estimated at $20 million.
D.M.B.&amp; B. was awarded the account after a six-month review that also included Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg in New York and Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago.
Avrett, Free had handled the bulk of the account since 1986: Wheat, Rice, Corn and Multi-Bran Chex; Cookie Crisp; Almond Delight, and Ralston Muesli cereals.
Tatham had previously handled the Chex Mix snack brand, which had been inactive for the last two years.


California Energy Revises Bid for Magma
The California Energy Company said yesterday that it would begin a cash tender offer on Thursday worth an estimated $430 million for 51 percent of the common stock of its rival producer of geothermal power, the Magma Power Company, converting an acquisition offer into a hostile takeover bid.
California Energy is offering to exchange cash and stock it values at a total of $35 for each of 12.4 million Magma shares.
That is a shift from the original offer on Sept. 19, when it sought to acquire all of Magma's 24 million shares for the same terms of $25 in cash and $10 in stock.


In the Haiti Showdown, Is the Task Completed?
Like the hero in an old grade-B Hollywood western, William H. Gray 3d is set to ride out of town, having cleaned up the mess that was the Clinton Administration's Haitian policy.
At least that's the way he sees it.
"We have accomplished the goals," he said recently over lunch.
"That's why I'm leaving. The goals were: one, restore democracy. Guaranteed. Two, return Aristide. Guaranteed. Three, get the coup leaders out of power. They're out of power. They're sitting in their offices with nothing to do. And four, get the multinational force in there to protect the pro-democracy people and to keep the pro-democracy people from killing the coup leaders. That's happened."


Evolution of the Workplace Alters Office Relationships
The Giffnock Corporation, a small company just off Interstate 95 in Rye, N.Y., that rents office suites to itinerant business executives, is the kind of place that would give an organization man fits: it's a thoroughly modern office.
Most of the people working there are barely connected with one another.
They work for large and small companies elsewhere or for themselves -- merely leasing their offices for a monthly fee.
There's a foreign-currency trader for a big Wall Street brokerage house telecommuting in one office, just down the hall from a former I.B.M. executive trying to make it on his own.
Freelance headhunters stalk the halls.


Armstrong Adjusts To Chasing Rainbow
Lance Armstrong is back in his team jersey now, a blue and red one, and only the discreet multicolored stripes at the neck and sleeves indicate that he ever wore the broad bands of the world champion's rainbow jersey.
"My new old jersey, yeah," he said of the blue and red one.
Armstrong, who last year at the age of 21 became the second-youngest man to win the professional bicycle road racing world championship, finished seventh in August in the same race.


Major Earthquake Off Japan Causes Little Damage
One of the most powerful earthquakes in its history struck Japan Tuesday night, buffeting hundreds of miles of coastline with moderate seismic waves but causing surprisingly few casualties and little damage.
A warning for seismic waves was issued for much of the Pacific Rim, including the West Coast of the United States, causing public schools to be closed and coastal areas evacuated in Hawaii.
But as of this morning in Japan, the danger to Hawaii and the West Coast had receded.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A big-name tandem creates the latest shop to offer a la carte services.
TWO longtime New York creative executives, among the most widely known in advertising, are teaming up to open their own shop.
Allan Beaver, a co-founder of Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver, and Robert Reitzfeld, a co-founder of Altschiller Reitzfeld, will be partners in the new agency, called Beaver, Reitzfeld.
Between them, they have almost 70 years of experience, working on campaigns for clients including Subaru ("Inexpensive, and built to stay that way"), McCall's magazine (Tina Turner as "one of the drab homebodies who reads McCall's"), Liz Claiborne fragrances ("All you have to be is you") and Boar's Head cold cuts ("Pure bologna. Not phony baloney").


Comeback Kid? Ralph Sampson Can't Run, but Refuses to Hide
Ralph Sampson pulled his University of Virginia T-shirt over his head, and bared an upper body in sublime condition.
His shoulders and arms were sculptures of muscle.
His stomach was flat.
His waist was sleek.
At 34 years of age, Sampson's face was smooth, handsome, young.
Smiling and shaking hands with the players around him, he appeared to be just like them, in the glorious prime of athletic life.
And then Sampson was asked to run.


New Idaho Community Raises Neighbors' Fears
Ever since Lewis and Clark sloshed their way through this valley 190 years ago, some people have viewed the Pacific Northwest as a refuge for the kind of behavior that might get a person run out of town in other parts of the country.
Communities based on free love or a pending apocalypse or on conversing with ancient spirits have long sprouted among the hidden reaches of the American far corner.


Quarterbacks Are Entitled to Off Day (Just Ask Brown)
Dave Brown had to have a rough game sooner or later.
"Being a young quarterback, everybody says you're allowed to make mistakes," said Brown, who made his share of them in a 27-22 loss in New Orleans on Sunday.
"I want to go out there and learn as the game goes on, but not by making mistakes."


White House Memo; After So Many Awkward Departures, Espy Obedience Brings Sigh of Relief
In an Administration where high-level dismissals have often proved difficult, the White House expressed relief and even pride today over that rarest of events: the obedient departure.
Unlike Zoe Baird, or Lani Guinier, or Roger C. Altman, Webster L. Hubbell, Les Aspin or Clifford Wharton, Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy cut his White House ties on Monday with almost no warning and even less rancor.
Nor was there any advance word of the event that led to his downfall: his girlfriend's acceptance of a $1,200 scholarship from the huge Arkansas-based poultry processor Tyson Foods Inc., which had squired Mr.
Espy to a Dallas Cowboys game.


A Good Day's Work


The Dreyfus Affair Isn't Forgotten, Not In Berlin Anyway
Musically, the centennial year of the infamous court-martial that convicted Capt.
Alfred Dreyfus of the French Army of treason is taking place only in Germany.
Since it was in Germany that the European mixture of anti-Semitism, xenophobia and distorted nationalism illustrated by the Dreyfus Affair came to a horrific climax, perhaps this is not surprising.
So far the French seem to be turning a deaf ear.
Neither the world premiere of Jost Meier and George R. Whyte's opera, "Dreyfus: The Affair," at the Deutsche Oper Berlin this spring nor "Dreyfus: J'Accuse," the Bonn Opera's new ballet drama by Mr.
Whyte and the choreographer Valery Panov, to music by the Russian composer Alfred Schnittke, has attracted an invitation from the country where the affair took place a hundred years ago.


Report Won't Vindicate Iranian Faction
To the Editor:
"Listen to All Iranian Voices" (editorial, Sept. 26) contains a number of factual errors regarding the People's Mujahedeen (Mojahedin-e Khalq) and the Clinton Administration's planned response to the Congressional requirement for a report on this group.


Haiti's Military Power Structure Is Showing Signs of Falling Apart
The military power structure that has tyrannized Haiti for three years seemed to be crumbling today, as the feared chief of police suddenly fled the country and the leader of the main paramilitary group publicly endorsed the return of Haiti's ousted President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Col.
Michel Francois, the police chief of the Port-au-Prince district, was reported to have crossed into the Dominican Republic just before midday after a tense 14-hour standoff at the border in which Dominican officials initially denied him entry.
Several officers on his staff were said to have accompanied him into exile.


Hospital Put on Probation Over Tests on Poor Women
The Federal Government has put the Medical University of South Carolina on probation for violating ethical standards in a program in which pregnant women were threatened with exposure and jail if they did not complete drug education programs, Federal officials said today.
The Federal Office of Protection From Research Risks, the agency in charge of enforcing ethics rules in experiments, found that the program was tantamount to human experimentation on the black and poor women who received prenatal care from the hospital and that the researchers failed to obtain informed consent from their subjects.
If the hospital is not recertified by the office at the end of the probation period, it could lose its Federal financing.


Ticket Sales Are Set For Knicks and Nets
Single-game tickets to Nets home games will go on sale at 9 A.M.
Friday, and seats for Knick games will be available at 9 A.M. on Oct. 18.
The Nets said some tickets would be available at $16, $20 and $39.50.


Maneuvering on Bronx Judgeship Violates Federal Election Law
To the Editor:
Your criticism of Assemblyman George Friedman's maneuvering from Bronx County Democratic chairman into a New York State Supreme Court judgeship in the Bronx (editorial, Sept. 27) is inadequate, given the abuse of power and political hypocrisy involved.


Man in the News: Fernando Henrique Cardoso; Brazil's Big Winner
Hooded, handcuffed and listening to friends' cries under torture, a leftist sociology professor facing interrogation one night 25 years ago thought his life might end at the hands of army intelligence agents.
Indeed from 1964 to 1985, the years of Brazil's military dictatorship, he suffered exile, imprisonment, blacklisting and the bombing of his social research group.
But today, voting returns and exit polls indicated that Brazilians had elected the professor, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, to be President by the widest popular margin since a retired army general was chosen to lead the nation in 1945.


Judge Refuses to Void Ohio Obscenity Charges
In a ruling that echoes a celebrated case in Cincinnati four years ago, a municipal judge there denied motions on Monday to dismiss and suppress charges against a bookstore and three of its clerks for renting a tape of the film "Salo, or the 120 Days of Sodom."
The charge against the Pink Pyramid -- a bookstore that specializes in gay and lesbian titles -- and the other defendants is pandering obscenity, which refers to exhibiting, disseminating and distributing obscene material as defined by Ohio state law.
The offense, a misdemeanor, is punishable by up to 180 days in prison and a $1,000 fine.
In addition, the store could be fined $5,000.
A trial is scheduled for Jan. 9.


Yes, People Are Right. Caffeine Is Addictive.
RESEARCHERS have confirmed for the first time the widely held belief that some people are addicted to caffeine in the same way that others are addicted to cigarettes, alcohol or intravenous drugs.
Caffeine addicts may try to give up their coffee, tea or cola habit but usually cannot, even when it threatens their health.
Like emphysema patients who continue smoking cigarettes, they continue to use caffeine against their doctors' orders.


Jerome Wenig, 71, Expert in Labor Law
Jerome Wenig, a labor lawyer who served as a mediator in Connecticut in recent years, died on Sunday while being taken to Norwalk Hospital.
He was 71 and lived in Westport, Conn.
Mr.
Wenig, who had been suffering from kidney disease for several years, died of cardiac arrest, said his wife, Mary Moers Wenig.


75 Groups Open Drive for F.D.A. Tobacco Rules
Seventy-five health, consumer and religious groups announced today that they are beginning a national petition drive to encourage the enactment of a law that would require the regulation of tobacco by the Food and Drug Administration.
The groups are led by former Surgeon General C. Everett Koop and an anti-smoking organization, the Coalition on Smoking or Health, made up of the American Lung Association, the American Cancer Society and the American Heart Association.


Corrections
An article yesterday about university clubs in Manhattan misstated the closing date of a club for Columbia alumni.
It was in 1973, not in the last decade.
The article also omitted the Columbia Club's current status.
Since 1990, it has been an affiliate of the Williams Club.


Educators Held in Scheme Involving Supplier Bribes
Six current and former officials of the New York City Board of Education including a principal, a high school English teacher and several senior administrators were charged yesterday with bribery and other offenses involving the purchase of school supplies.
The charges, culminating a 22-month investigation, suggested that the board's $160 million annual budget for classroom and office supplies continues to be a lucrative target for corrupt officials and the board's 17,000 vendors.
The arrests of the six officials and a private supplier came seven weeks after a comptroller's report criticized the purchasing system as vulnerable to abuse, in a system in which actual spending on books, pencil, paper and other classroom supplies is only $44 per student.
The charges were announced yesterday and Monday in Brooklyn Federal court and state courts in Brooklyn and the Bronx.


S. Burns Weston, 90, Cleveland Lawyer And Federal Official
S.
Burns Weston, a retired lawyer and civic leader who worked in the Administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt, died on Friday at his home in Keene, N.Y., in the Adirondack Mountains.
He was 90.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Children of the Last P.O.W. Close a Pain-Filled Chapter
Four years to the day after his wife killed herself in despair at her inability to determine his fate, an American pilot who was the last listed prisoner of war from the Vietnam conflict was honored today at her grave in Arlington National Cemetery.
The occasion was a memorial service held by the couple's family and attended by the civilian and uniformed leaders of the Air Force.
Yet afterward -- and despite the service's decision last month to reclassify the pilot, Col.
Charles E. Shelton, from P.O.W. to killed in action -- two of the Sheltons' five children said they were still not convinced that he was dead.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
My wife, who teaches first grade at the Grace Church School in Greenwich Village, heard one of the boys humming the first few bars of "The Star-Spangled Banner." She went over to his desk and asked him, "Scott, do you know what that is that you're humming?"
"Yes," he replied. "It's an old baseball song." LEE HAYS
. . .
When is a window not a window?
Ask Ann L. Drinan of Manhattan, who was in the Philadelphia airport recently, reading while she waited for her flight to be called.
A middle-aged woman approached and very tentatively said, "I hope I'm not being too bold, but is your name Heloise?" Ms.
Drinan politely said no, her name was Ann.
The woman explained that she saw Ms.
Drinan reading a book about cleaning windows and thought she was Heloise, the household-hint columnist.
Well, why not?
Ms.
Drinan was indeed reading a book titled "It's Time to Clean Up Your Windows." How was the woman to know that it was about Microsoft Windows for computers?
. . .
Dear Diary:
It is a balmy late-summer evening.
While walking down West 18th Street, I stumble upon Book Friends Cafe.
A quartet is playing a tune from an old Busby Berkeley movie as I walk in.
True to its name, the front is a bookstore, the back a cafe.
As I stand, thumbing through Gracie Fields's autobiography, the quartet strikes up a sultry rumba.
Two couples, both in vintage evening dress, rise from their tables and take to the floor, dancing with a grace that Fred and Ginger would have envied.
I stare, poleaxed with pleasure, at my own private movie.
A moment of perfect bliss in Manhattan. ELISA DeCARLO
. . .
DREAMS
Someone
should walk the streets
collecting dreams
since those of us
who work at sleep
seem too tired to do the job.
Somewhere
the task of saving memories must
be recorded. Perhaps a storehouse
might hold them in golden barrels.
Sometimes
in the morning, sturdy souls
forget the nighttime fragments of
black and white recollections
that weave in and out of sunlight
like elusive flashy photographs.
There has to be
a permanent collection,
a museum of dreams.
Somehow. ROGER GRANET
. . .
Dr.
William K. Kopp of Rego Park, Queens, who identifies himself as a single man of 55, says that neither he nor Karen Weitz, his companion of 11 years, has ever felt comfortable with the term "girlfriend." But defining the relationship leads to some amusing moments.
Recently, Dr.
Kopp reported, "Karen spotted my daughter with my 16-month-old grandson, Jonah, playing with friends in the park."
"My daughter introduced Karen to her friends as 'my dad's girlfriend,' " he continued, "and then turned to my grandson and said, 'Jonah, say hi to Grandma Karen.' '
. . .
Nardi Reeder Campion of Hanover, N.H., was in the Harvard Club recently and overheard a man discussing his grandson, a freshman at Dartmouth.
"He went on this hiking trip and slept at a lodge," he said.
"In the morning, they had green eggs -- for Dartmouth, don't you know -- and had to choose between two pitchers of juice. One was marked 'O.J. Innocent' and the other 'O.J. Guilty.' "
. . .
After fruitless phone calls to her local toy shops in Craryville, N.Y., Shirley Siegel decided she'd try F. A. O. Schwarz in Manhattan.
She explained to the sales clerk that she was looking for a stuffed animal, specifically a snail.
Sales clerk: "A what?"
Mrs. Siegel: "A snail . . . S-N-A-I-L."
Sales clerk: "Oh, a snail, as in escargot."
Alas, bilingualism didn't help. Escargot or snail, there wasn't a stuffed one around.


Deep Discontent With Cuomo Strengthens Pataki, Poll Shows
Five weeks before Election Day, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and his Republican rival, State Senator George E. Pataki, are locked in a tight race because many New Yorkers are so disenchanted with the three-term incumbent that they are willing to support a challenger who remains largely unknown, according to a New York Times/WCBS-TV News Poll.
The statewide telephone poll, taken between Sept. 29 and Oct. 2, shows a virtual dead heat, with Mr.
Pataki holding a slim lead of 44 percent to 41 percent among registered voters.
Twelve percent are undecided.
The distance between Mr.
Pataki and Mr.
Cuomo is within the poll's margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points, meaning that either candidate could actually be ahead.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Monday about opponents of a global free trade pact misstated the position of Senator Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas, on the North American Free Trade Agreement.
He supported it.


Off the Menu
Goodbye to the Farm
Charles Chevillot has closed La Petite Ferme, his restaurant at 973 Lexington Avenue, near 70th Street, which for years drew fashionable patrons like Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.
"It has been 23 years, and you don't have the same energy after all that time," he said.
He is considering opening a country inn.
Mr.
Chevillot originally opened the restaurant in 1971 in the tiny space on West 10th Street that now houses La Metairie.
In 1978, he packed up his pair of trademark white doves and moved uptown.


Simpson Team Opens a New Attack on Evidence in Bronco
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson have mounted a two-front attack on evidence seized in later searches of his Ford Bronco, maintaining both that such evidence might have been tampered with while the vehicle was left unattended and that police blood tests on the interior are inherently unreliable.
Last month Mr.
Simpson's legal team moved to suppress several crucial items, including the carpeting and pieces of bloody upholstery, seized from the Bronco on June 14, a day and a half after the bodies of Mr.
Simpson's former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend Ronald L. Goldman were found outside her home in the Brentwood section of Los Angeles.
Judge Judge Lance A. Ito has essentially rejected that motion, although parts of it will be taken up at a hearing on Wednesday.


In Metropolitan Niches, Filipino Dishes Twice as Nice
TO order Filipino food, turo-turo.
The double word is easy to pronounce (TOO-roh-TOO-roh) and even easier to do.
As either a verb or a noun, it means "point-point."


Two Hospital Giants Plan A Merger
The Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corporation, the largest hospital company in the United States, said yesterday that it had agreed to merge with Healthtrust Inc., the company its principal operating unit had spun off as undesirable seven years ago.
The company said the merger, a stock deal estimated at more than $5 billion, would create a $15 billion health care provider.
After the merger, Columbia would own and operate 311 hospitals with about 60,000 licensed beds and 125 outpatient centers in 37 states and two foreign countries.


Blocking a Religious Divorce Proves Costly
The refusal of an Orthodox Jewish man to grant his wife a religious divorce cost him more than $180,000 yesterday, when a Brooklyn judge ruled that the husband's obstinacy and pressure to extract financial concessions were grounds for forfeiting any claim to a larger share of the couple's marital wealth.
Anthony Daniele, the lawyer for the wife, Naomi Schwartz, said the ruling was the first in New York State in which a husband was financially penalized in a civil court for withholding a religious divorce.


A Vigil Ends


School Corruption Case
6 Held in School Corruption Six current and former officials of the New York City Board of Education have been charged with bribery and other offenses in the purchase of school supplies.
Article, page B7.


Graber Sounds Off at Critics
The fallout from having lost three straight games -- to Syracuse, Penn State and Miami -- seemed to be catching up with Coach Doug Graber of Rutgers today.
When asked about a published report suggesting that Graber had taken the Rutgers football program as far as he could and that perhaps a change in coaching scenery was the answer to improving the struggling Scarlet Knights (2-3), Graber fired back at reporters.


Speaking French and Thinking African to Help Children Learn
In Nassau Elementary School here in one of the state's more impoverished districts, just past the alphabet cards and Pledge of Allegiance posters, a quiet revolution is taking place.
Every day, students enter another culture and speak another language, as their teachers try to prepare them for the world beyond their neighborhood.
This year, 130 kindergarteners and first-graders began taking all their classes except art and gym in French.
Within five years, all classes for all grades are to be in French.


Michigan's High Court Hears Arguments on Assisted Suicide
Michigan's Supreme Court heard arguments today on four combined cases arising from a state law banning physician-assisted suicide, including murder charges against Dr.
Jack Kevorkian.
All four cases are appeals from rulings by the Michigan Court of Appeals on May 10.
Two are appeals of the finding that the state law banning assisted suicide violated the Michigan Constitution on technical grounds.
Those cases involved patients of Dr.
Kevorkian, the retired pathologist who began openly assisting suicides in 1990.
The third case is an appeal of the ruling that Dr.
Kevorkian could be prosecuted for murder in two suicides.


Cubs Send Himes to Arizona
LARRY HIMES was removed as general manager of the Chicago Cubs yesterday and reassigned as director of Arizona operations and as a special assignment scout.
Himes will relocate to Arizona to oversee the club's new spring training site in Mesa, said the Cubs' new president, ANDY MacPHAIL.
Himes will also scout spring training, the Arizona Fall League and the American League as part of a two-year contract extension.


Executives Confront Computer Fears
One would never guess that Ludovico L. de Carlo, who is 65 years old, is a tormented man as he stands on the terrace at sunset, nibbling hors d'oeuvres, laughing with a group of international business tycoons, being serenaded by two violinists and caressed by warm ocean breezes.
But his wife, Sara, reveals his dark secret.
"He's so angry," Mrs. de Carlo confides to a visitor.
"He has complete control over everything else in his office, except for that little box. He's determined to master it, but he's frustrated that he can't do it in one day."


Mourning in Sitcomville
It is a sad day in Sitcomville.
To say this is not to belittle the human loss that her real-life family is experiencing at the death of Harriet Nelson in California this week.
For Mrs.
Nelson, her husband, Ozzie, and their sons, David and Ricky, were also inhabitants of a mythic electronic community.
It seemed vaguely Californian.
People wore sweaters at all seasons, and the hedges were always healthy.
Inside the house the geographic location seemed less important than its commercial orientation.
The kitchen looked like the kind of place where Betty Furness would feel comfortable touting the appliances.
The cabinets seemed to be hiding food products that deserved to be praised in the golden tones of Ed Herlihy.


Giuliani and Striking Lawyers: Sending a Message
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's stand against striking Legal Aid lawyers was not just about the 1,000 lawyers picketing the courthouse yesterday.
Instead, it had everything to do with the 210,000 municipal workers he will be facing over the bargaining table next year.
By moving swiftly against the lawyers, Mr.
Giuliani -- who told the strikers to go back to work today or lose their jobs for good -- underscored his stance that the city will not be able to afford raises for anyone, sending a message of resolve to the other unions and to a financial establishment whose cooperation he will need to bridge billion-dollar budget gaps over the next few years.


Away From Home and in a Dorm 101
Day after day in a coed dorm at Stanford University, a group of freshmen sit around on beds and on the floor, discussing sex, religion and books.
Nick blithely announces that he is bisexual, which causes Debbie to giggle and admit she has always been taught sex is wrong.
Sam, a gangly boy from New Jersey, says he wishes he had a girlfriend, just once.
Cheng, a first-generation Chinese-American from the Midwest fears he is not as smart as his classmates.
And a black woman named Monique decides that Aristotle would not be taught if he were black or a woman, "especially because he's always wrong." In between crises they go to the bookstore and the cafeteria, and for the first time try on attitudes away from their parents.
To make the documentary "Frosh: Nine Months in a Freshman Dorm," Dan Geller and Dayna Goldfine followed 10 Stanford students at Trucco Hall through their first year.
The film is best when it captures the sense of culture shock that all freshmen undergo.
One boy stands in the doorway, his mouth hanging open in astonishment, as Monique talks about her parents.
He is more amazed by the fact that her mother and father never married than he is by the information that Monique's mother is a crack addict she hasn't seen for several years.


Investigator Is Said to Admit Tampering With Evidence
A former New York state police investigator who was convicted last month of faking fingerprint evidence has decided to plead guilty to evidence tampering in another case, his lawyer said yesterday.
But in a setback to prosecutors, the former investigator, Edward Pilus, is refusing to assist in the investigation of other troopers suspected of similar activities.


The Legal Aid Crisis
In a space of just a few days, strongarm tactics by the lawyers' union and the Mayor's response have threatened three decades of arrangements that delivered most of New York City's criminal defense services.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's retaliatory cancellation of the Legal Aid Society's contract with the city at first looked authoritarian and even dangerous at a time when he is urging the police to crowd the courts with more defendants.
But Mr.
Giuliani's action has a firm foundation in fiscal reality.
The city faces a big budget deficit.
Public-employee unions are being told they cannot have raises.
It follows then that the legal professionals who already cost the city $79 million a year should know that this is not a year for negotiating the 4.5 percent raise they are demanding.


Aristide's Talk: 'Yes to Reconciliation'
Following are excerpts from the address today by the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, President of Haiti, to the United Nations General Assembly, as translated from the French and Creole by The New York Times.
. . . Finally, in 11 days, I will be in Haiti.


Survival Lesson For 'River' Director
Curtis Hanson was in turmoil.
Should he drive from theater to theater and hear the reaction of crowds on the first day of his new film, "The River Wild," or drive to the Los Angeles County Museum of Art and see a film by his favorite director, John Ford?
Almost guiltily, Mr.
Hanson acknowledged that he slipped into the museum to watch the film "7 Women," Ford's last feature.


Help Us, Oh Help Us, We've Got Buildings
One of the big issues in hockey's labor hassle is the suggestion that team owners share revenue.
The players want the owners to redistribute some gate receipts so that wealthy clubs from big cities can help their less-fortunate partners in smaller markets.
The owners, represented by Commissioner Gary Bettman, have rejected the proposal, so far.
Although they speak in generalities and provide few details, they insist they are losing money as a group, so why spread red ink?


Judge Won't Let Accused in Clinic Attack Argue That Killing Was Justified
The former minister accused of killing an abortion clinic doctor and the doctor's bodyguard was barred today from arguing that the deaths were "justified and necessary" to prevent illegal abortions.
Immediately after the ruling, the defendant dismissed his two court-appointed lawyers and announced that he would represent himself.
It was the fourth time in the two months since his arrest that the former Presbyterian minister, Paul J. Hill, changed his mind about who would represent him in a trial that he has sought to use as a forum for his religious convictions against abortion.


In Hartford Schools, Exhaustion Creates Opportunity
Education Alternatives, the company hired by the Hartford Board of Education on Monday to manage the city's public schools, surveyed the district's buildings last spring to estimate the cost of repairs.
The 32 schools needed immediate work costing $1.6 million, the company found.
But one building was too far gone, too derelict, too expensive to fix and needed to be abandoned.
It was 100 years old, sagging, cut off from the downtown by a highway, with front doors splintered from vandals.


Tabasco Cat Mission: Clearing 2 Big Hurdles
Tabasco Cat flew into New York from Kentucky yesterday, frolicked in the yard outside the Wayne Lukas barn at Belmont Park and prepared to pursue the memory and the record of Holy Bull in two landmark races that could determine who indeed is the Horse of the Year.
"What we're trying to do," said Lukas, who flew alongside his star colt, "is to have a better year than any other horse in America."


Mexico Names Two Suspects In Killing
Government officials said today that they would charge a former federal official and a fugitive congressman with plotting the assassination of the second-ranking leader of Mexico's governing party.
The prosecution of the two men, one of them formerly a close political associate of the slain party leader, Jose Francisco Ruiz Massieu, suggests that the authorities' theory is that the motive for the killing was at least in part personal revenge.


Governor Delays Plan For Cuts
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo delayed releasing his tax-cut proposal, saying today that he wants to hear more details of how his Republican challenger, State Senator George E. Pataki, will pay for his own plan to slash the top personal income tax rate by 25 percent.
"First, I want to hear from him," Mr.
Cuomo said in a news conference after a state police cadet graduation here.
"I don't want to set up a fog that allows him to escape. Let's hear their answers first. Why should we get to my plan?"


Despite Legal Aid Walkout, Courts Run Mostly as Usual
It was business as only-slightly-unusual yesterday in New York City courts, on the second full day of a strike by staff lawyers of the Legal Aid Society.
Lawyers in private practice took on all the new cases, and snappish Legal Aid supervisors handled the old ones, as chants from picketing lawyers wafted through courtroom windows, intermittently drowning out proceedings.
While administrators were relieved that caseloads were light and that the courts were functioning in a manner that habitues would describe as normal, there were warning signs that problems could erupt by week's end.
Supervising lawyers with the Legal Aid Society, which represents the city's indigent in civil and criminal matters, were asking for postponements deep into November.
Judges predicted that backlogs would begin to accumulate.


Raveling Suffers a Setback
Southern Cal Coach GEORGE RAVELING, who was injured in a car accident on Sept. 25, has been moved to intensive care because of bleeding in his chest.
The move was precautionary, a spokeswoman at U.S.C.
University Hospital said Monday.
Raveling, 57, was listed in serious but stable condition.
He suffered fractures of nine ribs, his pelvis and his collarbone in the two-car accident near the university campus. (AP)


CHRONICLE
Prince KARIM AGA KHAN, the spiritual leader of the world's Ismaili Muslims, and his wife, Princess SALIMA, are ending their 25-year marriage.
Their plan to divorce was announced yesterday in London by lawyers for the Aga Khan, 57, whose 12 million Ismaili Muslim followers believe that he is the 49th direct descendant of the prophet Muhammed.
The Times of London reported that Princess Salima, 54, the former Sally Croker-Poole, a former model, was expected to receive a divorce settlement that would be "one of the largest in European history."


'Doo-wop, Doo-wop.' 'Scalpel.' 'Scalpel.'
"HEARTBREAK HOTEL" is on the radio, and Dr.
Roy M. Schoen is ready to perform a hysterectomy.
Dr.
Schoen, a Manhattan gynecologist and an attending physician at Lenox Hill Hospital, firmly believes that hummable tunes are as essential as sutures in the operating room.
"Music is relaxing," says the doctor, a self-described "older guy" who likes to listen to the rock-and-roll of his youth when he operates.
"It relieves a lot of pressures and makes things seem easier. Sometimes I hum along."


A New Class of Troopers Ready to Hit the Road


Man in the News; New SUNY Chancellor: Thomas Alva Bartlett
As Thomas A. Bartlett recalls it, "it was a complete bolt out of the blue."
There he was, one afternoon early in June, sitting contentedly in the Portland office of the University of Oregon.
At 63, retiring after five years as Chancellor of the Oregon state university system, he was looking forward to assuming the mantle of chancellor emeritus, and leading a different sort of life.
There was his cattle farm in the foothills of the Cascade Mountains, and some projects connected with international education.
Maybe even a book.


Market Place; Bid for Trash Hauler Sets Off Spicy Trans-Atlantic Fight
Even in the more reserved pages of the British press, it is being portrayed as the battle between the former prostitute's husband and the former boss of the F.B.I.
It is that, but the effort by Browning-Ferris Industries to take over Attwoods P.L.C., a British trash company, may also be an example of a new acquisition strategy: Find an underperforming company and offer the shareholders a low price, warning them that the choice is between the bid and continued bad management by the incumbents.
In bidding low for a company whose shareholders have good reason to be disgruntled, Browning-Ferris is following a path blazed recently by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company in its effort to buy Borden Inc.
Kohlberg, Kravis managed to get the Borden board's support, however, while it appears certain that a majority of directors of Attwoods will oppose Browning-Ferris.


World News Briefs; Belgrade Reportedly Sending Arms to Bosnia
With some sanctions against Yugoslavia expected to be suspended on Wednesday, the Clinton Administration is studying reports that military goods are still crossing the Serbian border into Bosnia, a United States official said today.
But the Administration has not decided whether to turn over its information to the United Nations, the official said, because of reluctance to divulge intelligence methods.


Food Notes
New East Side Cafe
Fletcher Morgan's Provisions, 864 Lexington Avenue (64th Street), is a new, charming provincial-style cafe with an array of breakfast and lunch items.
Buttery breakfast pastries and moist muffins ($1.25 and up) are served with coffee and fresh juices.
Lunch items, to take out or eat in at little cafe tables or at the counter, include sandwiches (roasted vegetables, for example, or French-style ham, $5 to $6), salads (like ratatouille, couscous with vegetables or lentils, mostly $2 to $5 a pound), and main dishes, including roast chicken ($4.50 to $12).
There are also dessert tarts, cakes and cookies.
The shop is open from 9 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.
A Second Porcini Trading
Porcini Trading, a small produce market that opened last fall at 1450 Second Avenue (75th Street), has just opened a second, larger market at 1510 Second Avenue (78th Street).
The owners plan to keep both stores open.
The new market sells some prepared foods and has a broader selection of groceries and dairy products than the original market.
Both now have fresh imported porcini mushrooms from Italy.
They range in price from $7.50 to $30 a pound, depending on the size and quality, which for the beefy top-of-the-line ones is impeccable.
Corrado Opens a Market
Joining Corrado, a restaurant at 1373 Avenue of the Americas (55th Street), and its neighboring Corrado Cafe and Corrado Kitchen catering shop is the new Corrado Market.
But instead of being clustered with the other Corrado properties, this food market and catering shop is uptown, at 1409 Second Avenue (73d Street).
It is a spacious, rather homey-looking food market with a typical array of produce, breads, cheeses and some high-end packaged groceries like olive oils and pasta.
Some of the prepared food items are especially delicious, like the penne pasta with eggplant, baked butternut squash, linguine with shiitake mushrooms, all for $7 a pound, and the fresh salmon salad, $15 a pound.
The market is open every day.
Telephone: (212) 472-9200.
Mail-Order Spices
Adriana's Bazaar, a retail store on the Upper West Side that sold spices and condiments from around the world until it closed earlier this year, has become Adriana's Caravan, a mail-order company in Brooklyn with a catalogue of more than 1,000 items.
Copies of the catalogue can be ordered for $3 by calling (800) 316-0820.
A condensed version of the catalogue is free.
Hot Stuff in Flux
Another source of spiciness may also switch to mail order.
Hot Stuff, a shop specializing in spicy ingredients, at 227 Sullivan Street (near Bleecker Street), will close at the end of the year.
David Jenkins, the owner, said he hoped to open a new store elsewhere in Manhattan with a small restaurant, to help generate better sales, or to convert it into a mail order house.
The Parlor Set
The younger generation should be more than happy with the fare at Mr.
Chips, 27 East 92d Street, a classy new ice-cream parlor owned by Chip Fisher.
Mr.
Fisher, who has young children and lives in the neighborhood, also owns Fisher &amp; Levy, a cafe and caterer, and Lamalle Kitchenware.
The new ice-cream parlor is sleekly modern, done in blond wood, with low counters and child-height stools in sherbet pastels.
A swath of chalk board, with chalk provided, covers the wall above the counter.
The ice cream comes in more than a dozen flavors.
The restaurant is open from 11:30 A.M to 10 P.M. on weekdays, and from noon to 10 P.M. on weekends.
Battle of the Wines
An all-day tasting to compare American chardonnays and pinot noirs with French red and white Burgundies made from the same grapes has been scheduled for Dec. 10 at the International Wine Center, 231 West 29th Street, Suite 210.
The tasting, which will begin at 10 A.M. and end at about 4:30 P.M., will cover 42 wines and include lunch.
The wines will be tasted blind in groups of three.
The fee for the tasting is $235 and must be paid in full to secure a reservation.
More information is available from the Wine Center, (212) 268-7517.
Indian Feast in Queens
Dinner for 50,000?
That is about how many people are expected to show up for an Indian folk and food festival from 8 P.M. to 1 A.M.
Friday, Saturday and Sunday and next Friday and Saturday , Oct. 14 and 15, in Flushing Meadow Park, Queens.
The festival, called Garba '94, will feature music, dancing and appearances by Indian movie stars.
The garba is a kind of dance.
More than 100 food stalls will be selling portions of Indian specialties for $2 to $5.
Admission to the festival, which was organized by Rhythm of India, an association of Indian businesses in Jackson Heights, Queens, is $20; those 60 and older will be admitted for $13.
More information can be obtained by calling (718) 803-3333.


Buffalo for Sale


Public &amp; Private; Casualties Of War
Two baby boys, born many miles apart.
Michael was apparently healthy except for the strange sweats that drenched his clothes and bedding.
His mother thought of him as a fussy baby because he nursed so often, slept so little, and wanted to be held so much.
He died in November, age five months.
An autopsy showed a mitral valve defect that had caused his heart to swell several times its normal size.
Cedrick was born with spina bifida and hydrocephalus, missing an eye and an ear, his heart on the right side of his body, his trachea and esophagus connected.
People gasped and turned away when they saw him in the cart in the supermarket.
He is 2 and has had eight operations so far.


Baseball Owners Seek Off-Season Freeze
Out of the slumber of a season-shattering baseball strike, club owners have proposed to the union that the two sides agree to a 45-day freeze on off-season dates and rules.
The freeze, most noticeably, would push back the free-agency filing period.
But it could have potentially greater implications, especially for the clubs' decision on whether to declare an impasse in already dormant negotiations and then impose new rules unilaterally.


Poll Indicates Few Plan To Shop Electronically
Americans show a high interest in the educational and communications aspects of the emerging national information system, but not in the interactive entertainment and home-shopping features that have attracted the most investment from businesses, according to results of a new national poll released yesterday.
The poll, conducted by Louis Harris &amp; Associates in cooperation with the newsletter Privacy &amp; American Business, also indicated growing concern about the potential abuse of personal information gleaned from households by advertisers and other interactive-service providers.


For the Jets, 10 Yards Is Four-Down Territory
This is the "we've got to stick together" phase of the Jets' season.
They have learned not only that they are human -- but that they are, in the words of one assistant coach, "very fragile."
Fragile?
A team that routs the Bills in Game 1 and then produces a sensational overtime victory against the Broncos before more than 70,000 home fans?


Having 'Done Enough Harm,' Senate Inches to Adjournment
With three Senate filibusters running and others waiting their turn, the world's most glacial deliberative body crept toward adjournment today.
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, said there could be night sessions and adjournment might be delayed past Friday.
"We are going to finish the bills that are necessary," he vowed.
But there were hardly any pending measures that Republicans put in that category.


Frazier May Miss Rest of the Season
Nebraska quarterback TOMMIE FRAZIER, a leading contender for the Heisman Trophy, may be lost for the season after the discovery yesterday of a new blood clot in his leg.
He was hospitalized and Coach TOM OSBORNE said the 20-year-old junior quarterback apparently will stay on blood thinners for three to six months.
"Which means the rest of the season is in jeopardy and doubt for him," Osborne said.
"I doubt if he will play any more this year."


In New York And New Jersey, Filipino Dishes Twice as Nice


Can the Party Survive Without Weicker?; New Path or a Lengthened Shadow?
When Lowell P. Weicker Jr. became the first third-party Governor in Connecticut since the Civil War, it was heralded across the country as a leap forward for those seeking an alternative to the Democrats and Republicans.
"We're not used to the idea of a third party," he said at the time.
"But why shouldn't the monopoly of politics be changed?"


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  ARISTIDE SEEKS RECONCILIATION  The exiled president of Haiti, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, addressed the United Nations General Assembly and promised a policy of reconciliation and reconstruction.
A1  HAITI STRUCTURE CRUMBLING  The military structure that has governed Haiti for three years seemed to be crumbling as the police chief fled and the head of the major paramilitary group declared his support for the exiled President.
A1


German Train Isn't the Fastest
To the Editor:
Germany's experimental magnetic levitation train is by no means the world's fastest at only 240 miles per hour, as you erroneously report Sept. 25.
The French high-speed train, T.G.V. (train a grande vitesse), has bettered that speed on a number of occasions and attained 320.2 miles per hour during a test run in May 1990.
Long sections of the new T.G.V. line south of Lyon were built for commercial service of 200 miles an hour at less than half the per-mile cost of the German Transrapid.


N.H.L. Revises Its Proposal To Players
Eleven days before Opening Night II, the National Hockey League presented its players with a revised proposal yesterday.
Neither side offered details of the proposal, but a person familiar with the offer said it contained nothing the union could be expected to embrace as a way of ending the dispute.
Commissioner Gary Bettman made the revised offer in an effort to inject some impetus into the stalled talks and get the two sides moving toward an agreement that would enable the league to open the season on Oct. 15.
That's the date Bettman set last Friday when he announced he was postponing the scheduled Oct. 1 start.


Supplies Cost $44 a Student, Badillo Finds
Although New York City's school system spends more money per student than any of the nation's 15 largest districts, a new report commissioned by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has found that the actual spending on books, pencil, paper and other classroom supplies is only $44 per student.
By contrast, the system spends $788 per pupil on its administration at the central and district levels, according to the study, which was overseen by the Mayor's special adviser on school finances, Herman Badillo, to review spending at the city's Board of Education.


U.S. AND CHINESE RESOLVE DISPUTE ON MISSILE SALES
As a sign of improving relations, the United States today agreed to allow the export of high-technology satellites to China that was frozen after Beijing secretly transferred missile components and technology to Pakistan.
In return, China pledged that once those sanctions are waived, it will not sell or transfer surface-to-surface missiles covered under an international accord controlling the transfer of sensitive missile technology.


A Celebration Of Dunham
Katherine Dunham, the pioneering dancer, choreographer and anthropologist, was saluted on Sunday afternoon at Town Hall with a happy, boisterous 85th-birthday tribute.
The event, presented by the Caribbean Cultural Center, began a monthlong, citywide homage to her.
With Danny Glover as the host, the gala benefit opened with exciting traditional drumming by Joe Sircus and the Dunham Drum Ensemble and closed with music by Tito Puente, his band and Mongo Santamaria.
Highlights included the hauntingly plain, resonant singing of Pauline Lot and Myriam Dorisme, and drum solos by a genial Max Roach.


Sixers and No. 1 Pick Agree to Agree
The Philadelphia 76ers reached agreement in principle with their top draft pick, SHARONE WRIGHT of Clemson, and DANA BARROS, a point guard, said he will accept a one-year contract.


Colors Galore, a Bit of Shine, And Style That Won't Startle
Laura Biagiotti makes the most exquisite handkerchief linen dresses and the most luxurious cashmeres.
If only she had focused her energies on them in the spring collection she showed here today.
Too much of the show was devoted to heavy-looking appliques of wild color combinations and tortured cutouts with brass borders.


Utilities See Costly Time Warp In '78 Law
The 1978 law that shook the utility industry seemed like a good idea to Congress.
Aimed at reducing the nation's use of imported oil by spurring the development of alternative energy sources, it requires utilities to buy power from independent generators.
Now the industry is saying that the prices set for that electricity more than a decade ago are so high that utilities are paying hundreds of millions of dollars extra for power they no longer need, hurting stockholders and raising bills to consumers.


Yeltsin Promises to Continue the Fight Against Inflation
A year after ordering tanks to crush a parliamentary rebellion, President Boris N. Yeltsin said today that Russia was moving toward economic and political stability.
He promised to maintain deflationary economic policies at least until the presidential election in June 1996.
At a news conference exactly one year after tanks fired on the Russian Parliament, Mr.
Yeltsin also promised to encourage private investment, "move a bit faster on economic reform" and pursue a strong Russian role in international affairs.


Major American Express Layoffs Expected Soon
American Express will announce details of long-planned cost-cutting moves in the next few days, according to a letter that Harvey Golub, the company's chairman, sent to employees on Monday night.
The company will probably close two of its seven large operating centers in the United States and several smaller centers, as well, a person close to the company said.
It is not likely to announce a specific target for the number of jobs to be cut, but internal estimates range from 3,000 to 5,000.
The big operating centers each have 1,000 to 1,500 employees.


Haitians March In New York
Marching behind a Haitian flag with a photograph of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide taped to its center, a chanting crowd of hundreds of Haitians and Haitian-Americans crossed 42d Street from Times Square to the United Nations yesterday in a show of support for the exiled President.
In the hours before Father Aristide addressed the General Assembly, the orderly procession of some 500 people, flanked by an escort of about 50 police officers, filled the midday air with call and response:


COMPANY BRIEFS
BAYER A.G., Leverkusen, Germany, said its United States subsidiary Miles Inc., Pittsburgh, had begun a joint venture with Schein Pharmaceutical Inc. to market generic drugs internationally.
The terms were not disclosed.
FILENE'S BASEMENT CORP., Wellesley, Mass., the discount clothing store chain, said it may drop plans to open new stores in its 1995 fiscal year after posting disappointing sales in August and September.


No Headline
"In 11 days I will be in Haiti." THE REV. JEAN-BERTRAND ARISTIDE.  [ A1:6. ]


Know the Limits as Seasons Change
New York State hunters will have 10 more days for waterfowling this fall and winter, and canvasback ducks will be legal quarry for the first time in a decade.
Responding to increased duck populations in the United States and Canada, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service has given all the states the option of extending their seasons from 30 to 40 days or increasing the daily bag limit of birds.
In the Atlantic, Mississippi and Central flyways, the daily limit, without the longer season, could be raised from three birds to four.
In the Pacific Flyway, it could be raised from four to five.
The flyways are the major north-south corridors used by migrating waterfowl.


Leaf Blowers Torment Those Working at Home
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 27 report from White Plains on leaf blowers notes that landscape contractors complain that they will be out of business because of bans on the leaf blower, but you say nothing about how their noise is already causing loss of productive work and income for those working at home.


IN THE KITCHEN WITH: Morley Safer; Serving Up Brouhahas And Garlic
THE ivy-draped, turn-of-the-century stone cottage with its aromatic herb gardens, rolling lawns and granite swimming pool could easily be in the south of France.
Behind the garage there is even a wood-framed playing field for the Provencal game of petanque, also known as boules, which is a French twist on boccie.
Two hours from New York City and along the Connecticut River, this is the weekend home of a resolute Francophile, Morley Safer, the correspondent for the CBS television program "60 Minutes." Mr.
Safer and his wife of 25 years, Jane, come here to read, to garden, to paint (Mr. Safer works in watercolors and acrylics) and, of course, to cook.


In Re: The Papal Mass That Wasn't Meant to Be
FOR five months the logistics of Mass for the masses -- from sacred music and liturgy to the decidedly more mundane matters of transportation and tickets -- had consumed the Papal Visit Task Force.
In committees large and small, the several dozen staff members of the Archdiocese of New York held lively meetings as they raced the clock to welcome Pope John Paul II to New York City on Oct. 20.
They planned for everything, except the task they are now forced to tackle: stopping and waiting.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Monday about Nasdaq stocks with the largest gains in the third quarter misstated the prices of two stocks.
Shares of Access Health Marketing closed at $7.875 on June 30 and at $18.75 on Sept. 30.
Shares of Microtouch Systems closed at $18.875 on June 30.
An adjacent chart about the biggest gainers on the American Stock Exchange omitted one stock.
Shares of Wireless Telecom Group had the second-largest gain of stocks traded on the exchange; the stock ended the quarter at $14.125, for a gain of 109.3 percent in the third quarter.


Chancing a Romance With an Eager Stranger
The risk in "Risk," a film by Deirdre Fishel, is ostensibly the chance taken by Maya (Karen Sillas) when she lets an eager young man pick her up on a bus.
Maya is a struggling artist living a lonely New York life, and Joe (David Ilku) is so eager he's hard to resist.
Following Maya home after he first meets her, he surveys her apartment and abruptly decides to take a bath, which turns into a seduction.
"If you don't let me spend the night," says Joe, "I'm going to have to kill myself."
Despite the intense attraction between these two, which the film captures forcefully, there are warning signs of trouble.
Joe has a mercurial temper and a checkered past, but Maya is too charmed by him to worry.
Her own life, involving rejections by art galleries and disheartening work as a nude figure model for art students, has been stagnant.
Joe dispels those blues and even takes her out of New York City, insisting they can start all over in a rustic new place.


Medical Investigators Find No Spread of the Plague From India
As international medical surveillance for plague intensifies, at least six countries have investigated suspect cases from India but none have been confirmed, health officials said yesterday.
A woman passing through customs at Kennedy International Airport in New York on Monday after arriving from India was sent to Bellevue Hospital because she was coughing and had a fever of 100.8 degrees Fahrenheit, a Federal health official said.
Tests indicated she did not have plague.


Treasury Issues Fall Moderately
Prices of Treasury securities were moderately lower in fairly subdued trading yesterday, as a sales report by the Ford Motor Company showed continued strength in that sector.
According to some analysts, the market had been expecting the monthly sales data to dip slightly after the strong showing for August, but the first September figures out, those of Ford, were much stronger than expected.


Aristide Backers Start to Surface
Slowly, cautiously, a government-in-waiting is surfacing here.
Evans Paul, Mayor of this gritty, impoverished city by the sea, can now speak openly with politicians, journalists and friends, arriving nattily dressed at City Hall and at luxury hotels to appear on television to discuss Haiti's future.
But when night falls he does not go home.
Instead, with memories of his arrest and beatings still in mind, he moves around the capital, seeking refuge in the homes of those who promise shelter.


Daniels Waived by San Antonio
The San Antonio Spurs have waived guard LLOYD DANIELS, who spent two seasons with the team.
Spurs General Manager GREGG POPOVICH announced the move yesterday, just three days before the team's training camp was scheduled to begin.


CHRONICLE
GEORGE WEISSMAN celebrated his retirement as chairman of Lincoln Center Monday night with a party for 400 friends at -- where else? -- Lincoln Center.
"I loved it," he said afterward.  "The evening was short on speeches."


Mushrooms Add Flavor To Polenta
Today's end-of-summer-beginning-of-fall menu was inspired by a lovely happenstance at one of the stores where I shop: an assortment of sliced wild mushrooms, ready to rinse and cook.
If you aren't quite so lucky, you can pick and choose the mushrooms you want to use.
Polenta With Mushrooms And Arugula
1 pound assorted mushrooms like crimini, shiitake, portobello, oyster, enoki or 1 pound of white button mushrooms  1 teaspoon olive oil  4 ounces ripe tomato  1 large clove garlic  2 ounces arugula  Small bunch of chives to yield 1 tablespoon minced  2 sprigs tarragon to make 1 tablespoon minced  2 tablespoons tomato paste  Freshly ground black pepper to taste.
1. Wash, dry and slice mushrooms.
2.
Heat a nonstick skillet until it is very hot; reduce heat to medium high, and add oil.
Add mushrooms, and saute until they begin to soften.
3.
Wash, trim and dice the tomato; mince the garlic, and add both to the mushrooms after they have begun to soften.
4.
Wash, trim and dry the arugula.
Slice the arugula into thin strips.
Add to the mushrooms.
5.
Wash, dry and mince the chives and tarragon; add to the mushrooms with the tomato paste.
Stir well, and cook only until the arugula has wilted.
Season with pepper.
Serve over the polenta.
Yield: 2 servings
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 120 calories, 7 grams fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 30 milligrams sodium, 10 grams protein, 14 grams carbohydrate.
Polenta
2 1/4 cups no-salt-added chicken stock  8 tablespoons instant polenta  1 ounce Parmigiano Reggiano ( 1/3 cup coarsely grated)  1/8 teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper to taste.
1. Bring stock to boil in covered pot.
2.
Slowly stir in the polenta so that it will not lump, and cook for about 2 minutes, until polenta has thickened.
3. Grate the cheese.
4. Season the polenta with salt and pepper, and stir in the cheese.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 215 calories, 7 grams fat, 20 milligrams cholesterol, 325 milligrams sodium, 12 grams protein, 25 grams carbohydrate.
Zucchini With Corn
24 ounces whole zucchini or 22 ounces sliced ready-cut zucchini (5 to 6 cups)  2 teaspoons olive oil  2 ears corn or 2 cups frozen corn kernels  1/8 teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper to taste.
1. Wash, trim and slice whole zucchini into 1/4-inch-thick rounds.
2. Heat a large nonstick skillet until it is very hot.
3.
Reduce heat to medium high; add oil, and saute zucchini, turning occasionally, until it begins to brown.
To get the maximum flavor from the zucchini, brown the slices as much as possible.
4.
Remove the corn from the cobs.
Two or three minutes before the meal is ready, add the corn from the cob or frozen corn kernels to the zucchini.
Season with salt and pepper; cover and simmer a couple of minutes, until corn is cooked.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 165 calories, 6 grams fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 155 milligrams sodium, 4 grams protein, 30 grams carbohydrate.
Game Plan Prepare and cook zucchini.
Remove corn from the cob.
Prepare and cook mushrooms.
Chop tomato and mince garlic.
Prepare arugula and herbs.
Add tomato and garlic to mushrooms.
Boil water for polenta.
Add arugula and herbs to mushrooms.
Add corn to zucchini.
Cook polenta.
Grate cheese.
Season dishes and serve.


Stocks Drop And Traders Are Puzzled
The stock market, for reasons that puzzled even professional traders, dropped sharply yesterday, dragging down stocks as varied as Union Carbide, the chemical company; Promus, a casino and hotel company, and Xilinx, a computer-chip distributor.
On the New York Stock Exchange, slightly more than three stocks fell for every one that rose in heavy trading.
The three leading stock indexes dropped 1 percent or more, a significant fall.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 45.76 points, or 1.19 percent, to 3,801.13, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index fell 7.15 points, or 1.55 percent, to 454.59.
The Nasdaq composite fell the most, dropping 13.58 points, or 1.78 percent, to 747.30.


Former Junk-Bond Manager Agrees to a Bar by the S.E.C.
Securities regulators these days are focusing on portfolio managers' personal trading, rather than on the junk-bond and insider trading cases that dominated in the heyday of Drexel Burnham Lambert.
But yesterday, the Securities and Exchange Commission reached back, using a Drexel-related case dating back to 1987 to detail the rules governing portfolio managers' duties to their clients.
The S.E.C. permanently barred a former junk-bond manager from the securities business for making a personal investment that it said she should have made for her clients.


Bay Ridge Begins to Fear Its Youths
When the teen-agers who hang out in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, ponder their lives, they see run-of-the-mill youths enamored of beer and play.
"We're not car thieves or thugs," said Scott Nickolson, 17.
"We're kids who trust each other and know more about each other than our parents do."


Auto Sales Rose 7.4% Last Month
Sales of cars and light trucks rose 7.4 percent in September, as the Big Three auto makers gained market share from foreign producers by virtue of the surging popularity of pickup trucks, mini-vans and four-wheel-drive vehicles.
The strong gain in sales, reported today by the auto makers, came despite concerns that higher interest rates could choke off consumer confidence and the ability of consumers to make monthly payments.
The report briefly unnerved the bond market, which saw it as a sign that higher rates were failing to moderate growth, and Treasury prices fell.  [ Page D15. ]  Stock prices were also lower yesterday.  [ Page D8. ]


Quel Shock! The Italianization Of French Cuisine
FOR more than three centuries, France has set the international gold standard for fine restaurants.
From lobster thermidor to beef Wellington, the nature of dishes was as immutable as the order in which each course was served, the arrangement of flatware as unyielding as the presence of sweet butter on the well-laid table.
So there is, understandably, much consternation at the growing Italian influence in haute bastions like Le Louis XV, Alain Ducasse's three-star restaurant in Monte Carlo.
Increasingly, the menu offers more and more pasta, risotto and Italian-style vegetables.
And last summer, the chef took the butter off the tables and set them with five different varieties of olive oil -- Italian olive oil.
Quelle horreur!


Double-Decker Buses Engage in Darwinian Battle
This summer was a long, hot one for New York City's double-decker tour-bus operators, who faced a court battle that threatened to put them out of business, a minefield of city and state safety regulations and weekly neighborhood protests.
They also accumulated more than 500 parking tickets.
But the fledgling industry survived its first big season, even thrived, and its operators are claiming a permanent place in the slow lane of Manhattan traffic.


Seminoles Know Pain Of Miami's Mind Games
They had no heart.
That is what today's team leaders at Florida State remember hearing, following the losses to Miami when they were young.
Never mind that in two consecutive games, in 1991 and 1992, Miami's victories were not secured until Florida State kicks passed wide of the right upright.
Those Hurricanes had mastered the techniques of gamesmanship, an art that goes well beyond mere trash-talking.
Gamesmanship creates doubts for both this time and the next one.
That is what those Hurricanes had in mind when they said, again and again, that Florida State had no heart.
Those young Seminoles knew that people believed what they were hearing.
Maybe some of them began to wonder, too.


Mandela Bids U.S. Assist In New Fight
In his first visit to the United States since his inauguration, President Nelson Mandela thanked the American people today for helping to overturn the apartheid system and then implored them to join South Afria in its newest struggle: overcoming poverty and building its economy.
At an emotional White House ceremony that included a 21-gun salute and trumpet flourishes, Mr.
Mandela said that after coming so far in helping the rebirth of his nation, the United States should not abandon its friend, but must instead invest in a new South Africa.


Mandela in Washington


Sports of The Times; Can Carroll Make Jets 'Ballistic'?
THE brilliant American comedian Richard Pryor once said that his goal in life was to make everybody in his path say, "Man, this guy's crazy." (I've cleaned it up a bit.)
Not that I value football coaches as highly as I value tetchy geniuses like Pryor, but, for better or worse, intimidation pays off in the only sport we have left.
It helps if the lads with the thick necks think Coach is slightly off his flip.


Mexico City Journal; Among the Ruins of the Left, a Pillar Stands
It was in 1975 that Rosario Ibarra de Piedra's 21-year-old son, Jesus, was arrested at an anti-Government rally.
He has never been found.
After her son's disappearance, her husband, also named Jesus, was tortured by interrogators demanding information about their son.


INSIDE
American Auto Sales Surge
Detroit's Big Three auto makers captured sales from foreign producers, sending car and truck sales up 7.4 percent in September.
Page D1.
Major Earthquake Hits Japan
One of the most powerful earthquakes in its history hit Japan, but it caused surprisingly few casualties and little damage.
Page A3.
Big Hospital Chains to Merge
Columbia-HCA Healthcare, the nation's largest hospital company, will acquire Healthtrust, the second-biggest, in a $5 billion deal.
Page D1.


Accounts
*
Reebok International Ltd., Stoughton, Mass., to Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, Boston, to handle advertising for its Reebok golf and Greg Norman product lines, previously at Mullen Advertising, Wenham, Mass.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.


High Court Backs Lloyd's Investors
Three thousand investors in the Lloyd's of London insurance market who lost hundreds of millions of dollars in a series of natural disasters and environmental accidents won a big legal battle yesterday when a High Court judge accepted their contention that they had been victims of negligence.
In a complex, 140-page decision, the judge, Justice Sir Nicholas Phillips, ruled that the agents and underwriters of the now-bankrupt insurance syndicate, Gooda Walker, had been negligent in their responsibilities to the Lloyd's investors, who are known as "names."


In Oklahoma's Senate Race, Both Candidates Are Running Against Clinton
President Clinton is probably more unpopular in this state than in any other, says one of its Senators, David L. Boren, a Democrat who is retiring this year.
"When Bill Clinton ran for President, people here hoped he was one of them," Mr.
Boren explained in an interview.
"Our guy next door, they thought, New Democrat, a lot less liberal than Dukakis or Mondale or Carter. So he carried the state. Now they've decided he ran under false colors, and that has infuriated them."


Flying Through the Air With the Greatest of Ease
Every society has its own mythological expressions of the human urge to fly.
In America, comic-book heroes like Superman and Batman fulfill that fantasy.
A trademark of Hong Kong action films is the aerial martial arts combat by kung-fu virtuosos whose spectacular leaps have a supernatural levity.
In "The Red Lotus Society," the Taiwanese film maker Stan Lai's elegant and lighthearted reflection on Chinese myths of the mind and body, the dream has been realized by a group of seven men and women who, according to legend, came to Taiwan from the Chinese mainland in 1949.
Trained in the art of "vaulting," the ability to leap great distances, they were sent back to the mainland on a secret mission.
After a series of reversals worthy of the trickiest film noir plot, the three survivors of the mission disappeared into Taiwanese society.
One became a shipping clerk, another the operator of a dumpling stand and the third a blind masseur.


Ellis Takes His Aim to Denver
The Denver Nuggets have signed one of the National Basketball Association's best shooters, DALE ELLIS, to a contract that will pay him $1.3 million this season.
The Nuggets also signed the rookie guard ABDUL FOX from the University of Rhode Island and were expected to add CLIFF LEVINGSTON, a 6-foot-7-inch power forward.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Reassigned general manager Larry Himes as director of Arizona operations-special assignment scout.
Announced they are dropping their affiliation with the Huntington club of the Appalachian League for financial reasons.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.81
4.83
3.04
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.94
4.92
2.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.37
5.38
3.11
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.68
7.65
5.33
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.88
7.85
6.01
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.74
8.70
7.01
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.61
6.59
5.43
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Calling-Card Fraud Goes High-Tech
A $50 million telephone calling-card theft ring disclosed earlier this week by Federal investigators is representative of the advanced types of frauds that have emerged in the last two years as telephone companies have become better at ferreting out such crimes.
In contrast with older and still more common cases of calling-card fraud involving small batches of numbers, often obtained by peering over callers' shoulders while they are dialing public pay phones, the latest case typifies an emerging category of inside crimes by people with computer programming skills, telecommunications experts said yesterday.


Baker, Lieutenant to Reagan, Salutes North
The man who was a major force in the success of the Reagan White House came to Virginia tonight to pay court to the man whose actions could have toppled it.
James A. Baker 3d, White House chief of staff and Treasury Secretary in the Reagan Administration, and President George Bush's Secretary of State, joined the pilgrimage of Republican Presidential prospects campaigning with Oliver L. North in his remarkable bid to join the Senate he once defied.


Reviews/Fashion; Versace and Sander Say No to Gimmicks
The Great Glamour Movement may look great in department-store windows.
But it certainly hasn't been great for design.
Fine fashion design doesn't need cigarette holders or maribou or big diamond collars.
It doesn't need Chinese fans or chopsticks in the hair or Shar-Peis on leashes.
Elegance, as a fashion sage once said, is refusal.
And great design needs that, especially now, with so many temptations so easily obtained.


Mead to Sell On-Line Unit to Reed Elsevier
The Mead Corporation has reached an agreement to sell its Mead Data Central electronic information division to the British-Dutch publishing giant Reed Elsevier P.L.C., the two companies said last night.
The proposed sale, for $1.5 billion, gives Reed Elsevier its first major stake in the emerging world of electronic information services, and allows Mead to return its focus to its core forest-products business.
Other bidders for Mead Data Central reportedly included the Thomson Corporation and Times Mirror.


ARISTIDE, AT U.N., EMPHASIZES NEED FOR CONCILIATION
Pledging that "in 11 days I will be in Haiti," its exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, told the United Nations General Assembly today that he is committed to a policy of reconciliation and reconstruction under which civil violence will not be tolerated and retribution will be left to the judicial process.
"We will prepare our reconciliation coffee with the filter of justice, so that no traces of violence or vengeance will be found," he said, quoting a Creole saying.
He devoted much of his address to outlining a recovery plan, suggesting also that Haiti's Army, which he called a drain on the economy, would be reduced in size.


With Plague Come False Reassurances
To the Editor:
"Return of the Plague" (editorial, Sept. 29) states that the pneumonic plague that has appeared in Surat, India, "for all its historic savagery, should be controllable in the modern world." This reassurance is reminiscent of the words of Surgeon General William H. Stewart, who told Congress in 1969 that "it was time to close the book on infectious diseases" and stated that the war against pestilence was won.


Whose Body Is It? Not Always One's Own
The story dramatized in "Against Her Will: The Carrie Buck Story" is about the woman chosen as the test case for a 1927 Supreme Court ruling that legalized the compulsory sterilization of "mentally deficient" women.
Being telecast on Lifetime tonight, the film is in many ways a standard television movie: issues are spelled out laboriously, emotions are milked shamelessly.
In this instance, however, the issues are genuinely unsettling and the emotions, delivered in strong performances by Melissa Gilbert and Marlee Matlin, are justifiable.
It's Virginia in 1924.
Melissa Prentice (Ms. Gilbert), a law student with entry to all the right social circles, has a chance meeting on a dusty road with Carrie Buck (Ms. Matlin), who is running away from a state mental institution run by Melissa's uncle, Dr.
Arthur Kent (Pat Hingle).
Carrie has been separated from her out-of-wedlock baby and now the institution, having judged her feeble-minded and a moral delinquent, wants her sterilized.
Much to the distress of her uncle, who hopes she gets "this damn lawyer stuff out of your system," Melissa insists on being Carrie's advocate.


Death of Queens Fire Company's Leader Ends 59-Day Vigil
The signal -- a sequence of five bells repeated four times -- echoed through firehouses across the city yesterday.
Slowly, solemnly, it confirmed what a telephone call had already told the firefighters at Ladder Company 136 in Elmhurst, Queens: the 59-day vigil for their commanding officer was over.
The commander, Capt.
Wayne E. Smith, was trapped in a two-alarm fire on Aug. 7.
With burns over 40 percent of his body and lung injuries from the air in the burning building at 81-04 37th Avenue, Captain Smith died at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
His wife, Connie, had kept a daily vigil.
Fire Commissioner Howard Safir had stopped by nearly every day.


No Reaganomics Redux
To the Editor:
The return to Reaganomics espoused by most Republican candidates for Congress (editorial, Sept. 28) would saddle the Federal Government with huge debt increases and would jeopardize our economy.
A balanced budget amendment is useless if combined with policies that add to the deficits.


Dorfman to Quit USA Today To Go to Money Magazine
Dan Dorfman, the Wall Street columnist for USA Today, will leave the daily newspaper to join Money magazine as a senior writer on Jan. 1.
He will write an investment column for the personal-finance monthly.
Mr.
Dorfman, who is also a commentator for the financial cable channel CNBC, will continue his daily reports on CNBC five days a week.


Another Casualty Of NBC's Hit 'E.R.'
NBC's new Thursday night hit drama "E.R." claimed its second victim yesterday as ABC announced that it would move "Prime Time Live" away from the "E.R." time slot in January, as part of a wholesale rescheduling of the network's news magazine programs.
"Prime Time" will shift to 10 P.M.
Wednesdays, a night when ABC has a much stronger lineup of shows earlier in the evening.
Roone Arledge, the president of ABC News, said in a statement that "Prime Time" was "one of the news division's most important franchises."


Javits Center Inquiry Says Workers Have Mob Ties
Despite repeated efforts to curb corruption at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, a court-appointed investigator charged yesterday that 100 carpenters who put up and take down most of the displays there are hired by union officials with connections to organized crime.
The investigator, Kenneth Conboy, said in a report that "an alarming number" of the 100 carpenters also appear to have connections to the Genovese crime family.
In addition, the report said, about a third of them have been arrested or convicted of crimes ranging from arson to drug trafficking to murder.


Judge Rejects Barrage of Objections by Simpson's Lawyers
The defense raised numerous objections today to the manner in which the police had either obtained or analyzed the evidence they gathered against O. J. Simpson, including drops of blood on his driveway, a pair of Reebok sneakers and items seized from his white Bronco.
But Judge Lance A. Ito of Los Angeles Superior Court quickly dispensed with most of them, either because the defense did not raised them earlier or because, while he said they were "novel," they had no foundation in law.


Ex-Flier Ends Testimony On Tailhook
Paula A. Coughlin, whose accusation of being sexually assaulted at the 1991 Tailhook Association convention shook the Navy from the top down, ended three days on the witness stand in her civil suit today by defending her conduct as an aviator in the year and a half after the incident.
The 32-year-old former Navy lieutenant admitted under cross-examination that despite her fragile mental state and recurring thoughts of suicide after the convention here, she persisted in piloting helicopters.


A New Network Hopes To Lure Fox Viewers
Looking to steal a page from the Fox network's playbook, the United Paramount network plans to start up in January with a schedule of five programs over two nights, deliberately aimed at the same young men who were the original core audience for Fox.
Lucille S. Salhany, the president of the would-be network, announced yesterday that United Paramount is to begin the evening of Jan. 16, a Monday, with a two-hour premiere of its latest "Star Trek" spinoff series, "Voyager." A week later that series is to begin as a one-hour show at 8 P.M.


Mayor Moves To Cut Role Of Legal Aid
Striking Legal Aid lawyers returned to work yesterday, but Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani insisted that he would not restore the nonprofit Legal Aid Society to its position as the primary defender of the poor in the city's packed courts.
Contending that the city should not be subject to lawyers' strikes, Mr.
Giuliani said he would be looking for alternative arrangements to the Legal Aid Society in some city courts, suggesting that new options could be tried in Queens and Staten Island.


BEHIND THE WHEEL WITH: Jimmie Vaughan; A Bluesman's Songs of Joy
BY 10 on a lazy September morning, the sun has already bleached the Texas sky to a pale blue, vibrant with heat.
Outside a dignified downtown hotel, sedate Infinitis and board-room-gray Town Cars enter and depart along a U-shaped driveway, moving like stately ocean liners through air so humid it can be wrung out like a towel.
This is the quiet, corporate face of Austin, where the hotel staff in their crisp, proper uniforms help to keep the city's honky-tonking reputation at bay.


Evoking the Sensations Of Blood, Lust, Revenge
It might surprise those who think of modern dance as an arcane or at least forbidding art, but some of the best theater in town was happening on Tuesday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, where "Radical Graham" entered its final week.
The air throbbed with blood, lust, vengeance -- and the excitement of imaginative formal experimentation and abstraction -- but there was not a moment of melodrama.
Returning to a work loved long ago is always risky.
But Martha Graham's "Deaths and Entrances," a 1943 dance set to a score by Hunter Johnson, lives still in a revival directed by Pearl Lang.
If its current dancers have not quite the grandeur of casts of other years, they make the dance alive in a way that is thoroughly contemporary but that does justice to the past.


Nevada Court Lets Bout Decision Stand
The Nevada Supreme Court refused yesterday to cancel a lower court decision allowing the Nov. 5 heavyweight fight between the World Boxing Association and International Boxing Federation champion, MICHAEL MOORER, and GEORGE FOREMAN in Las Vegas.
Nev.


CONGRESS FORGOES ITS BID TO HASTEN CLEANUP OF DUMPS
In a setback for the Clinton Administration and its politics of environmental consensus-building, Congress today gave up the effort to rewrite the law that provides for cleaning up toxic waste dumps.
Administration officials expressed bitter disappointment as they reluctantly agreed with House Democratic leaders, and with their allies from business and environmental groups, that they could not force recalcitrant Republicans to accept the revised version of the Superfund law without amendments that would have torn the coalition apart.


How to Call a Play Into Being By Smearing a Man With Mud
"Believe then, if you please, that I can do strange things," Rosalind announces mysteriously toward the end of Shakespeare's "As You Like It." The line has been spoken by actresses like Vanessa Redgrave and Katharine Hepburn, but it is difficult to imagine it ever having the profound pertinence it takes on in the mouth of one Adrian Lester, a tall, gangly man playing a woman in man's clothing.
When the words were delivered late Tuesday night at the Majestic Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, an audible sigh of appreciation rippled through the house.
Even more than the standing ovation that followed, that sigh was an ideal tribute to what Cheek by Jowl company of London had achieved: a sustained conjuring act that celebrates the basic power of theater to bewitch, to teach and above all to transform.


Curry and Rowland Trade Ad Barrages
Last week, John G. Rowland, the Republican candidate for governor, began running his first attack ad, branding his Democratic opponent, William E. Curry Jr., a liberal.
This week, Mr.
Curry fired back, with a commercial castigating Mr.
Rowland for resorting to "misleading negative ads" and chiding him for resorting to "old style politics as usual."


Coaches Group Opposes Proposition 16
The National Association of Basketball Coaches ended its two-day meeting in Houston yesterday by calling for a delay in implementing stricter entry standards and the eventual end of eligibility for all freshmen.
The board of directors of the N.A.B.C. released a statement stating its opposition to Proposition 16, which is scheduled to go into effect next fall and will include a scale that would toughen the standards for a freshman athlete to be eligible.


Jim Baker Sings Ollie's Tune
So Jim Baker, a man who exudes an air of steady probity, has joined Ollie North's Old Dominion Glee Club.
He has plenty of shamefaced company among the basso profundos of the Republican Party.
Rational citizens might ask how Mr.
North, an admitted liar to Congress, has so many law-abiding Presidential candidates singing his tune.
The reason, of course, is that anyone who wants the G.O.P. nomination in 1996 has to bow to the superpatriots and conservative religionists who now control their party's nominating process.
Some candidates, such as former Vice President Dan Quayle and Senator Phil Gramm, seem comfortable enough with Mr.
North.
For Mr.
Baker and Senator Bob Dole, it is clearly an agony that they hope a forgiving nation will understand has nothing to do with character or the values Republicans like to talk about at their convention.
It's just politics, Mr.
Baker explained.
The party will do almost anything to gain control of the Senate, and Mr.
North is the living proof of their avidity.


Bridge
For 30 years, the American Contract Bridge League's Charity Foundation has distributed about $250,000 annually to various beneficiaries, like Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders, which is the recipient this year.
The league's Educational Foundation gives smaller amounts to promote bridge teaching projects.
Both these bodies of the league, whose headquarters are in Memphis, were thrown into disarray three weeks ago when their bank accounts proved to be close to depletion.
The league's president, Virgil V. Anderson Jr. of Springfield, Mo., said Federal and Memphis authorities were investigating the incidents.
According to Roy Green, the league's chief executive, about $1 million is believed to be missing.


A Declaration of Chip Independence
Seven years ago, when the United States semiconductor industry was reeling in the face of a Japanese invasion, American chip makers persuaded the Government to establish a groundbreaking federally financed manufacturing consortium intended to resurrect their industry.
The argument was that by investing in manufacturing technology, it was possible to reverse declining United States market share for the fingernail-sized circuits that were increasingly being viewed as the crude oil of the information age.


CHRONICLE
DNA tests have shown that Anna Anderson was not the Grand Duchess Anastasia, the youngest daughter of Nicholas II, Russia's last czar, and his wife, the Empress Aleksandra, despite a decades-long contention that she was.
The Reuters news agency reported yesterday that Dr.
PETER GILL, a British forensic scientist, had performed tests on tissue from Mrs.
Anderson's intestine.
The blood sample Dr.
Gill used for comparison was donated by PRINCE PHILIP, the husband of Queen Elizabeth II.
Prince Philip is related to the empress through his mother.


Drug Ring Is Accused After Years Of Luxury
After running one of the biggest heroin operations in New York for more than two decades, Charles Galletti tried slipping away to Puerto Rico three years ago to live a kind of early retirement, Federal law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
Mr.
Galletti, 42, took elaborate steps to look like a legitimate, albeit extremely successful, businessman, the officials said.
He oversaw a San Juan company that provides meals and hangar space to international airlines, and a big recycling plant near West Palm Beach, Fla., they said, as well as a handful of auto repair shops, a hair salon and several restaurants.


Times Co. Magazines' Shifts
The New York Times Sports/Leisure Magazines Group said yesterday that it was realigning its management structure and was creating new positions of group publishers.
The changes go into effect on Oct. 17.


A Hospital Leader Widens the Gap
The Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corporation was already the nation's largest for-profit hospital chain, by far.
But that was not big enough.
When word leaked that the second-largest chain was considering merging with a rival, Columbia/ HCA saw an opportunity to get much bigger in a hurry.
The $5 billion merger that Columbia/HCA and Healthtrust Inc. announced Tuesday night would involve a swap of stock valued at $3.6 billion and an assumption of Healthtrust's $1.8 billion in debt.
It would create a behemoth with revenues of $15 billion, about five times those of the nearest rival, National Medical Enterprises Inc. of Santa Monica, Calif.
The chain will grow to 311 hospitals and 125 outpatient centers in 37 states and Europe and will have almost 120,000 employees, spreading from high-tech urban centers that are the flagships of the Columbia/ HCA group into scores of surrounding rural communities where Healthtrust has a near monopoly on hospital service.


A Longer Long-Distance Routine Brings Adjustments in Dialing
Ever since last Monday morning, James T. O'Brien Jr., a Syosset business owner, has been stumbling over the simple task of dialing a phone.
And it is driving him batty.
Long Island used to be one of the few areas that did not require callers to dial "1" before dialing long distance.
But with new phone numbers in increasing demand nationwide, Long Island dialers are having to readjust their ways.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.81
4.78
2.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.94
4.94
2.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.37
5.37
3.08
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.75
7.68
5.31
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.95
7.88
6.01
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.74
7.03
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.69
6.61
5.44
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Fine in Nuclear Shutdown
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission fined the Public Service Electric and Gas Company $500,000 today, saying that six violations had led to an alert and partial shutdown at its Salem I nuclear power plant in southern New Jersey last spring.
The executive director of the commission, James M. Taylor, announced the fine in a letter to company officials that accused the utility of bumbling and of tolerating lax security controls at the Salem I plant in Lower Alloways Creek, N.J.


House Vote on Trade Accord Is Postponed
Stymied by election-year politics, leaders from both parties in the House of Representatives decided tonight to postpone until after the elections a House vote on legislation to allow the United States to participate in a new worldwide trade agreement.
The Senate decided last week to hold a lame-duck session after Thanksgiving to vote on the measure.


Haitians Ask Of U.S. Links To Attaches
The sudden transformation of the leader of Haiti's paramilitary gunmen into a United States-sponsored spokesman for democracy has stunned many Haitians and stirred speculation in the diplomatic community about American intelligence ties to the forces that ousted the country's elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
"Are the American Embassy and Fraph strolling hand-in-hand?" asked a front page headline this morning in Le Nouvelliste, the country's most independent newspaper, using the acronym of the paramilitary force the military set up to support its own rule.


A Cyberspace Name Game: Fighting Words on Internet
On the Internet, it's not necessarily who you know but how you're known.
Some Internet users complain, however, that others have deliberately grabbed their names.
Now, an arbitration panel in New York has ruled that the Princeton Review had no right to establish an electronic address on the Internet by using the name of its chief rival.


Flanders Passes 2d Drug Test
The state Racing and Wagering Board confirmed yesterday that it was awaiting an official report that a second drug test on the star 2-year-old filly Flanders had been negative, and conceded that it was uncertain what the next step would be in its inquiry into the filly and her trainer, Wayne Lukas.
Flanders has finished first in all three races in her career, but tested positive for the therapeutic medication isoxsuprine after winning the Matron Stakes at Belmont Park on Sept. 17.
All medication is banned on race day in New York State, and isoxsuprine cannot be given within 36 hours before a race.
As a result of the test, taken at Cornell University, the filly was removed from first place and forfeited the purse of $67,000 to Stormy Blues, the runner-up.


Lance Inc.(LNCE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 3


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about changes in the workplace and the shifting relations between workers and companies misidentified the subject of the photo in some editions.


Federal Paper Board Co.(FBO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 10


Sex and Good Taste


Great Mining Ripoff Dodges the Bullet Again
To the Editor:
"Environmental Downs and Ups" (editorial, Oct. 3) notes that significant progress was made toward reforming the 1872 mining law this year.
In the end, however, victory went to the mining industry, which has taken $231 billion worth of gold and other minerals off the public lands and has paid no royalty whatever to the taxpayers.


Perot Urges Voters to Fill Congress With Republicans
Ross Perot says that he has lifted the hood of American politics, found the engine broken, and that the way to fix it is simple: elect Republicans.
Mr.
Perot, who ran for President as an independent candidate in 1992, said on "Larry King Live" on Tuesday night that voters should toss the Democrats out of Congress and elect Republicans in their place.


Knicks Make Oakley Their No. 1 Priority
As the Knicks prepared to start training camp tomorrow, Dave Checketts, their president, was preparing to deal with some key issues during the coming weeks.
Several players, most notably Charles Oakley, are seeking contract extensions.
The point guard position is overcrowded.
And New York has been unable to make an off-season deal for a scorer.


Winn-Dixie Stores Inc.(WIN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 21


Jail Budget Overrun Is of Giuliani's Making
To the Editor:
At least in one area, corrections, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's claim that New York City's budget problems are based on past fiscal practices is misleading and disingenuous.
The problems in the jails -- severe crowding and budget overruns from excessive overtime costs -- are the direct result of policy decisions made by the Giuliani administration.


Coach Beard Wants the Nets to Run, Run
If there are less than 5 seconds left on the shot clock and Kenny Anderson is still trying to free himself from a defender and Derrick Coleman is waiting impatiently in the post for the ball, then Butch Beard will be unhappy.
If Anderson is crossing midcourt with 22 seconds on the clock and Coleman is depositing the ball into the basket at 0:21, then Beard will be happy.


Washington Talk; U.S. Accepts Easing of Curbs on Serbia: Three Reasons Why
In December 1992, the United States branded President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia, among others, as a possible war criminal who should be tried for crimes against humanity.
Since then, the man who inflamed Serbian nationalism and allowed paramilitary forces to conduct an ethnic cleansing campaign in his name has survived, even thrived.
Now the United Nations is today rewarding him for good behavior by lifting some of the sanctions it imposed 28 months ago, maintaining that he has halted the passage of war materials to the Bosnian Serbs.


Owners' Rules Freeze Fails to Excite Players
Striking major league baseball players have yet to respond to management's proposal for a 45-day freeze on off-season dates and rules on the conduct of business transactions.
But the players most likely will see no benefit in endorsing the idea because they don't know what the ramifications would be.
Union and management officials met yesterday to discuss the freeze, which would halt all transactions affecting players without contracts and, most notably, free agents, until Nov. 15.
The union expects to respond to the proposal by either tomorrow or Monday.


Saudi King Trying to Dilute Islamic Radicalism
In a move to limit the influence of militant clerics, King Fahd of Saudi Arabia has set up a Supreme Council of Islamic Affairs directed by ranking family members and technocrats.
The council, appointed Tuesday night, will act as a sort of ombudsman of Islamic activity in educational, economic and foreign policy matters.
Prince Sultan, Defense Minister and a brother of the King, is head of the council.


Battered Browns Re-sign Wide Receiver
With fullback TOMMY VARDELL out for the season and three wide receivers nursing injuries, the Cleveland Browns began plugging holes in their offense yesterday by re-signing wide receiver PATRICK NEWMAN.
Newman, a fifth-year wide receiver from Utah State, signed with the Browns in June after playing in 33 games with New Orleans over the previous three seasons.
He was with Cleveland throughout its June minicamp and played in four preseason games before getting cut on Aug. 31.


Samaranch Calls Chinese Sports 'Very Clean'
Antonio Samaranch, the International Olympic Committee president, came to the defense of China's world-record athletes today, saying they did not take drugs and that sports in China was "very clean."
Speaking one day after China's female weight lifters set 14 world records at the Asian Games here, Samaranch said he was not surprised a nation with a population of 1.3 billion people would reach the top ranks of international sports.


Haiti's Military May Not Avoid Criminal Trials
With only 10 days remaining before Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras is to relinquish power, the Haitian Parliament is mired in disputes and seems unlikely to pass the broad amnesty that the military leaders demand.
The diminished prospects for an amnesty covering all crimes became clear today when, after a week of delays, officials loyal to Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, introduced a bill that would limit amnesty for military officers to "political matters." The measure specifically does not cover crimes "punishable under the penal code."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Union Pacific offered to acquire Santa Fe Pacific for $3.4 billion, threatening the proposed merger of Santa Fe Pacific and Burlington Northern.
Analysts predicted that Union Pacific's offer would be barred on antitrust grounds.  [ D1. ]
Columbia/HCA Healthcare saw an opportunity to get much bigger in a hurry in a $5 billion deal for Healthtrust Inc.  [ D1. ]
With U.S. chip makers leading in world markets, the Sematech consortium has declared its national mission accomplished.  [ D1. ]
American Express plans to cut up to 6,000 jobs, close four credit card-processing centers and merge some functions.  [ D3. ]
Comerica plans to acquire University Bank and Trust of Palo Alto, Calif., for stock valued at $73 million.  [ D3. ]
Borden said it would have a third-quarter loss because of a pretax charge of $150 to $200 million.
Paul Kazarian said he intended to bid for Borden in competition with K.K.R.'s $2 billion offer.  [ D4. ]
Apple shares soared 12 percent to $37.875 on rumors that Motorola might take a big stake in it.
Neither would comment.  [ D3. ]
Dan Dorfman will leave USA Today to join Money magazine, where he will write an investment column.  [ D20. ]
American depository receipts for the shares of the British and Dutch parents of Reed Elsevier, the publishing giant, will be listed on the New York Stock Exchange.  [ D20. ] The Economy
House leaders decided to postpone a vote on the world trade pact until after the elections.
But Representative Thomas S. Foley, the Speaker, insisted that "it is going to become law."  [ D1. ]  Some Republicans called the pact a Clinton Administration plan to help businesses, notably the Washington Post Company.  [ D7. ]
Internet address poaching was barred by an arbitration panel in New York in a case involving the Princeton Review.
It had set up an electronic address using the name of its rival, Kaplan.  [ D1. ]
Factory orders and shipments surged at the fastest rate in more than a year during August, fanning fears of inflation and higher interest rates.
Manufacturers' orders jumped 4.4 percent.  [ D5. ]
The Government is paying up to $5 billion a year in fraudulently claimed tax refunds, an independent study group has found.  [ A21. ]
International
Russia's foreign bank creditors agreed to allow postponement of repayment on $26 billion in loans, easing pressure.  [ D1. ] 1 Markets
Stocks tumbled early on Wall Street, putting the bourses on the skids.
Later, American shares substantially recovered.  [ D8. ]
The yield on the Treasury's long bond approached 8 percent, on traders' expressed fear of inflation.  [ D7. ]
The dollar fell against other leading currencies, dragged down by the bond market's decline.  [ D15. ]
Cotton futures prices recovered from a nine-month low as demand appeared strong for a huge American crop.  [ D15. ] Today's Columns
A truce on trade has pleased both Japan and the United States.
But it does not dispel the myth of an economic struggle that one of the two nations must lose.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
The rapid expansion of Columbia/HCA Healthcare -- financed largely by stock -- shows that when Wall Street loves you, growth can be almost unlimited.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D8. ]
The methods of product placement are being used in a campaign aimed at persuading youth to shun conflicts before they escalate into violent confrontations.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D19. ]


Villain or Hero? Pinochet Is Still Viewed as Both in Chile
Four years after his brutal military leadership relinquished power to an elected Government, Gen.
Augusto Pinochet remains both a popular and a potent figure in Chile, despite the thousands of dissenters killed by his security forces during his 17-year reign.
Although widely regarded as a vicious dictator, General Pinochet, whose economic and social changes fostered Chile's current prosperity, is revered here as much as he is despised.


Gerald Lee Bledsoe; Broadcaster Was 51
Gerald Lee Bledsoe, whose career as a broadcaster took him to stations from Buffalo to New York City to Washington and finally Detroit, died on Sept. 27 at his home in Detroit.
He was 51.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Slain Youth Inspires Call: Quit Toy Guns
Holding back tears, the parents of a 13-year-old boy killed last week by a housing police officer -- who mistook his toy gun for a real one and his game of cops and robbers for something more menacing -- appealed to toy stores yesterday to exchange toy guns for other playthings.
"Children cannot play games as we did when we were young," Angela Heyward, the mother of the boy, Nicholas Heyward Jr., said at a news conference at Intermediate School 293 in Brooklyn, where her son attended eighth grade.


Newcomer Enters Sharks' Waters
Like the career prosecutor he is, Dennis C. Vacco was forceful, if a bit stiff, as he stood on the steps of City Hall recently and made the case why he should be the next state attorney general.
He led with a quick joke about his height (at 5 foot 7 inches, he is literally overshadowed by two Republican ticketmates who are 6 foot 5), then tore into his Democratic rival on an issue he believes will help win the race: She is liberal.
He decidedly is not.
"There has never been a bigger difference or a clearer choice," said Mr.
Vacco, 42, for five years the United States Attorney in Buffalo.
"Both my opponent and I have a record of public service but quite frankly that's where our similarities end."


Comerica Set To Add Bank In California
Comerica Inc., the second-largest bank company in Michigan, said today that it would acquire University Bank and Trust Company, a small bank based in Palo Alto, Calif., in a stock deal valued at $73 million.
Comerica said it had reached an agreement to swap 1.75 shares of its common stock for every share of University Bank stock.
Shares of University Bank jumped $3 today, to $42, in Nasdaq trading.
Comerica's stock gained 25 cents, to $26.75, on the Big Board.
For Comerica, the purchase of University Bank represents another step in its strategy to gain a foothold in California.
Since 1991, when a change in California's banking law permitted acquisitions by domestic bank holding companies based outside the state, Comerica has been on a buying spree.


Plan for Health Clinics
The Giuliani administration is moving forward with a plan to turn 45 child health clinics over to the troubled Health and Hospitals Corporation next month.
Page B3.


James McCahon, 38, New York Architect
James J. McCahon, an architect of the new American headquarters of the Bertelsmann company, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 38 years old.
The cause was AIDS-related lymphoma, said Rob Goldfarb, his companion.


CHRONICLE
KURT MASUR, the music director of the New York Philharmonic, is known for his love of Japanese music.
In 1978 he commissioned MINORU MIKI, a Japanese composer, to write a piece that combined traditional Japanese and Western instruments and musical styles.
The American premiere of Mr.
Miki's composition, titled "Symphony of Two Worlds," is to take place this evening at a Philharmonic concert in Avery Fisher Hall.


Mr. Badillo's First Salvo
Herman Badillo, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's special agent assigned to penetrate the mysteries of the New York City school budget, issued his first report yesterday.
It provides a useful framework for understanding the chaotic accounting that afflicts the school system, with its uncoordinated and incompatible computer systems.
But the study is a long way from answering the question that has provoked so much political controversy between the Board of Education and City Hall: How much administrative fat exists in the school budget that might be squeezed out as the hard-pressed city tries to close a huge budget gap?


Lawsuit Is Prepared As Fire Captain Dies
As Capt.
Wayne E. Smith's family prepared for his funeral tomorrow, a lawsuit against the city on behalf of the firefighter was in its preliminary stages.
Peter James Johnson Jr., a lawyer for the family, said a notice of claim, which informs the city of an intention to sue, was filed last month in State Supreme Court in Queens, seeking $30 million.


Left Alone at Home: O.K., or a Danger?
PEOPLE across the country were horrified in late September when a Pittsburgh couple left four young children with a 14-year-old baby sitter and did not return for two weeks.
But parents are forced into difficult judgment calls every day.
How old should baby sitters be before parents can entrust their children to them?
At what age is it appropriate to leave a child alone, and for how long?
Neither laws nor child-care experts provide a clear answer.
Laws, which vary by state and locality, usually do not outline in great detail what constitutes neglect or abandonment, leaving that decision to a prosecutor, child welfare worker or judge, said Howard Davidson, director of the American Bar Association's Center on Children and the Law in Washington.


A Lineup Shuffle for the 49ers
With the offense laboring, the San Francisco 49ers changed their lineup yesterday and installed FRANK POLLACK at right tackle and the rookie WILLIAM FLOYD at fullback.
Pollack takes over for HARRY BOATSWAIN, who has struggled since replacing the Pro Bowler HARRIS BARTON.
During a season-opening victory over the Los Angeles Raiders, Barton went down with a torn left triceps and is expected to miss about another month. (AP)


Quick &amp; Reilly Selects Grey Direct
Quick &amp; Reilly Inc., the discount brokerage firm in New York, has selected Grey Direct in New York to handle its account, which was at Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond in New York for 19 months until that agency resigned earlier this year.
Billings were estimated at $7 million.


An Evening That Highlights The Flute's Many Facets
No traditional instrument has made itself more amenable to 20th-century exploration than the flute, and a good part of Tuesday night's Ensemble 21 program at Merkin Concert Hall was spent listening to how it can be bent and transformed.
In "Cassandra's Dream Song" by Brian Ferneyhough, Tara O'Connor's flute spit, fluttered, wavered and clicked.
Mr.
Ferneyhough breathes this music in short sentences, like variations whose theme is the instrument itself.
Harvey Sollberger's "Riding the Wind" treats the flute as the principal in a pocket concerto.
Here the experiments are conducted against the scurrying figures and fragments of a clarinet-piano-violin-cello ensemble.
It took Luciano Berio's "Sequenza III" to return lightness and wit to the general earnestness.
Clearly enjoying herself, Cheryl Marshall ran through Mr.
Berio's over-the-top yet always deft extensions of the wordless human voice.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  CULT MEMBERS FOUND DEAD  Fifty people were found dead in what appears to have been a collective suicide and slaying carried out almost simultaneously in two Swiss villages and a Canadian town by members of a religious sect.
A1


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Navratilova After 168th  Top-seeded Martina Navratilova advanced to the quarterfinals of the European Indoors in Zurich yesterday with a 7-6 (7-1), 6-3 victory over a fellow American, Meredith McGrath.
Navratilova, ranked fourth in the world as she winds down her career, has never won in Zurich but hopes to record her 168th tour victory this week thanks in part to the absence of injured Steffi Graf, a six-time winner of the Indoors. (AP) Becker Stays Alive in Australia: Boris Becker survived a second-set loss and defeated Steve Bryan by 6-4, 1-6, 6-0 in the Australian Indoors at Sydney.
The second-seeded Becker advanced to the quarterfinals, one of only three seeded survivors in a starting field of 32. (AP) Forget Still Under Power: Top-seeded Andrei Medvedev of Ukraine and No. 2 Marc Rosset of Switzerland were eliminated by Frenchmen yesterday from the Toulouse Open in France.
Medvedev lost, 6-3, 6-3, in the first round to Guy Forget, who continued his strong comeback from a knee injury that sidelined him most of 1993.
Rosset fell, 6-1, 5-7, 6-2, in the second round to Olivier Delaitre. (AP)


France Sends a Signal That It Cares for Problems of the Young
Earlier this year, embarrassed by a wave of anti-Government student protests, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur decided to show that he really cared about young people by sending out millions of questionnaires inviting them to give him their views on life and society in France.
At first it seemed like a pointless exercise.
Surely the Government already knew that most young French people were unhappy?
Indeed, when preliminary results of the survey were issued this week, that was the conclusion: 71 percent said they had no confidence in the future.


Victims in Mass Deaths Linked to Magical Sects
The 50 people who died in simultaneous suicides or killings in Switzerland and Canada yesterday appeared to have been members of an occult, ritualistic organization led by Luc Jouret, a dark-haired, charismatic Belgian remembered in Europe for lectures that combined spiritual ideas with warnings about coming environmental catastrophes.
The Swiss police said they did not know whether Mr.
Jouret, 46, was among the total of 48 people found dead in two places in Switzerland -- a burned farmhouse in the village of Cheiry, northeast of Geneva, and at three chalets in a ski area at Granges-sur-Salvan, near the Italian border.


Sports of The Times; What Did You Have For Dinner?
"DID you have a good night's sleep?"
"Terrible. I dreamed that baseball has been on strike since Aug. 12, wiping out the rest of the season, the league playoffs and even the World Series."


Borrowing the methods of product placement, a campaign asks young people to avoid violence.
AN ambitious effort to encourage young people to avoid violence, particularly gun-related violence, is turning to the methods of Madison Avenue to help achieve its aims.
The Center for Health Communications at the Harvard School of Public Health is sponsoring a campaign to persuade youth to shun conflicts before they escalate into violent confrontations.
The campaign is called "Squash it," after a term already popular among youth in inner-city neighborhoods when they determine they can withdraw from a potentially perilous incident without losing face.


The Majority Leader Is Happy to Sling Some Dirt


Lynch a Candidate for Cubs Job
Ed Lynch, the special assistant to Mets General Manager Joe McIlvaine, is the leading candidate to replace Larry Himes as general manager of the Chicago Cubs, according to a person close to the Cubs' operations.
McIlvaine confirmed yesterday that the Cubs president, Andy MacPhail, had called last week to request permission to speak with Lynch about the general manager's job and that MacPhail had initiated conversations with Lynch.
Lynch did not return calls to his Long Island home last night.


World News Briefs; Telephone Links to Cuba Backed by White House
The Clinton Administration gave American telecommunications companies permission today to establish direct telephone links with Cuba in a move that is expected to vastly increase calls between the two countries.
The decision will also enable six telecommunications companies to upgrade phone service to Cuba.
For example, AT&amp;T plans to put back into service a 140-circuit cable that was damaged by a 1989 hurricane.


A Secretive and Charismatic Cult Leader
Little is known about Luc Jouret, a dark-haired, charismatic man said to be the leader of the secretive sect known as the Order of the Solar Temple.
The police said yesterday that they did not even know whether the 46-year-old Belgian was among the 50 people who died in apparent collective suicides linked to his sect in Switzerland and Quebec.
Mr.
Jouret is believed to have left Canada for Switzerland last year after being convicted of with weapons possession and conspiracy.


T.G.I.T.? Yes, Thursday; In the Northeast, There's a New Party-Hearty Night
It's Thursday Night Live!
The time: fall 1994, 6:15 P.M.


Sir Terence Starts Over. Again.
IT is a bittersweet moment in the life and career of Sir Terence Conran.
The English entrepreneur whose back-to-basics design philosophy made him a home-furnishings taste maker on a global scale is back where he started.
Sort of.
No longer is Sir Terence the chairman of Storehouse P.L.C., the mammoth international retail empire that included the trend-setting Habitat stores in Europe and Conran's in the United States.
Nor does he own a big chunk of Butler's Wharf, the celebrated 12-acre real estate development on the south bank of the Thames.
But at 63, an age when other successful executives are going into plush retirement, he has jump-started a new life.


In a Delay, Signs of a Plan Backfiring
House Republicans successfully delayed a vote on a global free trade pact today, in part by criticizing the agreement as a Clinton Administration plan to help powerful businesses, particularly the Washington Post Company.
Forced by Congressional budget rules to offset the tariffs that were eliminated by the agreement with new fees or spending cuts, the Clinton Administration chose last month to impose fees on three cellular telephone companies.


Bipartisan Push Advances Education Bill
In a rare display of bipartisanship, the Senate voted 77 to 20 today to send a five-year, $60 billion education bill to President Clinton, but party divisions remained strong enough to imperil the lobbying bill.
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts and the manager of the education bill, which redirects some Federal aid toward poor communities, told reporters, "The gridlock that has affected just about every aspect of Congressional action has not affected education."


Aid Lawyers Return to Jobs With Mixture Of Emotions
Returning to the courts this morning in the aftermath of a short but furious strike, staff lawyers for the Legal Aid Society said they felt bitter and disillusioned but glad to have jobs to come back to.
While some blamed the union for prompting a walkout that nearly ended in the gutting of Legal Aid by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, most lawyers turned their anger on the society's management and on the Mayor himself.
"I'm thrilled to be back doing a job that I love," said David Feige, a criminal defense lawyer for Legal Aid in Brooklyn.
"And I'm horrified to be back doing it under conditions that are not substantially improved. Meanwhile, the Mayor comes out looking like a major league hardball pitcher."


Gardens and Their Lure
A GARDEN symposium, "The Nature of Special Places," will be held on Friday, Oct. 21, at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory on Long Island.
It is sponsored by the Friends of the Humes Japanese Stroll Garden in Mill Neck, L.I, and the Garden Conservancy.
Three speakers will discuss how gardens have always reflected the search for meaning and spiritual fulfillment; how gardens are retreats for contemplation and intimacy, places of artistic expression or simply personal enjoyment, and how they develop one's appreciation of the natural world.


In Europe, Graves to Let
To the Editor:
John Shinners (letter, Sept. 29) implies that reuse of graves in Europe ended in the 17th century.
Last summer on a bicycle tour in Denmark, we stopped at small-town churches to use the toilet facilities.


The Ins and Outs and X's and O's of Joe Walton
There are no football fields on campus, so Robert Morris College uses Moon Stadium, a high school field two blocks away, for its games.
There are no athletic scholarships, so players are persuaded to attend the school through guile and financial aid.
There is no history other than the four games played in the last month.
Robert Morris is a football baby.
But there is a football coach with some history at Robert Morris, a coach who once guided professional teams on the more renowned fields in the country, his cap turned backward, his demeanor classy; a coach whose tenure with the Jets turned dark and dreary as it dribbled toward its demise in 1989.


C.I.A. Dawdles Over Information Act Requests
To the Editor:
In reading "The C.I.A. Club Needs a Cleanup" (editorial, Sept. 30), regarding the Central Intelligence Agency and its director, James Woolsey -- as well as hearing Mr.
Woolsey being interviewed on the MacNeil-Lehrer NewsHour last evening -- I noted nothing indicating whether or not pensions are being paid to those agents (retired or not) who have been found malfeasant in the Ames spy case.
The question of pensions would seem to be crucial in evaluating if the punishment fits the crimes.
ROBERT COLE  Westport, Conn., Oct. 3, 1994


Winnebago Industries(WGO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Iris Damage
Q.
My iris plant's leaves have become ragged and discolored.
Now they are also wilting.
What's wrong? -- Jennifer McNeill, Newton, Mass.


Economic Scene; The U.S. and Japan are happy, but the trade truce is fragile.
DETERMINED American trade negotiators bargained into the wee hours with their equally determined Japanese counterparts and, miracle of miracles, both sides went to bed happy.
For what Gary Saxonhouse, an economist at the University of Michigan, calls "an artful compromise" allowed both to claim victory at a moment neither could afford defeat.
The catch is that the agreement does nothing to dispel the myth that Japan and America are engaged in a Darwinian economic struggle one or the other must lose.
And that virtually guarantees continuing friction over trade.


Bangladesh Succeeds With Family Planning
To the Editor:
Re "What Success Story?" by Betsy Hartmann (Op-Ed, Sept. 29), on family planning in Bangladesh:


N.B.A. and Stern Take the Road Less Traveled
On a day when locked out hockey players rebuffed two management plans, and striking baseball players mulled an owners' proposal to freeze free agency rules, the National Basketball Association yesterday traveled the labor road not taken: it declined to set a date to lock out players and said it expects to start the season on time.
"We want to separate ourselves from other sports," said Larry Miller, the Utah Jazz owner.
"Setting a lockout date would inflame discussions."


Corrections
An obituary of the biologist Andre Lwoff on Tuesday referred incorrectly to one of the two scientists who shared the Nobel Prize with him in 1965.
Dr.
Lwoff was not the sole survivor; Dr.
Francois Jacob is still alive, in Paris, and according to the Pasteur Institute is still at work.


International Dairy Queen (INDQA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 26


Clothes That Yearn For Other Times
The nostalgia quotient is running high in the spring shows here, with designers dredging up ideas out of every decade from the 1930's through the 70's.
They seem to be telling women to pick a time they wished they had lived in -- or wish to relive.
If you liked the styles of the 30's, here are bias-cut satin dresses.
The 50's?
Here are form-fitting sheaths.
The 60's?
Jackie O. shifts.
The 70's?
Bare midriffs and hip-huggers.
Sometimes they can all be found in one collection.


Opponents Successfully Challenge Hoboken Rent-Control Limits
An effort to relax rent control on vacant apartments in small buildings in Hoboken has been stymied by tenant advocates, very likely forcing the issue onto the ballot for voters to decide.
Invoking a New Jersey law allowing citizens to challenge local ordinances, opponents of the measure last week filed a petition blocking an amendment to the city's Rent Control Ordinance that would have let landlords charge market value for some regulated apartments that become vacant.
Now the measure goes back to the City Council, which can repeal it or set a referendum.


In Monday Night Tribute, Giants Will Retire No. 56
The Giants announced today that former linebacker Lawrence Taylor, a future Hall of Famer, will have his jersey number retired at halftime of Monday night's game against the Minnesota Vikings at Giants Stadium.
The Giants invited Phil Simms to be honored as well, but the former quarterback, citing a scheduling conflict, declined.


L.A. Gear Inc.(LA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


American Express Cuts Deeper Than Expected
The American Express Company said yesterday that it would eliminate as many as 6,000 jobs by closing four credit card-processing facilities and merging overlapping functions.
The cost-cutting had been expected, although the total number of jobs to be eliminated -- 8 percent of its total work force -- is higher than initial reports.
American Express is recovering from several lean years caused by customer defections and losses from unpaid charges on its Optima credit card.
It has been forced to cut its fees to merchants and card holders, and as a result it is trying to reduce its operating costs, which are higher than those of many banks.


New Study On Jobs: Good News To Whitman
A quickening pace of job growth is helping New Jersey lead the region out of the recession, but the job recovery lags behind the national growth rate.
That's what two Rutgers University economists told an audience of New Jersey business people here today.
The figures compiled by James W. Hughes and Joseph J. Seneca for the State Data Center's annual economic conference are good news for Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman.
If current trends hold, the two predict, the state will have recovered all of the 262,000 jobs lost in the 1989-92 recession by early 1997, the year Mrs.
Whitman could be expected to run for re-election.


Reviews/Fashion; Armani's Voluptuous Vision
For most fashion insiders, this season will be remembered as the one when Giorgio Armani and Gianni Versace seemed to have switched roles: Armani, known for his good taste, showed a sexually charged collection today; Versace, known for his sexually charged collections, did a collection in good taste the day before.
Of course, the terms "sexually charged" and "good taste" are relative.
There was still sexiness in Versace's good taste and good taste in Armani's new sexiness.
But it is Armani who left his audience more stunned.
Good taste, after all, stuns no one.
The industry is reacting to Armani, with his more voluptuous vision, a bit like one might to a boss who has brought an 18-year-old girlfriend to a party.
And since Armani is a safe harbor for every retailer, there are bound to be some waves.


Poker on the Train Home? Maybe, but No Pile of Cash
For years, Alvin Goldstein and his buddies have passed the time during the daily commuting home with friendly games of poker aboard the 5:35 out of Grand Central to Irvington.
Then the police broke up the game."People were in shock," said Mr.
Goldstein, a 65-year-old lawyer from Hastings-on-Hudson who was arrested on Friday along with three of his companions.


Plan to Shift Child Clinics Raises Fears Over Survival
The Giuliani administration is moving forward with a plan to turn 45 child health clinics over to the troubled Health and Hospitals Corporation next month, a move that one administration official said was a "shell game" to shift employees off the official city payroll.
The plan has generated intense opposition driven by fear that the clinics will not survive in an agency already planning widespread layoffs.
But some state and city officials say that despite ongoing upheaval at the Health and Hospitals Corporation, the clinics must be removed from the city's Health Department -- and off the Mayor's official budget -- to save them from even more drastic cuts.


Remembering a Friend, and a Son


The Pop Life
Ticket Tricks
Some Eric Clapton fans will go to any length to obtain tickets to the guitarist's three sold-out shows at Madison Square Garden on Saturday, Sunday and Monday.


Mayor's Ultimatum Led to Legal Aid Settlement
The eleventh-hour contract agreement on Tuesday between striking lawyers and the Legal Aid Society came about in an atmosphere of fear, as both labor and management came to believe that they were no longer negotiating to reach a deal on a new contract, but to save the society itself.
In the end, it was Sheldon Silver, the Speaker of the State Assembly, the second most powerful Democrat in the state, who played midwife to the tentative agreement, persuading both sides to take Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's threat to dismantle Legal Aid seriously.


Lina Basquette, Silent-Film Star And Dog Breeder, Is Dead at 87
Lina Basquette, a star of the silent-film era who later became a professional dog breeder and handler, died on Friday at her home in Wheeling, W.Va.
She was 87.
The cause was cancer, said Barry Paris, a friend.


Cortines Assails Report on School-Board Bloat
New York City's Schools Chancellor yesterday criticized a report on education spending that was commissioned by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, saying it had factual errors and even so did not prove that the system's central administration was bloated.
The rebuttal by the Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, came as Mr.
Giuliani publicly released the report yesterday.
It concluded that the Board of Education spent only 47.8 percent of its $8 billion on classroom instruction and 7.9 percent on instruction support, like principals and guidance counselors.


INSIDE
Giuliani v. Legal Aid Society
Striking lawyers voted to accept a new contract, but Mayor Giuliani insisted he would not restore the Legal Aid Society to the role of primary defender of the poor.
Page B1.
A Medical Giant Emerges
A $5 billion merger of Columbia/ HCA and Healthtrust will create a medical behemoth with annual revenues of $15 billion, about five times those of the nearest rival.
Page D1.
Trade Vote Is Postponed
House leaders decided to postpone a vote on a new global trade pact until after the elections.
Speaker Thomas S. Foley insisted, however, "It is going to become law." Page D1.
Met Museum Thinks Big
The Metropolitan Museum of Art announced a $300 million capital fund-raising campaign, the largest such campaign ever for an American museum.
Page C17.
Thank God It's Thursday
At many restaurants and clubs, especially in New York, Thursday night has become the big social night of the week.
Page B1.


Reform New York Worker Compensation Law
To the Editor:
If employers could save 6.5 percent of worker compensation premiums without cutting benefits to injured employees, shouldn't they grab that opportunity?
They could if lawmakers would pass legislation needed to lower these costs.


Knicks Sign Williams to a Five-Year Deal
Monty Williams, a 6-foot-8-inch rookie small forward who has intrigued the Knicks with his scoring and ball-handling ability, signed a five-year, $5.2 million contract with the team yesterday.
Williams will earn $650,000 this season, fighting for playing time on a team that is already deep in the frontcourt.
With Charles Smith, Anthony Mason and Anthony Bonner already in the Knicks' small forward rotation, it is unclear how much Williams will play this season.
But during summer league action, he impressed the Knicks with one-on-one moves and the ability to handle the ball in the open court.


Wrecking a Wreck


No One's Here but Us Chickens -- and Vegetarians


Tournament Ends With Unique Final
Professional bowling came to town and Bonnie Penny started using up her vacation time.
Hooked on the first Dick Weber Classic, Penny followed the tournament from the early rounds at Major League Lanes to tonight's finals at the Arthur Ashe Center.
"I took off two days," admitted Penny, a systems analyst for the Viginia Department of Social Services, whose jacket lapels were covered with bowling pins.
"If I had known how much fun it was, I would have taken off the whole week."


How to Stop Haiti's Cycle of Violence
To the Editor:
By televising and publishing pictures of people fighting one another in Haiti without context, the media are helping paper over the real sources of violence and unrest in that country and are allowing a destructive American policy to continue unchallenged.


New York as Hell
PRODUCER -- Severin/Aviles/Associates, New York City VISUAL -- This 30-second ad opens with a still photograph of a "will work for food" sign.
Images flash of a body bag, a chalk outline of a corpse, "for sale" signs, a "going out of business" sign.
Finally, the camera pans across a rubble-strewn city lot, followed by a grim-looking shot of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo (the producers say the photographs were all taken in New York over the last week).
Cuomo is solely responsible.
But this dark portrait is not meant as history; it is an emotional summation of the three themes that may defeat Mr.
Cuomo: crime, jobs and taxes.
SCORECARD -- This ad was financed by the real estate developer Abraham Hirschfeld, but it is as if it came from Dante, depicting New York as hell.
There has been bad blood between the two men: in 1986, Mr.
Cuomo knocked Mr.
Hirschfeld off the ballot when he tried to run for lieutenant governor and last year, Mr.
Cuomo successfully opposed Mr.
Hirschfeld's attempts to buy the New York Post.
Though he says it is not revenge, Mr.
Hirschfeld says he is spending from $250,000 to $1 million to broadcast this ad, first in New York City and Albany, then perhaps across the state.
Mr.
Hirschfeld said he supports the Republican candidate, State Senator George E. Pataki (who is not mentioned in the ad), but that his primary reason for the ad was "to help my fellow man" by presenting his vision of New York State under Mr.
Cuomo.
As a bit of television drama, it makes its case with undeniable force.
But some viewers might see it as being so negative, its claims so sweeping, that they might dismiss it entirely.
Ian Fisher


Esiason Is Back on Wobbly Ankle
Boomer Esiason was named the starting quarterback again today when the Jets (2-3) began practice for Sunday's game against Indianapolis (2-3) at Giants Stadium.
Whether his left ankle, sprained two weekends ago against the Chicago Bears, will have recovered enough to allow him to start against the Colts has yet to be determined.
With Jack Trudeau replacing Esiason, the Jets looked awful Sunday in a 27-7 loss to the Cleveland Browns.
That was their third straight defeat, and Coach Pete Carroll said what the team needed most was the return of a healthy Esiason.


Hampton May Return, But Whither His Back?
It's not often that a Dan Reeves-coached team is ranked last in total offense.
Reeves coached one of the best quarterbacks of all time in John Elway, who could ring up points as if he were playing on a pinball machine.
Putting up big numbers has never been a problem for Reeves.
Until now.
After four games the Giants are ranked dead last in total offense in the entire league.
That's right.
Last in the entire league.
It's unusual, man biting dog, and it can basically be attributed to one thing: Rodney Hampton.


Robbins &amp; Myers Inc.(ROBN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the family of the last American listed as a prisoner of war from the Vietnam conflict carried reversed identifications of two members, supplied by The Associated Press.
John Shelton was seated on the far right, and Michael was next to him.


DMR Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
EMERSON ELECTRIC CO., St Louis, signed a preliminary agreement to acquire F. G. Wilson, a leading European maker of diesel electric generating sets based in Northern Ireland.
Terms were not disclosed.
LORAL CORP., New York, said its Space Information Systems division had won a 10-year $299 million contract from NASA's Johnson Space Center to provide engineering support to space shuttle and space station programs.


30-Year Bond Nears 8% As Prices Fall 3d Day
Bond prices tumbled yesterday for the third consecutive day, as investors, fearing inflation, pushed up the yield on the Treasury's long bond to 7.95 percent, its highest point in 28 months.
After opening quietly, Treasury securities turned down after the release of the August factory orders data, which showed exceptional strength in the economy and at the same time increased investors' uneasiness that the Federal Reserve could move soon to increase short-term interest rates for the sixth time this year.


Whitewater Prosecutor Adding Ethics Counsel to Allay Criticism
Stung by accusations that he was an unfair choice to head the Whitewater investigation, Kenneth W. Starr announced today that he would take the unusual step of adding an ethics counsel to his staff.
Mr.
Starr said he had chosen Samuel Dash, a Georgetown University law professor who became nationally known 20 years ago as the chief counsel to the Senate Watergate committee.
Mr.
Dash earned a reputation for probity at the Watergate hearings, and people involved in the Whitewater inquiry said today that Mr.
Starr hoped his would help to insulate the office from further accusations that he has been too closely tied to the Republican Party.


Market Place; Efficiencies of scale are taken to the nth degree at Columbia.
IN only a few years, Richard L. Scott has gone from a very minor player in the hospital industry to the dominant force.
He has done it by persuading investors he can run hospitals better than anyone else.
The growth of Mr.
Scott's enterprise from a few hospitals to hundreds has been accomplished through acquisitions financed almost entirely by issuing new shares of stock.


I.R.S. Fraud Found to Net Big Refunds
The Treasury Department is sending checks for as much as $5 billion a year -- about 7 percent of all annual refunds -- to taxpayers who make fraudulent claims for refunds, according to an independent group that has been studying the problem since June.
The examination of the refunds arose out of concern that by increasing its emphasis on electronic filing, the Internal Revenue Service had helped make refund fraud easier.
"It was an eye-opener," said one person involved closely with the group's work who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
"I was surprised it was that high."


Stolt Comex Seaway S.A.(SCSWF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


'Lost Tribe' Has Israelis Pondering Law of Return
In the knitted yarmulke and prayer shawl that he brought from his home in India, Haokhothang Lunkhel says that all he wants is to live as a Jew in Israel.
"I wish to pray here in the Holy Land," said Mr.
Lunkhel, who arrived this summer from Manipur state on India's border with Burma and went almost immediately to a trailer in the West Bank settlement of Qiryat Arba.
"We can't do all the commandments in Manipur. Here, we can."


Voucher Plan Is Unveiled For Schools in Jersey City
The Whitman administration unveiled its long-awaited school voucher program today, an experiment that would subsidize Jersey City parents who send their children to private and parochial schools.
But the plan did not specify how much the individual vouchers would be worth, how much the program would cost or who would pay for it.
And even a senior Republican legislative ally of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman said it was so vague that he did not know if he could support it.


Binks Manufacturing Co.(BIN,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Essay; Year of the Men?
"Cognitive dissonance" is the jangling in your head when you hold beliefs that clash with each other.
Nowhere does that apply more than in the 1994 campaign in California.
1.
Women running as candidates are good but candidates running as women are bad.
Both parties need to get more women running for ever-higher positions.
When Republicans elected Christie Whitman as New Jersey Governor, they opened the possibility of a woman on the 1996 national ticket.


Changes at the Border


Police Say Rookie Shot by Fellow Officer Recklessly Waved Gun
An off-duty New York City police officer wounded by a housing police officer Tuesday night had waved an unauthorized weapon at several housing officers for no apparent reason before he was shot, police officials said yesterday.
The Police Department described the behavior of the wounded rookie officer, Angelo Angelico, as reckless and inexplicable and said he was being suspended.
Officer Angelico was grazed in the head in the shooting.


Gotta Dance
What a relief!
The sportscasters and sportswriters are out there defending the dignity of professional football.
The occasion of this courageous defense was the blatant and costly spiking incident involving Chris Calloway, a New York Giants receiver.
Mr.
Calloway managed to squelch a Giants drive and seal their defeat by dashing a football against the turf in a manner that offended the sensibilities of an official.
In the days since, there has been a lot of commentary on spiking, end-zone dancing and other celebratory exhibitions.


Allied Power Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Four A's Panel On Minority Hiring
The American Association of Advertising Agencies has formed an advisory council to help increase the representation of minorities in the professional ranks at agencies.
There will be 28 members of the Diversity Initiatives Advisory Council, recruited from member agencies, national advertisers, the Advertising Council, the American Advertising Federation, the Advertising Educational Foundation and consulting companies.


A State of the Union With Razzle-Dazzle
David Stern came to the Plaza Hotel yesterday with more than $1 billion in hand, determined to give away 53 percent of it.
And that amount, he said, was certainly negotiable.
"They call me Easy David," Stern said.


Events: Garden Talks And Garden Pictures
Urban Gardens  Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street; (212) 534-1672.
"City Farmers: Operation Greenthumb," an exhibition of 75 color photographs of the more than 1,000 community gardens planted by New Yorkers, starts on Wednesday and continues through May 1.
Operation Greenthumb is a 15-year-old organization that makes city-owned lots available to urban gardeners.
On Oct. 23 at 1 P.M., there will be a walking tour of community gardens on the Lower East Side.
Fee for the tour is $15 (members, $10); advance registration is required.


Guilty in Clinic Attack
A former minister who acted as his own lawyer was convicted of Federal violations in two killings at a Pensacola, Fla., abortion clinic.
Article, page A18.


UMass Suspends Williams for 3 Games
MICHAEL WILLIAMS, Massachusetts' starting point guard the past two seasons, was suspended Tuesday for this season's first three games for academic reasons.
The only regular-season game Williams will miss is against the defending N.C.A.A. champion Arkansas on Nov. 25.
He also will sit out exhibition games Nov. 9 against Marathon Basketball and Nov. 17 against the Turkish junior national team.


Schoenberg, Romantic in Disguise
Mainstream audiences have generally found the heritage of Arnold Schoenberg about as appealing as a bite into a lemon rind, but in recent years even composers have been yearning for sweeter fare.
There are now few advocates of the atonal and Serial styles that once confidently claimed the future as their own.
But the pianist Emanuel Ax is gallantly swimming upstream.
In an anti-modernist climate, he is affirming in a series of concerts that Schoenberg was really an ante-modernist, a Romantic in disguise, the heir to Brahms.
This is not a new assertion, but Mr.
Ax's talents are bound to make a strong case.
The first volley came on Tuesday night in Carnegie Hall when he was the soloist in Schoenberg's Piano Concerto, accompanied by Wolfgang Sawallisch leading the Philadelphia Orchestra. (Mr. Ax will also offer Schoenberg this fall in a duo piano recital with Peter Serkin and in a concert of chamber music.)


Blazers Sign McKie for $7 Million
The Portland Trail Blazers signed their first-round draft pick, AARON McKIE, to a six-year, $7 million contract yesterday, two days before the start of training camp.
McKie, who teamed with EDDIE JONES at Temple to form one of the best backcourts in college basketball last season, will receive $650,000 this season, the only salary slot the Blazers had available.


No Headline
"He spoke with the magic of fire, of catastrophe, of ruin. It was an attractive message, just as fire always attracts a crowd." -- ALBERT LONGCHAMP, who has studied religious sects in Switzerland.  [ A12:1. ]


Which Counts, Congress's Intent or Its Words?
A Supreme Court argument today in a child pornography case provoked a spirited debate among the Justices over how the Court should respond when faced with a carelessly written law that if taken literally may well be unconstitutional.
Should the Court save Congress from itself by reading the law in the way that Congress almost certainly intended but did not quite say?
Or should the Court teach Congress a lesson by holding the legislators to their poor choice of words?


Expelled From Villages, Bewildered Muslims Trudge to Sarajevo
The central image of the Bosnian war was repeated yet again in Sarajevo today when Muslim men, women and children expelled by Serbs from eastern Bosnia trudged across a city bridge clutching their only remaining possessions in a few ragged sacks.
Dazed and frightened, some of them in tears, they came slowly across the so-called Bridge of Brotherhood and Unity between the Serb-held Grbavica section of Sarajevo and Government-held territory.
Then, as United Nations officials looked on, they were bundled onto city buses and taken off to one of the many refugee centers in the Bosnian capital.


I.N.S. Offers Testimony That Sounds Familiar
As Representative Romano L. Mazzoli presided over his final hearing as chairman of the House immigration subcommittee today, the testimony was remarkably similar to what he heard at one of his first hearings as chairman more than 13 years ago: Doris Meissner, the Immigration Commissioner, promised that fundamental change at her agency lay just ahead.
"We always seem to be at the same point," Mr.
Mazzoli complained.
"About to do this, about to do that."


Danish Modern Is Hot
REMEMBER Danish Modern, the design movement of the 1950's?
Don't blanch, but blond is back.
From the 50's through the early 60's, Americans with any pretensions to chic sat on pale wood furniture or upholstered furniture by Scandinavian taste makers, notably Arne Jacobsen's womblike Egg chair of 1958.


North Korea And the U.S. At an Impasse
Two months after North Korea and the United States appeared to be near a breakthrough to end North Korea's nuclear weapons program, the two sides seem to be as far apart as ever, Administration officials and experts outside Government say.
A potentially crucial round of high-level talks is to begin on Thursday, when Assistant Secretary of State Robert L. Gallucci sits down in Geneva with his North Korean counterpart, Deputy Foreign Minister Kang Sok Ju.


For a Home Office, High Tech or Low
IF your home office is essentially one end of your kitchen table and some shoe boxes, a consumer products show beckons in Secaucus, N.J., over the Columbus Day weekend.
Hometech 2000 will showcase 200 companies that are offering business-related supplies and electronic equipment for the home as well as home-entertainment electronics.


The Bent-Banana Ban and Other British Gibes at Europe
The story of the outlawed "bent banana" is the latest to make the rounds and it is causing the anti-European drums to beat from Fleet Street to the Surrey fruit market.
Is it for real?
Or will it join the others on the "Euro myth list," like the one about fishermen having to wear hairnets as they pull in the catch?
Or the regulation that gin bottles must henceforth be round, not square?
Or the banning of Britain's red double-decker buses?


Cuomo Unveils a Few New Tax-Cut Details
With a trickle rather than a splash, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo continued to disclose some details about his tax-cutting plans today, proposing a cut in the top personal income-tax rate that he said would benefit almost all the New Yorkers who pay that rate now.
The Governor proposed lowering the top tax rate to 7 percent from its current level of 7.875 percent for middle- and upper-middle-income earners, a reduction that eventually would be worth $600 million.
But he would not say how long it would take to phase in the cut or what spending he would eliminate to pay for it.


Arthur Paskin, 70, Expert on Computers
Arthur Paskin, a pioneer in the development of computer graphics used in the courtroom to analyze accidents, died on Sept. 26 at Tompkins Community Hospital in Ithaca, N.Y.
He was 70 and lived in Belle Terre, L.I.
The cause was complications from lymphoma, said his wife, Charlotte.


Markets Plunge, but Dow Loses Only 13.79
American and European financial markets shuddered yesterday, with United States stock and bond markets plummeting so far and so fast as trading in New York opened that their counterparts in London, Paris and Frankfurt, nearing the end of their sessions, suddenly buckled.
After falling as much as 53 points, the Dow Jones industrial average recovered late in the day and closed at 3,787.34, down 13.79 points, for only an 0.36 percent drop.
But the damage was already done.
British stocks fell 1.5 percent, German stocks, including after-hours trading, dropped 2.16 percent, and French stocks plunged 2.26 percent.


Staff Builders reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


L.A. Gear Account For Chiat/Day
L.A.
Gear Inc. said yesterday that it had selected Chiat/Day in Venice, Calif., to handle the creative portion of its account, with billings estimated at $20 million.
The account had been handled in-house and on a project basis by Ketchum Advertising Los Angeles and Ground Zero in Venice for the last few months after L.A.
Gear parted with its previous agency, Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York.


Rumors of Motorola Move Spur Apple Computer Rise
Shares of Apple Computer Inc. soared today after rumors circulated that Motorola Inc. might make a substantial equity investment in Apple or acquire it outright.
Neither company would comment.
The rumors stemmed from the announcement by Motorola on Tuesday that it intended to enter the personal computer business with a product based on the Power PC chip jointly developed by Apple, Motorola and the International Business Machines Corporation.


METRO DIGEST
TAX-CUT PROBLEM: HOW TO PAY COSTS How much can New York afford to cut state taxes?
That question encompasses the central debate between the two major candidates for governor.
At its heart is the question of how the Republican candidate, State Senator George E. Pataki, can pay for his plan to slash personal income taxes.
News Analysis, A1.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo continued to disclose some details about his tax-cutting plans.
B13.


Big Board's President Is Expected to Move Up
The board of the New York Stock Exchange is expected to choose Richard Grasso as its next chairman at a meeting scheduled for today, according to people close to the exchange.
A spokesman for the exchange declined to comment.
Mr.
Grasso, who is now the exchange's president and chief operating officer, was widely seen as the leading candidate to replace William H. Donaldson, who said in July that he would not seek a second four-year term.
Indeed, one person close to the exchange said that no search committee had been formed for the position, and no other candidates had been seriously considered.
Mr.
Donaldson enthusiastically endorsed Mr.
Grasso, the person said.
Mr.
Grasso would take office on June 1.


Donnkenny Inc.(DNKY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 3


Belmont's Day at the Races: Only a Superstar Is Missing
Tabasco Cat and Devil His Due drew adjoining stalls in the middle of the gate yesterday as the favorites for the Jockey Club Gold Cup, the dress rehearsal for the Breeders' Cup.
And Wayne Lukas said with appreciation: "They've really got the cast together. The only horse not in there is Holy Bull."
Holy Bull is not in there because he is resting in Kentucky after a resounding year at the races.
But the other contenders for post-season honors will be chasing his record on Saturday during Belmont Park's ultimate day at the races: six stakes that preview the Breeders' Cup series four weeks later at Churchill Downs in Kentucky.


Mercury Finance Co.(MFN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Muse and a Creator With Moral Conviction
The Lewitzky Dance Company from Los Angeles, which opened with four local premieres at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday night, tours nationally and internationally, but oddly, the last time it appeared in New York was 15 years ago.
This is a pity.
Bella Lewitzky, its 78-year-old founder, holds a special place in American modern dance.
To call her a first-rate choreographer would be inaccurate.
But she was a great dancer: those who did not see her onstage before her retirement from performing would find thoroughly persuasive evidence in existing films and accounts of her youthful career.


48 in Sect Are Killed in Grisly Ritual in Switzerland
Forty-eight people were found dead early today in what appears to have been a collective suicide and killing carried out almost simultaneously in two Swiss villages by members of a secretive religious sect known as the Order of the Solar Temple.
Two other people linked to the sect were found dead in a small Canadian town 50 miles northwest of Montreal.
Twenty-three bodies were found in a fire-damaged farmhouse in this tiny village 48 miles north of Geneva; 25 were found in three burned-out chalets at Granges-sur-Salvan, 47 miles east of Geneva.
Swiss, French and Canadian citizens, including some children, were among the dead.


Great Mining Ripoff Dodgest the Bullet Again; A Cowardly Congress
To the Editor:
I read with great dismay about the death of legislation to reform the 1872 mining law.
For 122 years, the American people have been royally ripped off by the mining industry.
Each year these giant corporations, many of them foreign, take billions of dollars in gold, silver, copper and other minerals that belong to Americans and pay nothing to the United States Treasury.


Jets Have Ingredients, but Need Cook
In Denver, the fans and the critics are howling over the Broncos' demise.
They want heads to roll.
In Houston, the Oilers continue their slide.
In New Orleans, finally, a Saints' victory has healed some wounds, but many more remain wide open.
In Detroit, they are wondering how a team can win on the road against Dallas and then drop two straight to New England and Tampa Bay.


C.I.A. Dawdles Over Information Act Requests
To the Editor:
While there has been much media attention focused on the Central Intelligence Agency for its dereliction in the Aldrich Ames spy case, for its attempt to disguise $350 million in its budget for construction of a building to house the satellite reconnaissance program and for other questionable management issues, nothing has been said about its handling of routine Freedom of Information Act requests filed by scholars, journalists and private citizens.
These filings, which take at least 14 months to process, are not and have never been an agency priority.


Democrats Taking Up Arms To Fend Off Voters' Apathy
Four evenings a week, about a dozen Democratic workers gather at a union office here on a mission that national party leaders say could be the difference between victory and defeat in November: motivating once-loyal party members who this year seem stuck in neutral.
But it is not an easy sell.


N.B.A. Adopts New Rules
The National Basketball Association's refusal to set a date to lock out the players took center stage yesterday, but the league also made several rules changes to enliven the game and penalize players further for on-court transgressions.
The league's Board of Governors adopted a uniform 3-point line of 22 feet from the basket.
Three-pointers have been shot from as far as 23 feet 9 inches at the top of the key.
In addition, players fouled in the act of shooting 3-pointers will get three foul shots.
Also:


Net Loss Expected By Borden
Borden Inc., the troubled food and dairy giant that received a $2 billion takeover offer from an affiliate of Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company last month, said yesterday that it expected to take pretax charges of $150 million to $200 million in its third quarter, and consequently it would have a net loss for the period.
Borden's announcement was one of several developments related to the Kohlberg, Kravis offer, under which Borden stockholders would receive $14.25 worth of shares in the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation.


Vilnius Journal; Unearthing Heroes (and Lithuania's Edgy Past)
A pleasant park on the outskirts of Vilnius, until recently a popular spot for picnics, is yielding one of the K.G.B.'s most gruesome Baltic secrets.
Investigators have found the remains of more than 500 people in the sandy brown soil of Tuskulenai Park, and they are uncovering more each day.
They work behind a discreet fence, while children play at tennis on the other side.


Panel Approves 'Nanny Tax' Bill
Solving a problem that dogged the Clinton Administration from its first days, House and Senate negotiators agreed today on legislation to simplify paying Social Security taxes for domestic workers.
An Administration nominee for Attorney General, Zoe Baird, had to withdraw last year after acknowledging that she had failed to obey the law requiring Social Security payments for workers earning at least $50 per quarter.
The conferees agreed to raise the threshold to $1,000 per year, which is to be paid annually.


Will He Ever Stop Talking?


Met Museum Seeks $300 Million For an Array of New Projects
The Metropolitan Museum of Art yesterday announced the start of a $300 million capital fund-raising campaign aimed at financing a series of major construction projects that include a renovation and enlargement of the Greek and Roman galleries, the creation of several new, smaller galleries and the establishment of a $100 million endowment for curatorial, educational and conservation projects.
The campaign, called the "Fund for the Met," is the largest ever undertaken by an American museum.
It marks the beginning of a yearlong celebration of the museum's 125th anniversary celebration.


Italian Government in Turmoil After Investigator's Remarks
Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's Government was thrown into turmoil today after a senior investigating magistrate said inquiries into a pay-television channel partly owned by the Italian leader could embroil "very high levels" of the country's political and financial elite.
The published remarks by the Milan investigator, Francesco Saverio Borrelli, were interpreted as what the Government spokesman, Giuliano Ferrara, called a "Mafia-style threat" against Mr.
Berlusconi and they set off a day of turbulence.


Festival of Song Series Moves Recitals Uptown
The New York Festival of Song, a vocal recital series run by Steven Blier and Michael Barrett, has moved uptown from the Greenwich House School of Music and will divide its 1994-95 season between the 92d Street Y and Weill Recital Hall.
The first program, "American Dreams," is to take place at the Y on Saturday evening at 8.
Lauren Flanigan, Amy Burton, William Bolcom, Joan Morris, William Sharp and Kimberly Barber are to join Mr.
Blier and Mr.
Barrett in a program of songs about love, family, freedom and personal joys and sorrows.
Information: (212) 916-1100.
In "Vienna, Turn of the Centuries," at the Y on Nov. 12, Cheryl Parrish, Susan Quittmeyer and William Sharp will sing music from the decades before and after 1800 and 1900 in Vienna, by such composers as Beethoven, Haydn, Mahler, Strauss, Schoenberg and Pfitzner, as well as contemporary Viennese works.


Rape Suspect Is Described
The police issued a description of a suspect yesterday in the sexual assault and robbery of two 17-year-old girls last month in the Linden Houses project in the East New York section of Brooklyn.
One victim was confronted on Sept. 18 in an elevator, the other a week later in a stairwell.
In each case, the man showed a handgun.
Both girls were robbed of jewelry, forced to a roof and assaulted.


COMPANY NEWS;
The Union Pacific Corporation offered yesterday to acquire the Santa Fe Pacific Corporation for $3.4 billion, in a move that could scuttle the previously announced merger of Santa Fe and Burlington Northern Inc.
Because of the overlap of Union Pacific and Santa Fe on many routes, the surprising offer by Union Pacific is expected to raise antitrust problems that could block its approval.
Thus, industry analysts said, Union Pacific may be playing the role of the spoiler to the proposed Santa Fe-Burlington Northern merger, which would have displaced Union Pacific as the nation's largest railroad.


A Report on Reporters in the World's Hot Spots
Taking its perfect title from the old spiritual song, Marcel Ophuls's engrossing new documentary "The Troubles We've Seen" calls attention to the missing phrase: "Nobody knows." No one besides journalists operating within the cauldron of a war zone really understands the occupational hazards of such work.
But Mr.
Ophuls, the contemplative documentary film maker whose specialty is plumbing the depths of unfathomable experience, has made it his business to try.
Working on his usual vast canvas, Mr.
Ophuls constructs another brave, enveloping inquiry into a compelling subject, reveling in the investigative process as he presents it imaginatively on screen.
The topics here range from journalistic ethics to survival tactics to grace under pressure.
And a leisurely four-hour running time lets Mr.
Ophuls explore them in rambling, frequently surprising ways.


Quebec Fire Kills 2; Linked to Cult in Switzerland
A fire at a luxurious chalet complex took the lives today of a man and woman who are believed to be members of the Order of the Solar Temple, the sect associated with a mass killing and suicide at two sites in Switzerland, the police said.
Officials in this Laurentian mountain village, 50 miles northwest of Montreal, said the two chalets that burned here were connected by a walkway and that one was owned by the sect's founder, Luc Jouret.


They've Seen the 'Enemy': He's Goodenow
The head of the players union rejected two modified proposals from National Hockey League owners yesterday, and they in turn unleashed a machine gun-like verbal attack in which they questioned his intelligence, labeled him as the enemy and said he had no intention of making a deal.
Hockey by Oct. 15?
Sure, and the Yankees and Montreal Expos will play the World Series later this month.


Banks Give Russia Time On Loans
Russia agreed with its foreign bank creditors today on a deal to postpone repayment of $26 billion in loans, relieving a little of the pressure on the nation as it struggles toward a market economy.
The agreement followed a year of negotiations that came down to whether Russia should be treated as a developing country or accorded first-world status.
The logjam was broken only after the banks dropped a demand that they be free to seize Russian Government funds and property around the world if Moscow defaulted on the loans.


New Border Defense Stems Volume of Illegal Crossings
He said that his name was Miguel and that he was very tired and discouraged.
For three nights in a row, he explained, he tried to slip into this country from Mexico and for three nights in a row he was caught.


Lack of Sleep the Least of His Problems
INSOMNIA  By Stephen King  787 pages. Viking. $27.95.
"When they are asleep," observed Aristotle, "you cannot tell a good man from a bad one." But what about a man who can't fall asleep?
Is he good or bad?
In Stephen King's latest novel of horror, "Insomnia," the 70-year-old Ralph Roberts has been waking up earlier and earlier each morning -- 3:15 . . . 3:02 . . . 2:45 . . . 2:15 -- and staring up at the shadowy ceiling "with eyes that felt as big as doorknobs." He's afraid that soon he won't be sleeping at all, a prospect made all the more unpleasant by Ralph's recent loss of his wife to brain cancer.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about a trial in the slayings of an abortion doctor and his clinic escort misstated the name of a group supporting the clinic.
It is the National Organization for Women, not "of" Women.


Robinson and Pistons Can't Work It Out
The former Michigan star RUMEAL ROBINSON will not be joining the Detroit Pistons after all.
The Pistons had said they were interested in seeing the 27-year-old point guard work out, but he apparently was unwilling to sign for the $150,000 salary the club has available.


If Ars Is Really Longa, Is New Money Brevis?
IT sounded like a great idea in its first incarnation.
It still sounds, for those who value the arts, like a great idea.
But it is no longer as advertised.
Little in government ever is, actually.
Reality has a funny way of getting in the way.
The original suggestion came in February when the cultural world, starved for government money, proposed a way of loosening up public dollars: give us $10 million in matching money if we raise our own $10 million in private donations.
This proved to be an irresistible proposition to elected officials.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yes, so did the City Council and the State Legislature, and the Cultural Challenge Initiative was born.


Abortion Protester Is Guilty Under Clinic Access Law
Paul J. Hill, the former Presbyterian minister and abortion protester, was convicted today on Federal charges in the killing of two people and the wounding of a third while trying to thwart abortions at a clinic here.
The verdict, by a jury of six men and six women, came in the first case brought to trial under a four-month-old Federal law enacted to combat increasing violence against clinics and abortion providers around the country.


Calendar: Talks, Tours And Design Exhibitions
Architects Speak  Architectural League of New York, Urban Center, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 753-1722.
A series of lectures by architects starts tonight at 6:30 P.M. with Paul Rudolph.
Other speakers are Joseph Esherick (Oct. 13), Max Abramovitz (Oct. 18), Philip Johnson (Oct. 27) and E. Fay Jones (Nov. 10, at Rockfeller University).
Tickets for the public, $7, are on a first-come basis at the door; information about ticket availability can be obtained by calling the day before the lecture.


Something's Wrong With Nearly All
At the beginning of the second act of "A Field in Heat," a first play by Ricky Spears, Martha reminisces with her brother, Donnie, about their father, who left his family in Oklahoma and migrated to California during the Depression.
It is an effective scene that tells more about the characters than anything that has happened up to that point.
In fact, "A Field in Heat" could probably lose the whole first act and never miss it.
The play, which takes place in 1954, concerns a family that is not so much dysfunctional as dysphoric.
Mother is a bitter complainer who tells fortunes with cards and resents her children any happiness.
One daughter, Aggie, is perennially pregnant, and the other, Martha, has gone through two husbands and may have met her third at the check-out counter of a grocery store.
Donnie is saving his money to buy a basketball hoop and hides his copy of Jane Austen under the front porch.


Company Withdraws Sponsorship of Daly
JOHN DALY, who withdrew from the PGA Tour last month because of personal problems, lost his sponsorship yesterday with Wilson Sporting Goods Company.
The company said it has suspended its contract with Daly.
Wilson said it will resume its relationship with him under a "restructured agreement" once the company is satisfied Daly has met "specific behavioral and performance objectives."


Pataki's Tax-Cut Plan: How to Pay for It?
How much can New York afford to cut state taxes?
With just a little more than a month before the election, that question encompasses the central debate between the two major candidates for governor.
And at the heart of that debate is the question of how the Republican candidate, State Senator George E. Pataki, can pay for his plan to slash personal income taxes, saving taxpayers at least $5.6 billion a year by 1998.


Arbor Drugs Inc.(ARBR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


CHRONICLE
"I'm not a sentimental person," TONY RANDALL, the actor and founder of the National Actors Theater in New York, said yesterday.
Indeed, he didn't think twice about donating the 1975 Emmy Award he won for the television sitcom "The Odd Couple" to an auction at the Pierre on Tuesday night to benefit the four-year-old theater company.


Death and Politics in Mexico
Jose Francisco Ruiz Massieu, the deputy leader of Mexico's ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, was assassinated Sept. 28 and government investigators now think anti-reform factions of the party may have been involved.
Similar allegations surrounded the murder of the party's presidential candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio, in March.
The United States has a strong interest in assuring that surviving reformers, like President-elect Ernesto Zedillo, do not feel intimidated about pressing for further change and that Mexican politics is not drawn further into a cycle of violence.
But given Mexico's sensitivities about U.S. meddling, Washington must pursue those goals with extraordinary diplomatic tact.


Journal; The Manchurian Candidate
When journalists describe Michael Huffington, the mystery man who may spend an unprecedented $25 million of his own money to buy a seat in the U.S.
Senate, they end up invoking the movies.
And not just because he is running in Hollywood's home state, where his relentless TV commercials have wiped out the 30-point gap that once separated him from the Democratic incumbent, Dianne Feinstein.
In countless articles -- all written without the man himself, who shuns interviews -- Mr.
Huffington has been compared to Chauncey Gardiner, the cipher of "Being There," and to the similarly hollow title characters of "The Wizard of Oz," "E.T." and "The Candidate."


U.S. Pledges Over $1 Billion in Aid Projects for South Africa
Answering Nelson Mandela's pleas to help South Africa's fractured economy, the Clinton Administration announced today that it would provide loan guarantees to build housing, begin sending Peace Corps volunteers and set up investment funds to generate more than $1 billion in projects.
As part of President Clinton's efforts to support Mr.
Mandela's cause, O.P.I.C., the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, unveiled two new equity funds, totaling $150 million, which aim to produce $1.3 billion in investment.


Reed-Elsevier Building Big Presence in the U.S.
Reed Elsevier P.L.C., the British-Dutch publishing giant, will make a bold entrance into the American equities marketplace today, after announcing a $1.5 billion deal for the Mead Data Central on-line information division.
Both Reed International of Britain and Elsevier of the Netherlands will have American depository receipts for their shares listed for the first time on the New York Stock Exchange today, a move analysts argue is needed to enhance the group's rapidly growing presence in the United States.
For Reed International, the ticker symbol will be RUCK; for Elsevier, it will be ENL.


MISSION TO HAITI: STRATEGY  Military Analysis; Pentagon's Haiti Policy Focuses on Casualties
The American intervention in Haiti offers a case study of an important shift in the Pentagon's concept of military planning: a casualty-free operation.
The American military has always sought to hold down its losses, but casualties were accepted as the price the military had to pay, and they were built into the planning of any operation.


The Mentally Ill Overwhelm New York's Prisons
As inmate No. 91A9788 at the state's maximum-security prison here, Alex Ocasio struggles with the stress and boredom that all the 2,100 inmates endure.
But as a paranoid schizophrenic, he also copes with hearing voices that aren't there and with hearing the other inmates he lives with dismissively call him a "bug," for the medication -- or "bug juice" -- that he and many other mentally ill inmates drink from little cups at night.


Devtek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Easton Journal; School Can Wait, but Potatoes Can't
At 4:30 A.M., the local television station, WAGM, begins broadcasting the latest potato news.
Galen Flewelling needs pickers.
Greg Smith wants harvester helpers.
Dick Mahan needs truck drivers.
Bruce Roope could use a potato house man.
The show, "The Potato Pickers' Special," anchored by John Logan and Dave Lavway of the Maine Potato Board, is live, for two hours, six days a week.
It includes interviews with potato experts, potato trivia, a weekly crystal spud giveaway and breakfast cooked on the air by local chefs.
In this part of Maine, it is news everyone can use.


Why Give Baseball Antitrust Exemption?
To the Editor:
The arguments for baseball's antiquated and pernicious exemption from antitrust laws are now reduced to the two demonstrably false propositions advanced by Lee MacPhail in "Keep That Antitrust Exemption" (Op-Ed, Oct. 3): "to support the minor leagues, and to allow major league baseball to control the movement of teams from city to city."


Festival of the Arts
"Performance Zone," a festival of dance, theater, music, film and video, is to open at 7 tonight at the Vineyard Theater, 108 East 15th Street, Gramercy Park.
The event, presented by the Field, a production group, features more than 130 pieces and is to continue Fridays through Sundays through Oct. 30.
Performances on Saturdays and Sundays are from 2 to 11 P.M.
Special programs are to be devoted to work by performers in major dance companies, crossover artists from other fields, artists from outside New York City, the elderly and children.
Admission: festival pass, $50; weekend pass, $15; day pass, $10.
Information: (212) 691-6969.


L.T. Gave Giants Blood, Sweat and Talent and Now, No. 56
Lawrence Taylor had a dream last night.
He was having his No. 56 retired during halftime of Monday night's game against the Minnesota Vikings, which actually is not fantasy but reality.
Anyway, a field goal with just seconds left put the Giants ahead.
Then, to Taylor's surprise, a Vikings player took the ensuing kickoff and was breaking free.
He was going to score.
Instinct took over and Taylor, who had been watching the game from the sideline, began chasing the return man.
In his dream he caught him and made the tackle.
"I saved the victory," Taylor said.
"It hurt but I did it."


Abroad at Home; Reward For a Job Well Done
As each day of the Haiti operation passes, it is more evident that this American military venture is working well.
Power is passing from the Haitian gangsters who seized it three years ago.
The Haitian people are happy -- and mostly non-violent, which is remarkable after all they have suffered.
"It's becoming very clear that there is a new sheriff in town," a U.S.
Embassy spokesman in Port-au-Prince said the other day.
Exactly.
And the bad guys are scurrying to leave town or else looking demure and promising to behave.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "BROKEN ENGLISH," 28th Street Theater, 120 West 28th Street, Chelsea.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12.
Information: (212) 279-4200.


John Opper, 85, Abstract Painter
John Opper, an abstract painter affiliated with the New York School, died on Tuesday at his home in Amagansett, L.I.
He was 85 and also had homes in Greenwich Village and Sarasota, Fla.
The cause was a heart attack, said his daughter, Jane, of New York City.


The Nanny Tax, Improved
Failure to pay the "nanny tax" felled Zoe Baird, President Clinton's first nominee for Attorney General.
It embarrassed Ron Brown, Secretary of Commerce; Bobby Ray Inman, Mr.
Clinton's candidate for Secretary of Defense, and William Kennedy 3d, White House Associate Counsel.
These officials, along with millions of fellow Americans, all failed to pay Social Security taxes on baby sitters and other low-income domestic workers.
Congress has not made compliance with the "nanny tax" easy.
It set the earnings threshold so low that baby sitters earning $4 a week qualified for the tax.
Employers had to file five Federal forms and additional state forms.
The annoyance turned otherwise law-abiding individuals into tax cheats.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day yesterday, about the growth of the Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corporation, misstated the number of shares of the company held by Richard L. Scott, its president.
It is more than six million shares, worth about $246 million.


Leader of the Sect: 'New Age' Warped by Apocalyptic Visions
Luc Jouret, the leader of the religious sect linked to the deaths of 53 people in murder-suicides in Switzerland and Canada, has lectured widely on spiritual topics in Western Europe for about eight years while building a secret circle of followers who shared his belief in a coming apocalypse, according to a Danish professor who monitors such groups.
At gatherings in France, Switzerland and Belgium, Mr.
Jouret, 46, spoke of heightened consciousness, personal auras and other New Age beliefs, said Johannes Aagaard, professor of theology at Aarhus University and president of Dialog Center International, a nonprofit organization that surveys cults.
He described Mr.
Jouret as well-versed in the vocabulary of those seeking new forms of spiritual fulfillment.


Richard Livingston, Businessman, 74
Richard M. Livingston, who founded and ran an electronics manufacturing company for three decades and was an official of the United States Golf Association, died on Wednesday while vacationing in Turkey.
He was 74 and lived in Larchmont, N.Y., and Boca Raton, Fla.


Eastern Europe, Post Communism: Five Years Later -- A special report; Fast and Slow Lanes on the Capitalist Road
As Jan Rusin, a 43-year-old coal miner, sits in his wood-panelled living room admiring the fruits of his labor under Communism -- a television set, comfortable furniture, a shiny, modern kitchen -- he wonders why he is at home, jobless and dependent on welfare payments.
Capitalism, he says, was supposed to bring him more, not less.
A few miles away in the heart of this industrial town, Elzbieta Leszczynska makes wedding dresses in the airy basement of her two-story home.
Amid the swish of brocades and laces, and the clip of scissors and sewing machines, Ms.
Leszczynska, one of Poland's new small entrepreneurs, runs a staff of 43 and sells glamorous gowns to boutiques around Poland.
But, she, too, is not satisfied.
Why can't she expand her business faster, she asks.


No Headline
"Good sense should have told us that most people don't have the time and energy to manage an affair, a job, a family and the Long Island Rail Road." JOHN H. GAGNON, co-author of a new study about sex in America.  [ A1:1. ]


Mobil Rehires Wells Rich
The Mobil Corporation has restored Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York to its agency roster, naming the agency yesterday to handle local and national advertising for its Mobil Land Development Corporation unit.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.





INSIDE
Poverty Maintains Its Hold  Median household income declined last year despite the growth of the economy, and more than a million Americans fell into poverty, Government figures show.
Page A16.
Trump Tower Meets Welfare
A man with a fancy Fifth Avenue address and a fleet of luxury cars has been indicted for illegally collecting welfare checks.
Page B1.
U.S.
Seeks Haitian Recruits
With the interim police force it had hoped to install in disarray, the U.S. is scrambling to form another force for Haiti's two largest cities, Administration officials said.
Page A14.
G.E.
Plans Kidder Cutbacks
General Electric took a big step toward quitting Wall Street, planning sweeping cutbacks in its Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company unit.
Page D1.


Retailers Report Slow Sales, Citing September Weather
The nation's largest retailers fell back on the weather -- a time-honored excuse -- to explain the snail's pace of sales in September.
Most retailers reported yesterday that September sales fell below their own expectations and some big chains, like Kmart and Filene's Basement, set about lowering their projections for third-quarter profits.
The exceptions were J. C. Penney, Wal-Mart Stores and the consumer electronics chains.


Art in Review
Luigi Ontani
Sperone Westwater Gallery 142 Greene Street SoHo Through Oct. 22
The act of seeing and the mutable nature of the self are recurring themes in the remarkably consistent body of work Luigi Ontani has made since the 1970's.
A selection of Mr.
Ontani's evocative pieces, including ceramics, paintings and photographs, is presented in this carefully installed show.


By Land and by Sea, America
Compared with French 19th-century landscape painting, which has been the object of lavish art-historical attention, the American counterpart can still sometimes seem like terra incognita.
Its mysteries may be never more enticing than when partly illuminated by the concentrated spotlights of small, highly focused shows.
At the moment, there are two such shows, both exemplary, on either side of the Hudson River.
The first is a 10-work presentation at the Metropolitan Museum of Art featuring the precise, jewel-like paintings of coastal thunderstorms created by Martin Johnson Heade (1819-1904), from 1859 to 1868.
The second is a 21-canvas survey at the Montclair Art Museum in Montclair, N.J., that neatly encapsulates the increasingly blurred and "impressionistic" art of George Inness (1825-1894), a show organized on the centenary of this artist's death in the town where he spent his last years and made some of his best paintings, by a museum unusually rich in Innesses.


First There Is a T-Shirt, Then There Will Be a Race
A month before the celebratory 25th New York City Marathon, the celebration of the city's improbable success story got under way yesterday, with, among other things, the formal unveiling of the official marathon T-shirt.
For a race that depends on 10,000 volunteers, this is no small matter.


Mr. Wright Is Mr. Right. Right.
In the frankly touristy "Only You," a Pittsburgh schoolteacher named Faith flees her dull fiance and races off to Italy, traveling cute in a black raincoat over a bouffant wedding dress.
Supposedly the purpose of this trip is Faith's finding her true soul mate, a man whose name -- Damon Bradley -- she has been given by a Ouija board.
Actually it's all about scenery, as the story moves from Venice to Rome to Positano, stopping for suitably fabulous vistas and fountains and flowers.
There are worse things than commissioning Sven Nykvist to photograph Italy at its most picturesque.


Art in Review
Adrian Saxe  Newark Art Museum 49 Washington Street Through Oct. 23
This 87-piece survey, organized by the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, sums up more than a quarter-century of work by the ceramic artist Adrian Saxe, who, whether you like or dislike his work (and it seems entirely possible to entertain both reactions simultaneously), is somewhere near the top of both his medium and his form.
As a ceramist, Mr.
Saxe is part jeweler, part painter and part cultural critic.
Faberge, the Marquis de Sade and Claude Levi-Strauss working together might approximate his exquisite, suggestive ceramics, fraught with cross-cultural references and intimations of the polymorphous perverse.


An Opera for Soloists Who Click and Whir
"Mathew in the School of Life" is the only musical stage piece I can think of in which instruments dictate the nature of the characters.
John Moran's "Electronic Opera" -- a Ridge Theater production at the Kitchen that opened a four-week run last night -- begins as a jeremiad against technology but leaves a lingering suspicion that the enemy may be itself.
This is a world of androids and robots, created to ape humanity in its daily routines of commerce and domesticity.
At its center is Mathew, a walking, whirring, clicking halfway house between sensitivity and automatic response.
Within his artificial body stirs unresolved conflict between the human demiurges who have created him and the obedient machine he has become.
In vivid if not always terribly subtle terms, man becomes machine, machinery reaches for manhood.


From the Early Days, Images of a Voyager Who Died at 24
Until recently, the photography of the 19th century was like a lost continent, a semi-mythical place known largely through images whose subjects and makers were equally forgotten.
In recent years, though, scholars have begun to retrieve the riches of early photography from the depths of time, assembling substantial bodies of work by major figures, uncovering details about their lives and researching the often arcane processes they used.
The fruits of some of those efforts are on view in New York City this month.
The Metropolitan Museum of Art is featuring the work of Edouard Baldus, a French photographer famed for his commanding views of architecture and industrial forms in the 1850's; in SoHo, the James Danziger Gallery, in association with Hans P. Kraus Jr., is presenting the work of John B. Greene, Baldus's contemporary, in a show that is both thrilling and fascinating.


Patrols Hunt Trash Trucks From New York With Defects
Connecticut is cracking down on New York City trash haulers who cart more than 10 million pounds of garbage to energy-producing plants in Bridgeport and Hartford each week, often in overweight trucks with faulty equipment that officials say are tearing up state roads.
State police officials here say the truckers, who have nowhere to dump their garbage in New York City anymore, are forced to drive to the waste-burning plants in Connecticut, New Jersey and other nearby states, and are trying to cut their expenses by piling more garbage on rigs that make fewer trips.


Oneok Inc.(OKE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


School Integration: Connecticut Struggles
Six months ago, Connecticut became the first state in the nation to embark on a voluntary program to integrate its schools across town lines.
The first results of the planning process are now in, and they confirm what critics have long predicted: None of the state's 11 regions has submitted a proposal that would significantly integrate classrooms any time soon.
The regional planning groups, covering all of Connecticut's 169 cities and towns, have submitted plans that propose a total of just five new magnet schools for the state, which has 508,000 public-school students.


Luby's Cafeterias Inc.(LUB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


U.S. Scrambles for Recruits to Bring Order To the Streets of Haiti's Two Largest Cities
With the interim police force it had hoped to install in Haiti now in disarray, the United States is scrambling to cobble together another force for Haiti's two largest cities and may soon hire "auxiliaries," basically any at least marginally trustworthy Haitian they can put in a uniform, senior Administration officials said today.
The military's plan to use members of the existing police and Haitian military for a new police force -- allowing American troops to hand off policing duties they accepted only reluctantly -- has faltered as many of the uniformed Haitians have either fled or refused to cooperate.


Giuliani's Approval Rating Rises to 61%
Bolstered by his maverick support of a Democratic Federal crime bill, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani now has the approval of a majority New York City residents, according to a New York Times/WCBS-TV News Poll.
The poll, taken between Sept. 29 and Oct. 2 with 495 city residents participating, shows that the Mayor's approval rating has shot upward in the last three months, increasing to 61 percent from 49 percent in June.
His rating is roughly tied with the first rating of Mayor David N. Dinkins four years ago; but Mr.
Dinkins's popularity quickly began to decline, while Mr.
Giuliani's seems to be on the rise.


3 More Bodies Are Discovered In Canada in Ritual Deaths
The charred remains of a man, a woman and a baby were discovered today in the rubble of a burned-out chalet owned by a secretive religious sect, the Quebec provincial police said today.
Two other bodies had been found there on Tuesday.
The police suspect that the deaths, in Morin Heights, a ski resort 50 miles northwest of Montreal, are linked to the ritual deaths in Switzerland of 48 members of a sect known in Quebec as the Order of the Solar Temple.


Ex-Councilman Admits $383,000 Payroll Theft
Rafael Castaneira-Colon, a former City Councilman from the Bronx, pleaded guilty yesterday to stealing $383,000 in public funds by putting phantom employees on his Council payroll and cashing the paychecks for himself.
Mr.
Castaneira-Colon used the names of a cousin in Puerto Rico, a sister in Venezuela and the mother of four of his children to pad his payroll over a period of seven years, prosecutors said.


California Court Opens New Gray Area for Libel
One way a person has been able to libel an enemy with impunity is to file a lawsuit filled with false accusations, then mail a copy of the filings to a reporter, who can publish whatever is in the court document without fear of a libel suit.
Now a California court has ruled that it would no longer consider copies of complaints that reporters receive from lawyers to be official court documents.
This means that the sender of such documents may find himself in court.
Courts in other states, New Jersey and Maryland among them, have issued similar rulings in an effort to keep people from drumming up publicity after filing frivolous lawsuits.
But news organizations are vigorously fighting the California decision because they say it could limit the public's access to one of the country's largest and complex court systems.
They also fear that the ruling may influence other courts.


Cardinals Have Mets' Lynch in for a Chat
ED LYNCH of the Mets, a top candidate for the vacant general manager's job with the Cubs, also has been interviewed by the Cardinals for their general manager's position, a Mets spokesman confirmed yesterday.
The special assistant to General Manager JOE McILVAINE the last year, Lynch is one of a large group of candidates to speak with St.
Louis since it dismissed DAL MAXVILL last month.


Obstruction in Senate Costs the S.E.C. Millions
Gridlock in Congress may cause distress in middle America, but it is winning some fans in corporate America.
Chrysler and General Motors are among the companies that have taken advantage this week of reduced fees for registering bond issues with the Securities and Exchange Commission -- a windfall made possible by Congressional inaction on the agency's budget.


Youth Fatally Shoots Friend With Found Gun
Jaffet Campoverde and Alfred Nicasio were the best of friends, neighbors said, sharing adventures, movies and a room in a little brick house on a neighborly street in the Bronx.
When day broke yesterday, 13-year-old Jaffet was dead of a bullet wound in the chest.
When darkness fell, 16-year-old Alfred was under arrest, charged with manslaughter and criminal possession of a weapon in connection with his friend's death.
And their friends stood outside the brick house at 1233 Virginia Avenue in Parkchester and wept and tried to console one another.


Gang Intimidation Takes Rising Toll of Court Cases
Three months after his testimony helped convict a gang member of murder, and just one week before he was to testify in the trial of a second defendant, 19-year-old Elijah Ragland was found dead in a creek in east Fort Worth.
He had been repeatedly shot in the head and neck.
And though the killing in January remains unsolved, the police say they believe it was related to Mr.
Ragland's testimony.


Review/Fashion; Goodbye Soft, Hello Stark
There was an industrial revolution of sorts in Italian fashion this season.
Gianfranco Ferre, who has often stood alone in Milan in his love for architectural fashion and high-tech fabrics, has a comrade in arms in Miuccia Prada.
The designers closed the Milan shows today and left buyers and the press with a new definition of what they come here to see, banishing cliched notions of murky colors and soft suits.
Mr.
Ferre and Ms.
Prada, in separate ways, offer a vision that is soaring, stark and functional, somewhat like the Fascist architecture and poster art of the 1930's that is so much a presence here.


CHRONICLE
It's amazing what a peanut-butter sandwich can lead to.
JULIET HOLLISTER of Greenwich, Conn., was eating one in her kitchen 35 years ago when she said to a friend: "The world's a mess. We should do something about promoting understanding among the world's religions."


Big Lawsuit Is Settled by 32 Insurers
An out-of-court settlement was reached today in a major antitrust lawsuit that accused 32 insurance companies in the United States and abroad of conspiring to restrict the availability of liability coverage to municipalities in the 1980's.
The companies agreed to pay $36 million, which will mainly go toward reorganizing the industry group that issues risk ratings and writes forms, and for the creation of a new organization to help municipalities calculate their insurance needs.


For Unsung Female Athletes, a Top-Notch, Revealing 'Passion to Play'
Twenty years ago, ABC's Donna de Varona was co-host of a documentary on women's sports, "The Lady Is a Champ," with Billie Jean King.
At 4 P.M.
Sunday, "A Passion to Play," which de Varona co-produced and contributed to, returns to the subject with powerful stories.
Too bad it's only an hour.
It is an unusual 60 minutes of a type rarely seen on weekend afternoons.
It's journalism, a rarity in sports TV, far removed from the mostly fawning yet glitzy profiles that inhabit football pregame shows.
Trust me, nothing like Fox's penetrating inquiry of Los Angeles Ram fullback Jerome Bettis's incredible fondness for bowling appears in "A Passion to Play."


Live Tribute to Presley on Pay TV
A live tribute to Elvis Presley will be televised tomorrow night as a two-and-a-half-hour pay-per-view special.
Titled "Harrah's Casinos Presents Elvis Aaron Presley: The Tribute," the concert will feature dozens of pop artists, including Michael Bolton, Cher, Carl Perkins, L7, Chaka Demus &amp; Pliers, Tony Bennett and reportedly Michael Jackson and Lisa Marie Presley, performing Presley's songs.


Diner's Journal
Seasonal American'
Among all the glitzy restaurants that have been having splashy openings this fall, Verbena is a modest presence.
In fact, you could walk right by it on Irving Place and never notice it was there.
Walk down a couple of steps, however, and you find a modern room, expensively decorated, lighted with candles and all cozy comfort.
Even the menu seems like a work of art.
The chef and owner, Diane Forley, calls her food "seasonal American," and the current menu seems perfectly suited to autumn.
Butternut squash ravioli has a strong and appealing flavor of roasted oranges.
Braised mushrooms are served with broken strands of pasta in a powerful mushroom broth, and shrimp are served on irresistible artichoke griddle cakes.


More Black Candidates Find Places on Republican Ballots
J.
C.
Watts Jr., who is running for Congress, is still remembered here as the quarterback who directed the Oklahoma Sooners down the field for a dramatic victory over Florida State in the waning seconds of the 1981 Orange Bowl.
But what really makes Mr.
Watts stand out is that he is a black politician in a state that is overwhelmingly white, and a Republican amid a national black population that is overwhelmingly Democratic.
Mr.
Watts was the first black person elected to statewide office in Oklahoma when he won a spot on the utility-regulating Corporation Commission four years ago, and he is widely regarded as the favorite to win on Nov. 8 in the Fourth District in southwestern Oklahoma.


Dow Off 11.78 as Market Awaits Report on Jobs
The stock market declined again yesterday as traders nervously awaited a closely watched economic indicator today: the announcement by the Labor Department about monthly job creation.
"It was the least interesting day in the last two weeks," said Bernard Spilko, senior vice president of Bank Julius Baer, about yesterday's market.
"But the holding pattern will end when the employment numbers are reported."


After Wary Weeks, Dinkins Announces Support for Cuomo
In a carefully choreographed encounter, former Mayor David N. Dinkins ended weeks of wary hesitation and endorsed Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday, pledging to "go anywhere and speak to anyone" -- even to make television commercials -- on behalf of his re-election.
The endorsement, which mixed obvious warmth with undisguised strains, had been sought by the Governor to help rally vital support among black voters in his race against State Senator George E. Pataki, and both Mr.
Dinkins and Mr.
Cuomo insisted that the only thing ever in doubt about it was the timing.
The pair, often allies in the past, smiled and joked and wrapped each other in a big bear hug on the stage of a ballroom at the Sheraton New York in Manhattan.


Executive Changes
CONCURRENT COMPUTER CORP., Oceanport, N.J., named Roger Mason chief financial officer.
FORTIS INC., New York, a financial services company, named Grover Thomas executive vice president, effective on Jan. 1.
Mr.
Thomas is now president of United Family Life, a Fortis company in Atlanta.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
General Electric took a big step toward letting Kidder, Peabody go.
G.E. announced a broad revamping of its troubled brokerage unit that includes staff cuts of 10 percent and cost reductions totaling $100 million.
Kidder also plans to sell $30 billion of its assets, including huge holdings in Government bonds.  [ Page D1. ]


Census Sees Falling Income and More Poor
Despite the growth of the overall economy, the typical American household saw its income decline in 1993, and more than a million Americans fell into poverty, according to figures made public today by the Census Bureau.
The numbers show the persistence, and perhaps even the quickening, of one of the most worrisome trends in the American economy, the long-term growth in inequality.


Corrections
An article yesterday about disputes in the Haitian Parliament over legislation to grant amnesty to leaders of the September 1991 coup, which overthrew President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, misstated the circumstances of the death of Silvio Claude, leader of the country's Christian Democratic Party.
He was killed during that coup, not at the time of Father Aristide's taking office in February 1991.


Clinton Exults in Swift Success Of U.S. Military Force in Haiti
The House of Representatives early today passed a resolution approved Thursday by the Senate that gave the White House some measure of support for the American military mission in Haiti.
The vote votes followed a day in which President Clinton and his advisers presented an upbeat accounting of the mission in an effort to head off any Congressional move to set a deadline on ending it.
Mr.
Clinton and his advisers said the mission's swift success at establishing order meant that the United States now stood prepared to hand over authority soon to Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Put the Public Back in Public Broadcasting
To the Editor:
Jennifer Lawson's Sept. 30 letter attacking Bob Herbert's Sept. 25 column was inaccurate.
She claims that the human rights series "Rights &amp; Wrongs" has been syndicated "with little evidence of acceptance by stations and viewers," despite the fact it now shows on more than 80 stations (more than 20 percent of all Public Broadcasting Service stations), including a prime-time slot in New York.


For Children
Sagamore Hill
Cove Neck Road  Oyster Bay Cove, L.I.  (516) 922-4447  Recommended for all ages
He was a New York City Police Commissioner, Governor of New York, Vice President and President.
And he loved children.
Everything about Theodore Roosevelt's beloved salmon-and-gray Victorian home reveals his penchant for roughhousing on the lawn, bird-watching, hiking, horseback riding or leading funeral processions to the pet cemetery, all with his six children.
Children visiting decades later may sense that this is a place made soft by others their age a long time ago.
Even adults may yearn to hear echoes of the Roosevelt brood, and wish they had grown up in the family themselves.
Roosevelt, it seemed, was a dream father, and this is a dream house. (Mrs. Roosevelt was, no doubt, charming, too.)


That Nip in the Air Comes From N.H.L. Talks
Irate National Hockey League owners can't understand why the union rejected their latest proposal aimed at getting an agreement and starting the locked-out season, but the union's economist offered a graphic explanation yesterday.
"This is like rearranging the deck chairs on the Titanic," said Jerry Hausman, the MacDonald Professor of Economics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
"The outline hasn't changed. They have not changed in the least what they're trying to do."


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about bribery and other charges against New York City school officials involved in the purchase of school supplies misidentified one of the people arrested.
He is Robert Mazza, assistant principal at the High School for Leadership and Public Service, not James Mazza, who is a superintendent in Community School District 3.


Health Insurance Percentage Is Lowest in 4 Sun Belt States
People in Louisiana, Oklahoma, Texas and New Mexico are less likely to have health insurance than residents of any other states, the Federal Government reported today.
Conversely, it said, people in Hawaii, Wisconsin, Connecticut and Minnesota are the most likely to have insurance coverage.


Pushing Back the Censors in Poland
Just two weeks ago, Poland seemed about to take a giant step back from freedom.
The lower house of Parliament, dominated by a coalition of former Communists and their allies, overwhelmingly passed a bill called the Official State Secrets Act, which would stifle the lively independent media that have grown up over the past four years.
The upper house, with the same parties in control, was expected to approve the bill as well, perhaps as soon as this week.
But the Polish press fought back and, although the danger has not completely passed, the censors are now in retreat.
Upper house action is stalled, lower house leaders are having second thoughts and President Lech Walesa promises to veto the bill if it reaches his desk in anything like its present form.


A Novel With a Complex Strategy
In the Lake of the Woods
By Tim O'Brien
306 pages. Houghton Mifflin/Seymour Lawrence. $21.95.
In summary, Tim O'Brien's new novel, "In the Lake of the Woods," sounds like a fast-paced thriller, the sort of book that might easily be made into a movie starring, say, Harrison Ford and Michelle Pfeiffer.
The story, on the surface, is simple: John Wade, a rising political star, decides to run for the Senate; in the course of the campaign, serious allegations are made about Wade's past, and he loses in a landslide; several days later, he and his beautiful wife, Kathy, take a vacation in the remote Minnesota back country; after an argument, Kathy disappears and when an extensive search fails to turn up her body, the police begin to focus their suspicions on Wade.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Activated Greg Hibbard and Ted Power, pitchers, from the 60-day disabled list and Chris Bosio and Shawn Boskie, pitchers, from the 15-day disabled list.
Designated Power for assignment.
Announced Keith Mitchell, outfielder, refused outright assignment to Calgary of the Pacific Coast League and elected to become a free agent.
Announced they did not offer a contract for Sammy Ellis, pitching coach.
Named Matt Sinatro, coach, and Bobby Cuellar, pitching coach.


Mandela Says U.S. Must Aid World's Poor
President Nelson Mandela of South Africa told a joint meeting of Congress today that the United States and other wealthy nations must resist the lure of isolationism and dedicate themselves to improving the lot of all the world's people.
After spending the last two days asking the Clinton Administration to help his country, President Mandela had a broader message: As nations grow closer together, rich lands need to do more to aid poor ones because that will serve the cause of peace, prosperity and democracy.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE FOOTBALL  Kansas State Quarterback Takes to the Air  Chad May shredded a suspect secondary for 379 yards last night, leading Kansas State past Kansas by 21-13, giving the Wildcats their first victory in Lawrence in 25 years.
May, 13-2-1 as Kansas State's starter, befuddled the Jayhawks with post patterns, crossing patterns, screen passes, shovel passes and bombs.
At halftime, the Wildcats (4-0), ranked No. 19 by The Associated Press and No. 6 by The New York Times computer ranking, had 1 yard rushing, 271 passing and a 14-0 lead.
It was the seventh time in his 16-game career that the 6-foot-2-inch, 220-pound May had thrown for more than 300 yards. (AP) GOLF  Couples Leads American Team to Victory  Fred Couples eagled the first hole at windswept St.
Andrews to start the United States to a 2-1 victory over Japan as it began defense of the Dunhill Cup in Scotland yesterday.
None of the 48 players in the team event broke par amid winds that gusted to 51 miles an hour. (AP) YACHT RACING  Leader in Solo Race Crosses Equator  Isabelle Autissier of France, leading the BOC race around the world, crossed the Equator yesterday on her way to Cape Town.
The Equator marks the halfway point for the fleet of 19 solo skippers making their way south in the Atlantic Ocean to their first stopover port.
Autissier, the only woman in the 27,000-mile race, is skipper of the 60-foot yacht, Ecureuil Poitou Charentes 2.


CHRONICLE
What do you do when you want to put on a play that has budget-straining extraordinary expenses?
One thing might be to apply for a grant from the Kennedy Center Fund for New American Plays, as 89 organizations from around the country did this year.
Three of the five theater awards, just announced by the fund, went to Manhattan theater companies.


Bond Prices Mixed Ahead Of Jobs Data
Bond prices were mixed yesterday as investors and traders waited to see if today's employment report for September would confirm that the economy is expanding and thus heighten fears about the possibility of accelerating inflation.
The price of the 30-year bond was unchanged at 9429/32 to yield 7.95 percent, with rates for shorter-maturity bills also holding the line.


Herbert Colton, 90, Real-Estate Lawyer
Herbert Spencer Colton, a retired Washington lawyer who specialized in housing and real-estate law, died on Monday at his home in Chevy Chase, Md.
He would have turned 91 on Wednesday.
The cause was heart failure, said Peter W. Segal, a longtime law partner.


Surgery Puts Frazier Out for Season
Nebraska quarterback TOMMIE FRAZIER had surgery yesterday in Lincoln, Neb., to tie off a vein that doctors believe was contributing to a recurring blood clot in his right leg.
Dr.
DEEPAK GANGAHAR, a cardiovascular surgeon, said the surgery went well.
He agreed with Dr.
LONNIE ALBERS, Nebraska's director of athletic medicine, that Frazier probably is out for the rest of the season.


Chip Advances To Be Sought
In an effort to push advanced computer chip making past the limits of lightwaves, four companies said yesterday that they would form the Proximity X-Ray Lithography Collaborative Association to perform advanced research in building advanced memory and microprocessor chips.
The International Business Machines Corporation , the Loral Corporation, the AT&amp;T Corporation and Motorola Inc. will jointly attempt to use X-ray beams to create extremely fine line widths on silicon wafers, possibly one four-hundredth of the diameter of a human hair.


James McCahon, 38, New York Architect
James J. McCahon, an architect of the new American headquarters of the Bertelsmann company, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 38 years old.
The cause was AIDS-related lymphoma, said Rob Goldfarb, his companion.


Mutilated Serb Bodies Found Outside Sarajevo
The mutilated bodies of 20 Bosnian Serb soldiers have been found just outside the demilitarized zone around Sarajevo, United Nations officials said today.
They added that the killings appeared to be the work of the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Army.
Yasushi Akashi, the top United Nations official in the former Yugoslavia, said that the killings took place early Wednesday morning on Mount Igman, southwest of the capital, and that the victims were 16 men and 4 women.
The women were apparently military nurses, he said.


'Middleman' Held in Plot To Rig Bills Insurers Paid
Swooping down on safe deposit boxes, agents of the Manhattan District Attorney seized at least $800,000 in cash and bonds yesterday in a spreading investigation into insurance schemes to inflate personal injury claims.
One Long Island man described as an expediter, or middleman, was arrested Tuesday and charged with theft and extortion after leaving a lawyer's office with a $52,000 check.
It was part of an inflated $700,000 injury settlement, said District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau.


In the Hinterlands, a Maverick Waits
A band of loyal Haitian Army supporters has been sharpening mango-tree branches into spikes and planting them in the local soccer field, the only flat stretch in this hilly town where several American helicopters could land.
Hundreds of civilian militia have been drilling daily with sticks and rusted M-1 rifles, saying they will fight foreign troops until the bitter end.


2 Hares Come Dancing to Lincoln Center


METRO DIGEST
DINKINS GIVES CUOMO HIS ENDORSEMENT
In a carefully choreographed encounter, former Mayor David N. Dinkins ended weeks of hesitation and endorsed Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, pledging to "go anywhere and speak to anyone" in behalf of his re-election.
The endorsement had been sought by Mr.
Cuomo to help rally support among black voters in his race against State Senator George E. Pataki.
A1.
The sound of tax-cut plans seems to be grating on voters' nerves. B4.


Collective Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Esiason's Status Goes From Start to Stopped
Will he or won't he?
Will Boomer Esiason's sprained left ankle allow him to start on Sunday against the Indianapolis Colts or will he be sidelined again?
It appeared today that Jack Trudeau would start, as he did last week against the Browns, with Esiason ready to play if needed.
Esiason said he thought that would be the scenario and suspected Coach Pete Carroll had already made the decision.
Carroll said he was not sure what would happen, that it depended on how Esiason felt.


Gasoline Tank Truck Explodes on Long Island Expressway, Killing One


Stolt-Nielsen S.A. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Tarpley Returns to Mavericks
The Dallas Mavericks gave ROY TARPLEY yet another chance last night, signing the recently reinstated 7-footer to a six-year contract the club said was worth about $2.5 million a year.
It came nearly three years to the day since his banishment from the N.B.A. for substance abuse. (AP)


When a Wife Decides Enough Is Enough
Anna Bouverie (sounds like Bovary) wants out.
She has had it with playing unpaid curate to her vicar husband, living in genteel poverty in an English village and dressing her two children in hand-me-downs.
When her husband fails to be appointed archdeacon, a position that at least promised some financial relief, Anna decides to act.
Her story is told, uncompromisingly, in "The Rector's Wife," adapted by the playwright Hugh Whitemore from a novel by Joanna Trollope.
The three-part "Masterpiece Theater" presentation, produced for England's Channel 4, will begin on Sunday with a 90-minute episode.
The best-selling novel is concurrently being published here by Random House.
The casting, as usual, meets top British standards.
Anna is played by Lindsay Duncan, who was hailed in the stage production of "Les Liaisons Dangereuses." Her Anna is a volatile mix of emotional fragility and iron determination.
Her infuriatingly passive husband, Peter (Jonathan Coy), is essentially a good and gentle man blinded by self-pity.
When Anna decides to take a job stocking shelves at a supermarket, Peter, along with the parish's twittering and constantly interfering women, is aghast.
Anna is accused of trying to shame the church by humiliating her husband.


Big Cuts Planned At Kidder
The General Electric Company took a big step yesterday toward quitting Wall Street.
The G.E. officials who now run the firm's troubled Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company brokerage subsidiary announced a sweeping plan that would transform Kidder from a main participant in the bond markets to a much smaller one.


Sports of The Times; Can Knicks Possibly Give More?
THERE they were, the same old cast at the same old gym in the same old Westchester woods preparing to roll the same old rock back up the same old hill.
It was exhausting just to see them lumber onto the court.
Good old Patrick.
Good old Oak.
Good old Starks.
The gang that came within three scattershot minutes of winning the National Basketball Association championship last spring.
Or was it summer?
Anyway, it was June 22.


Kakata Journal; War Engulfs Liberia, Humbling the Peacekeepers
As refugees from Liberia's newly raging civil war cooked dinner in the wrecked cabins of an abandoned rubber plantation, a Nigerian Army captain standing in the rain marveled at their luck in having any shelter at all.
"The only reason there are even roofs left here is because these shacks were built with asbestos," said the officer, who identified himself as Captain Franklin, a member of the 10,000-member peacekeeping force here led by Nigeria.
"If they had been tin, the rebels would have hauled them away a long time ago."


Home Video
Officially, "Jurassic Park" became avaliable in stores on Tuesday, the tape's "street date," as it is called in the trade.
But many video dealers informally decided to get a head start, and in many parts of the country, including the New York metropolitan area, this movie has already been on the street for at least 10 days.
"It's the largest, most flagrant example of nationwide street-date jumping that we've ever had," said Jeffrey Eves, the president of the Video Software Dealers Association.


An Announcer Attains a Lofty 'Goooool'
ANDREAS CANTOR, famed for his 'Gooool!
Goooool!' call during this past summer's World Cup, was selected sports personality of the year by the American Sportscasters Association yesterday.
Cantor, who works for Univision Sports, has done Spanish-language broadcasts of the last four World Cups.
He will be honored at the A.S.A. dinner in Manhattan on Nov. 30. (AP)


All Eyes Focused On Ewing's Right Knee
They had not been together since June, when they said goodbye with sadness, lamenting the championship that got away.
Today, the Knicks were reunited for their annual media day at their training site at SUNY-Purchase.
Their quest remains the same -- to win a National Basketball Association title.
Achieving that will be difficult.


COMPANY NEWS;
Salomon Inc., which owns the biggest bond dealer in the country, said yesterday that it lost about $100 million in the third quarter, with most of the losses coming from the trading that its Salomon Brothers subsidiary did for itself.
The loss was significant enough that the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, the credit-rating agency, put Salomon's long-term debt on its watch list, "with negative implications," meaning the agency may lower its ratings on various securities, the highest of which is now graded A-.


'River Wild' Delivers Same Old Sexist Line
To the Editor:
When my 11-year-old son, and rowing companion, and I saw coming attractions for "The River Wild" (screen review, Sept. 30), we agreed that the movie, with a 45-year-old-rowing-action-hero-mom, would be a great ending to our summer.


At the Bar; Success of a primer on the O. J. Simpson trial depends on a decision by the trial judge.
Many people have a vital stake in whether Judge Lance A. Ito allows the O. J. Simpson trial to be televised.
Steven Brill, the major-domo of Court TV, may sound nonchalant on the question, but he is sending out his heaviest hitter, Floyd Abrams, to plead his cause at a hearing that Judge Ito has set for Nov. 7.
On the other hand, Kathleen Brown's floundering campaign for California governor, for which the Simpson drama could well prove a fatal distraction, would love the judge to yank the plug.
But no one is following the issue more closely than Charles A. (Chuck) Rosenberg.


For Belarussian Girl, 7, the Nightmares Persist; Two Months After Her Father's Suicide, Lidiya Kitayev's Recovery Is Slow but Steady
In her nightmares, she screams that someone is pulling her by the hand, trying to kill her.
Awake, she remembers fitfully, asking why she is in a hospital bed, bruised, hooked up to wires and tubes.
Two months after falling from a fourth-floor window with her father, who died in a suicide leap, 7-year-old Lidiya Kitayev of Belarus has recovered enough to take a wheelchair to a playroom, scold her mother and the medical staff, plead for split pea soup and farina with jelly, and complain that she has nothing to wear.


Floyd Returns To the Nets
Twelve years after they drafted him and 11 1/2 years after they traded him, the Nets welcomed Eric (Sleepy) Floyd back today, signing the veteran guard to a one-year deal contingent on him making the club.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.
"It's kind of funny how life brings you back around to where you started," said Floyd, 34, who was selected 13th by the Nets in 1982 out of Georgetown.
He was traded midway through his rookie season to Golden State.


F.C.C. Takes Cautious Step To Alter a Prime-Time Rule
The Federal Communications Commission is moving cautiously toward proposing a change in a 24-year-old rule that limits the three big television networks to filling just three hours of prime time a night with their nationally broadcast programs, a senior commission official said yesterday.
The commission will issue a "notice of proposed rule-making" on the regulation, known as the prime-time access rule, at its next scheduled meeting on Oct. 20.
That action is significant because it usually means the commission will consider altering a rule or even repealing it.


Chavez to Fight Lopez in December
JULIO CESAR CHAVEZ, who stopped MELDRICK TAYLOR last month to retain the W.B.C. super-lightweight title, will defend the title Dec. 10 against TONY LOPEZ in Monterrey, Mexico, the promoter DON KING said yesterday in Las Vegas, Nev.
King said the fight would be part of a card featuring four or five title fights. (AP)


Plans for Publicizing the Study Run Afoul of a Race to Publish
Newspaper readers and television viewers learned details of the report on sexual behavior earlier than they were supposed to yesterday as a careful effort to orchestrate a wave of national publicity went awry.
The New York Daily News, The Chicago Tribune and The Boston Herald published articles about the survey yesterday, though publicists who were trying to draw attention to the survey said that under an agreement with the press, Friday was the earliest date it was to be disclosed.


Well-Dressed Officer: Navy, Not Powder Blue
Changing a 22-year-old policy on police uniforms, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton announced yesterday that the department would require beat officers to replace their powder blue shirts with navy blue shirts by next October.
"We're getting rid of the Mr. Goodwrench look," Mr. Bratton said.


Car Driver Killed as Tanker Explodes on L.I. Expressway
A gasoline tanker carrying about 9,000 gallons of fuel rolled onto a car and exploded in a fireball on the Long Island Expressway today, killing the car's driver and closing the Island's main artery at the height of the evening rush hour, the police said.
Flames from the tanker shot up 75 feet, witnesses said, and smoke was visible from as far as Westchester and New Jersey.
The accident occurred under an overpass at Exit 53 of the expressway on the border of Islip and Smithtown near Commack in western Suffolk County.
It tied up traffic several miles in both directions.


United Stationers Inc.(USTR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


New Jersey Gets Warning On Auto Emissions Rules
New Jersey legislators were told today by Federal officials that they must enact tough new auto emissions standards by February or face sanctions that could virtually shut down road-building and business expansion in the state by next summer.
Officials of the United States Environmental Protection Agency told the lawmakers at a hearing here that the state had exhausted its discretion under the Federal Clean Air Act of 1990 to obtain additional time to lower pollution from automobiles.
They said that Federal sanctions would be triggered automatically if the February deadline passed without tough new state standards.


Centura Banks Inc.(CBC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


City College Installs Its New President


Art in Review
Portia Munson  Yoshii Gallery 20 West 57th Street Manhattan Through Oct. 22
Portia Munson's "Pink Project" was among the standout images in last year's "Bad Girls" show at the New Museum.
It consisted of hundreds, possibly thousands of found pink objects spread out on a table like a nightmarish Tupperware display.
Most of them were small, inexpensive, made of rubber or plastic, and created for the use of women or children.
They included hair curlers, pacifiers, fake fingernails, dildos, combs, flowers, dolls, pincushions, plastic-foam meat trays, a small "pro choice" button, and even several varieties of deadly looking packaged snack food.


A Troubled Mother Against the Bureaucracy
Ken Loach's "Ladybird, Ladybird" asks viewers to imagine what it is like for Maggie (Crissy Rock) to open a newspaper one day and see a photograph of a boy in need of adoptive parents.
"I've never had much love," says the caption.
"Can you give me some now?" The photograph is of Maggie's own son.
Maggie, the central figure in this raw, wrenching film based on a true story, is first seen as a mother of four who has no children.
English social service agencies have seen fit to take all of them away.
And those agencies are not presented as simply villainous.
Maggie's history is troubling enough to yield different opinions on whether she is a fit parent for her children.


Art in Review
Jindrich Styrksy  Ubu Gallery 16 East 78th Street Manhattan Through Oct. 22
For its initial offering this new gallery is presenting work by Jindrich Styrsky, a Czech photographer active in the 1920's and 30's, whose reputation has been on the rise in recent years.
Styrksy was a leading figure in the Czech branch of Surrealism between the world wars; here he is represented by prints made for a book titled "On the Needles of These Days," which included verses by Jindrich Heisler and was published clandestinely in 1941.


Ritual and Romance Among the Cheeverites: Sad Souls Estranged in Their Own Paradise
The characters in the novels and short stories of John Cheever value their cocktail hour, summer in hundred-year-old beach homes, send their children to dancing school and feel a vague sense of exile in their own privileged land.
So do the characters in the plays of A. R. Gurney.


Giants Place Four Veterans on Waivers
The two-time National League batting champion WILLIE McGEE, pitcher BUD BLACK, outfielder DAVE MARTINEZ and first baseman TODD BENZINGER were placed on waivers yesterday by San Francisco.
Their contracts expired at the end of the strike-shortened season and they will become unrestricted free agents.
McGee, 35, tore an Achilles' tendon during a game at Pittsburgh and missed the last 70 games of the season.
A four-time National League all-star and the league's most valuable player in 1985, McGee was paid $3.5 million this season.
He has a career batting average of .298, including .282 with 5 home runs and 23 runs batted in in limited duty last season.


Collusion Is Another Issue Where Both Sides Disagree
Collusion, an issue neither owners nor players seem eager to revisit, nonetheless could be superimposed on already contentious relations in baseball, a sport that has been idled by a strike since Aug. 12.
The issue was initially raised Wednesday when union officials questioned whether adoption of a management proposal to freeze off-season dates and rules through Nov. 15, because of the absence of a Basic Agreement, would constitute collusion against free-agent players.


4 Women From Senate Bolster Robb Candidacy
Intensifying his attack against Oliver L. North, Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia today campaigned with four female Senators, one of whom told a midday crowd that Mr.
North's actions in the Iran-contra affair were far worse than anything he had said about them.
"My lowest, darkest, bleakest day as an American was when I learned that a Marine colonel who swore to uphold the Constitution of the United States had sold arms to the most terrorist nation on earth," said Senator Barbara Boxer, Democrat of California.
"That person cannot become a United States senator."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
California Housing Finance Agency is selling $196.9 million of tax-exempt home mortgage revenue bonds through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The bonds are priced to yield a maximum of 7 percent for an issue due in 2026, while other long bonds are priced to yield 6.85 percent in 2015.
For short-maturity serial bonds, the yields range from 4.75 percent in 1996 to 6.50 percent in 2008.
The bonds are rated Aa by Moody's Investors Service and AA- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Atmel Corp.(ATML,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Inside Art
Museum Raises More Than $84 Million
While expansion and capital fund-raising campaigns have become something of a trend among American museums, few can boast the kind of success that the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art can.
This week, the museum announced that it had increased its permanent collection by 50 percent, from 10,000 works to 15,000, and had raised more than $84 million of its $85 million capital drive.
"It's been an incredible outpouring from the Bay Area arts community," said John R. Lane, the museum's director.
"Sixty-five million dollars has come from the board itself."


Swiss Examine Conflicting Signs in Cult Deaths
Swiss investigators raised doubts today whether 48 members of a sect who were found dead in two villages on Wednesday had taken part in a collective suicide, noting that some had received a powerful drug before they died.
Andre Piller, a judge investigating the deaths of 23 members of the sect at a farmhouse in Cheiry, said some evidence supported the idea of a collective suicide "but others make us think of an execution."


Vice Chairman Is Appointed by Chrysler
The Chrysler Corporation promoted its executive vice president and chief administrative officer to vice chairman today and shuffled responsibilities for several officers.
Robert J. Eaton, Chrysler's chairman, said in a statement that the moves were in keeping with "the company's long-term strategy for continuous improvement." By moving people, he said, "management can create opportunities for the sharing of experience in ways that bring new light to old methods."


Burlington Resources Inc.(BR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


G.O.P. Flexes Its Muscles
The lobbying bill's defeat demonstrates how quickly a conservative network can be mobilized in support of a minority party that feels increasingly powerful.
Page A22.


New Chairman at the New York Stock Exchange
The board of the New York Stock Exchange did the expected yesterday, unanimously electing Richard A. Grasso to succeed William H. Donaldson as its chairman and chief executive when Mr.
Donaldson steps down at the end of May.
Mr.
Grasso, who is 48 years old, has been executive vice chairman at the exchange since January 1991 and president and chief operating officer since 1988.
An exchange employee for 26 years, he is the first staff member to rise to the top job in the 202-year history of the exchange.


Hungarians of 1956 Fought for Ideals
To the Editor:
"East Europe's Hard Path to a New Day" (front page, Sept. 30) states: "During the cold war, the Communist parties of Eastern Europe professed loyalty to Moscow and let the Red Army enforce that allegiance in 1953, 1956 and 1968 in East Germany, Poland and Czechoslovakia." While there were disturbances in Poland in 1956, the 1956 Revolution occurred in Hungary.


American Isuzu Picks Poppe Tyson
American Isuzu Motors Inc. said yesterday that it had selected Poppe Tyson in Los Angeles to handle its commercial vehicle account, previously at Lenac, Warford, Stone Inc. in Newport Beach, Calif.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.
Poppe Tyson was awarded the account after a two-month review that included Lenac, Warford and three other agencies: Anderson &amp; Lembke in San Francisco; Borders, Perrin &amp; Norrander in Portland, Ore., and dGWB Inc. in Irvine, Calif.


All-Out Strategy Hobbled Lobby Bill
The Christian Coalition took one look at the lobbying bill and sprang into action.
"We have a state-of-the-art network set up," said Mike Russell, a spokesman for the group.
"We mobilized 250,000 people within a 24-hour period before the Senate vote, with computer bulletin boards, telephone trees, faxes, talk radio outlets to get the word out to both Christian and secular talk stations. We used the high-tech home gadgetry combined with getting on the phone to grass-roots members to make the phones ring back in your Senator's office."


COMPANY BRIEFS
HUBCO INC., Union City, N.J., said its Hudson United Bank subsidiary had signed a letter of intent to acquire Shoppers Charge Accounts Co., Jersey City, for $18.5 million in cash.


Lawyers for a Killer Who Shunned Them
In the Federal courtroom where Paul J. Hill stood trial this week, Roderick D. Vereen, a public defender, was forced to sit next to the defendant silently and poker-faced, "cringing inside," he said, as he watched one lost opportunity after another go by.
Here was a trial with national significance, the test of a new Federal law in a case involving the killings of an abortion clinic doctor and his escort, and Mr.
Vereen felt helpless.
In the end, on Wednesday, Mr.
Hill was convicted, hearing the verdict as both defendant and lawyer.


Where History Meets Nature in the Hudson Valley
THIS Hudson River village, its Main Street lined with antiques stores under ornate cornices, appears caught in a time warp, a faded Victorian postcard sprung to life.
In recent years, people have streamed in from all over just to admire the architecture or browse in Salmagundi Books or sup at the Vintage Cafe.
Most end up at the river's edge, awed by the ancient Hudson Highlands, which loom from the opposite bank: enormous mounds of granite and dense green forest.


From Postwar Italy, With Style
YOU needn't have cruised down the Via Veneto on a Vespa in the 1960's to know what is meant by la dolce vita.
It means Ferrari, Ferragamo and Fellini, Pucci and paparazzi: Italy during its years of postwar prosperity epitomized glamour.
Beginning in the late 50's, the country enjoyed what Italians considered to be a miracle of economic and industrial expansion after the degradation of the Fascist years.
But the biggest miracle was the number of talented people who came to maturity after World War II and gave to resurging Italy a culture and style that reached a peak by the mid-60's.
"The Italian Metamorphosis, 1943-1968," which fills the Guggenheim Museum, is a gigantic survey of what they accomplished in painting and sculpture, film and photography, fashion, architecture and design between the fall of Mussolini and the rise of a generation opposed to Italy's new opulence.


The Spoken Word
"RIGOLETTO," Metropolitan Opera Guild, 10th floor, Rose Building, 70 Lincoln Center Plaza.
A discussion of Verdi's opera by Bridget Paolucci, a writer.
Tomorrow at 11:45 A.M.
Admission: $8.
Information: (212) 769-7028.
LAUREN BACALL, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
Charlie Rose will inteview the actress.
Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Haiti: How Broad an Amnesty?
It should be up to Haitians to decide what kind of amnesty to grant to Haiti's coup leaders.
The Clinton Administration is right to leave the details to the country's elected authorities.
Washington's guiding principle should be to restore self-government and rule of law to Haiti and bring American troops back home at the earliest feasible date.
The agreement that former President Jimmy Carter reached with Generals Raoul Cedras and Philippe Biamby last month committed those generals to retire as soon as Haiti's Parliament voted a "general amnesty" into law.
But it also said they would retire no later than Oct. 15 even if no amnesty were enacted.


14-Year-Olds Begin Their 'Phasing-In' Process
One down, one to go.
If the conscience-laden, sponsorless women's tennis tour delivers on its promise to make sure its circuit does not turn into the Tiny Tot Exploitation Tour, the world has now seen the next-to-last debut by a 14-year-old female phenom.
The Czech-born Martina Hingis had hers this week in Zurich, where the Sallsportshalle was jammed.
Venus Williams will have hers later this month, courtesy of the International Management Group, which was only too happy to grant her a wild card for its event in Oakland, Calif., where agents from every management firm will take up where Don King left off and try to sign her as a client. (I.M.G. drew the early bead on Hingis and signed her back when she was 12.)


First Love, With No Girls Around
"Wild Reeds" is Andre Techine's delicate, lovingly photographed, strongly acted coming-of-age story in which a smart, sensitive boy named Francois falls in love with his classmate, a peasant boy named Serge.
Set in the French countryside in 1962, at the end of the Algerian war, the film is more successful at making Francois an evocative character than it is in its lukewarm attempt to make politics an integral part of the story.
In a discreet scene at school one night, Francois and Serge sleep together.
It is clear that for Serge, this is an adolescent experiment, done for lack of any females around.
But Francois falls painfully in love, and has no idea what to do about it.


On My Mind; Congress, Haiti and Ravens
Often, listening to some of the American journalists and politicians who opposed the U.S. intervention in Haiti, you can hear clearly what they do not say.
They want the mission to fail and Haiti to explode into violence and chaos.
They do not want American troops to be killed.
But if casualties do come, they are poised, mouth and computer at the ready, to scream havoc.


Andrea Velis, 67, Met Opera Tenor
Andrea Velis, a tenor who sang more than 60 roles at the Metropolitan Opera and was one of the company's best character actors, died on Tuesday at Memorial Hospital in North Conway, N.H.
He was 67 and had homes in Manhattan and Tamworth, N.H.
The cause was a heart attack, said Faber Donoughe, his companion.


Art in Review
Rosemarie Trockel  Barbara Gladstone Gallery 99 Greene Street SoHo Through Oct. 15
The best piece in this so-so show of the German artist Rosemarie Trockel is the video playing on the gallery's lower level.
In it, the irate artist circles and interrogates a woman, identically dressed, seated in a chair.
"Who is the best artist?" Ms.
Trockel demands peremptorily and, not getting a satisfactory answer, starts berating and beating her alter ego.
A candidate for the New York Film Festival the video isn't, but its literally slapstick scenario offers welcome comic relief in an art world that has little to laugh about just now.


Vaness and Pavarotti in 'Tosca'
Franco Zeffirelli's hyper-realistic staging of "Tosca," a centerpiece of the Met's active repertory since its premiere in 1985, had its first performance of the season on Wednesday evening.
Realism, of course, is a slippery thing: now that a televised production from Rome has presented the work staged in the actual settings and at the right times of day, Mr.
Zeffirelli's grandiose, intensely detailed sets look less like virtual reality and more like theatrical facsimiles.
And say what one will about them, they are really distracting only when the singing and acting fail to command the attention.
That was not a problem on Wednesday.
Luciano Pavarotti, who has been known to sleepwalk through "Tosca" in recent seasons, was in spectacular form as Cavaradossi.
His voice sounded younger and fresher than it did a year ago, and he sang with a passion and magnetism that made his Cavaradossi a defiant hero.
In his showpieces, "Recondita armonia" and "E lucevan le stelle," he found an emotional depth that made the arias moving rather than merely crowd-pleasing.
Smaller touches were equally effective: Cavaradossi's brief celebration of Napoleon's victory -- his shouted "Vittoria! Vittoria!" in the second act -- rarely has the spontaneity or the chilling power that Mr.
Pavarotti brought to it.


Sex in America: Faithfulness In Marriage Thrives After All
While several previous studies of sex in America have created a popular image of extramarital affairs, casual sex and rampant experimentation, an authoritative new study of American sexual practices -- widely described as the most definitive ever -- paints a much more subdued picture of marital fidelity, few partners and less exotic sexual practices.
In the new study, based on surveys of 3,432 men and women 18 to 59 years of age, 85 percent of married women and more than 75 percent of married men said they were faithful to their spouses.
And married people have more sex than their single counterparts: 41 percent of married couples have sex twice a week or more, compared with 23 percent of the singles.


CHRONICLE
RUTH LAREDO, the pianist, has returned to her native city, Detroit, to join the Detroit Symphony Orchestra in celebrating the 75th anniversary of Orchestra Hall in three concerts this weekend.
It's quite an experience, she said, because she had not previously met NEEME JARVI, the conductor of the symphony.
"You just want to love him and hug him," Ms.
Laredo said yesterday.
"He's cute like a bear."


Art in Review
Laure Albin-Guillot  Zabriskie Gallery 724 Fifth Avenue (near 57th Street) Through Oct. 15
Well known as a commercial photographer in France in the 1920's and 30's, Laure Albain-Guillot published the first book on advertising photography in that country in 1933.
After her death in 1962, her work was largely forgotten; this small survey offers an introductory sampler of her diverse images.


Focus on Assaults Against the Land
The 19th-century tradition of using the landscape as a vehicle for social commentary has had few takers among contemporary artists.
Neil Jenney (born in 1945) is one of them, and six of his chilly, immaculately executed paintings have been brought together as part of the Collection in Context series at the Whitney Museum of American Art.
Organized by Elizabeth Sussman, the show leaves no doubt that Mr.
Jenney is an artist overdue for reassessment, but it also suggests why he remains a marginal figure.
His debt to earlier American art is clear at a glance.
His reiterated images of blasted trees and sunset skies, for example, were standard Hudson River School emblems of decay and renewal, fraught with allegorical implications.
Mr.
Jenney acknowledges the symbolic nature of his own paintings by stenciling their didactic-sounding titles directly onto their frames.
The frames themselves -- thick, shelflike and painted black -- recall the prosceniumlike structures used by Frederic Edwin Church and Albert Bierstadt to turn their landscape paintings into near-cinematic spectacles.


Big Spender Is Charged With Fraud On Welfare
His life style was dazzling: a $4,000-a-month apartment on the 37th floor of Trump Tower on Fifth Avenue, a small fleet of luxury cars, membership in a health and racquet club, chief executive of his own business.
Just last Monday he was negotiating to buy a $5 million English manor house on Long Island Sound.
But yesterday, as 63-year-old Herbert Steed walked out of his polished brass-and-marble lobby, past the rosewood table with a vase of lovely autumn flowers and the doormen in livery and white gloves, detectives were waiting under the canopy to burst the bubble and arrest him -- on welfare-fraud charges.


Carbide/Graphite Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.79
4.77
2.95
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.94
4.94
2.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.37
5.37
3.06
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.76
7.75
5.32
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.95
7.95
6.01
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.80
7.02
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.70
6.69
5.43
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Giants Place Four Veterans on Waivers
The two-time National League batting champion WILLIE McGEE, pitcher BUD BLACK, outfielder DAVE MARTINEZ and first baseman TODD BENZINGER were placed on waivers yesterday by San Francisco.
Their contracts expired at the end of the strike-shortened season and they will become unrestricted free agents.
McGee, 35, tore an Achilles' tendon during a game at Pittsburgh and missed the last 70 games of the season.
A four-time National League all-star and the league's most valuable player in 1985, McGee was paid $3.5 million this season.
He has a career batting average of .298, including .282 with 5 home runs and 23 runs batted in in limited duty last season.


Sixers Cut Dawkins to Sign Three Picks
Guard JOHNNY DAWKINS, the last link to the CHARLES BARKLEY era in Philadelphia, became a casualty of the National Basketball Association's salary cap yesterday.
Dawkins, 31, was released so the Philadelphia 76ers could sign their three top draft choices, SHARONE WRIGHT, DERRICK TAYLOR and B. J. TYLER.
The 76ers are entitled to use half of Dawkins's salary toward signing players. (AP)


Simpson's Defense Suffers More Evidentiary Defeats
Judge Lance A. Ito today rejected a defense move to bar a broad range of evidence seized from O. J. Simpson's white Ford Bronco over a 10-week period either because it was stale, obtained by unauthorized personnel or seized without a proper warrant.
Once the police lawfully possess a car, Judge Ito ruled, "they may conduct reasonable tests over a reasonable period of time."


Voters Wary Of Promises, Especially From Cuomo
When Peter Zachareas hears that the two leading candidates for governor are promising to reduce taxes, he cringes.
"It's easy to say you're going to do it and then get in office and find out there's no money," Mr.
Zachareas, 55, said inside his brother's florist shop in Yonkers this week.
But tax cut talk from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the three-term Democrat, makes him angrier than similar talk from State Senator George E. Pataki, even though Mr.
Pataki, the Republican, has proposed much deeper cuts.
That's because Mr.
Cuomo is "two-faced," Mr.
Zachareas said.


Politics Called Main Motive in Killing of Party Leader in Mexico
The chief investigator in the assassination of a top governing party leader said today that the central motive in the killing appeared to be political and that more prominent public figures might be involved.
The investigator, Deputy Attorney General Mario Ruiz Massieu, said the Government was continuing to explore the possibility that narcotics traffickers might have financed or abetted the murder last week of the party leader, Jose Francisco Ruiz Massieu, who was his brother.


City Hall to Explain Youth Agency Cuts
Threatened with a subpoena by the City Council, the Giuliani administration promised yesterday to give the Council records of the procedures it used in deciding to cut off funds to 146 community organizations that offer youth programs.
During a hearing by the Council's Youth Committee, Victor L. Robles, a Brooklyn Councilman who heads the committee, said he had sought the documents from the Department of Youth Services for nearly a month to no avail.
He added that he had prepared to issue subpoenas yesterday to administration officials, including Deputy Mayor Ninfa Segarra, until Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani intervened, asking Speaker Peter F. Vallone to wait another week and promising to provide all requested data.


Danny Gatton, Pop Guitarist Known for Virtuosity, Dies at 49
Danny Gatton, a guitarist who applied dazzling technique to down-home styles, died on Tuesday at his farm in Newburg, Md.
He was 49.
He died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound, said Detective James Whitcraft of the Charles County sheriff's office.


Santa Fe Rejects Hostile Offer From Union Pacific
The Santa Fe Pacific Corporation rejected a $3.4 billion hostile takeover offer from the Union Pacific Corporation last night, saying it felt the bid would not be approved by Federal regulators.
Union Pacific officials said they were disappointed by the news.
"Without even talking to us and without due consideration, the Santa Fe board of directors has given short shrift to our proposal," Drew Lewis, chairman of Union Pacific, said.
The company said it was considering its next step.


Dreaming The Dreams, Realizing The Realities
AT a high point in his young career, Arthur Agee, a 14-year-old basketball player at St.
Joseph High School in Chicago, stands on the court with his idol, Isiah Thomas.
The N.B.A. star is visiting his old school, and as Arthur goes one-on-one with his hero, the boy flashes a smile as big and joyous as any you've ever seen.
Four years later, Arthur's classmate William Gates, who also dreams obsessively about playing in the National Basketball Association, has progressed to the Nike All-America basketball camp, where college coaches look over high school players.
Spike Lee visits and tells the students a cold-blooded truth: they are being used and the one way to protect themselves is to know it.
"The only reason you are here is because you can make their schools win and they can make a lot of money," Mr.
Lee says of the coaches.
"This whole thing is about money." It is the kind of valuable advice boys like Arthur and William, from poor black neighborhoods, hear all too rarely.


'Gump' Sells, to Viacom's Surprise
Licensed merchandise intended to exploit the popularity of movies is, you should pardon the expression, like a box of chocolates: Hollywood never knows what it's going to get.
Case in point, "Forrest Gump." The film, which stars Tom Hanks as an Alabama-born idiot savant, has unexpectedly become a prodigious generator of merchandise licensed to bear its name and logos.
That success has surprised even executives of the movie's owner, Viacom Inc.


Judge Acted Prudently on Mob Informer
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal's Sept. 30 column, "3 Months a Murder," is based on a misunderstanding of the administration of criminal justice.
While I have no personal knowledge of what was involved in John Gotti's conviction and the breakup of his criminal empire, my experience (starting in 1938 as a deputy assistant district attorney under Thomas E. Dewey) impels me to set the record straight.


U.N. Study Finds a Free Eastern Europe Poorer and Less Healthy
The unsettling years of transition from Communism to free-market democracies have left the most vulnerable people of Eastern and Central Europe significantly poorer, less healthy or fed and more prone to accidental death and homicide, according to a report published today by Unicef, the United Nations Children's Fund.
Economic changes have "provoked a deterioration of unparalleled proportions in human welfare throughout most of the region," the Unicef study says.
Rising incidence of infectious diseases, stress, malnutrition and alcoholism, already documented in Russia, affect a much wider area, the report shows.


Both B.C. and Notre Dame Try to Give Up the Ghost
The career paths of two football coaches, Dan Henning of Boston College and Lou Holtz of Notre Dame, will cross once more tomorrow, when the Eagles play the Irish at Alumni Stadium in Chesnut Hill, Mass.
This crossing will be more conspicuous than the others.
It will be held before a national television audience and within a bulging stadium against a background of emotion that around Boston borders on hysteria.
There are reports of $25 tickets being resold for $200 and up.


McCall to Lewis: 'Keep Your Money'
OLIVER McCALL was offered $10 million for a rematch with LENNOX LEWIS to which the World Boxing Council heavyweight champion replied, "Keep your money."
"Now they come with their tail between their legs," McCall said.
"First of all, Lennox Lewis disrepected my winning of the championship. Instead of saying, 'Hey, Oliver was the better man tonight. I need a rematch,' he came on the microphone saying he was robbed. If they offer me $100 million for a rematch, I wouldn't do it."


Russell Sherman, True to His Own Methods
"In everything beautiful is something strange." That was the epigram by Baudelaire that the critic and teacher Edward Said offered as an introduction to the pianism of Russell Sherman on Wednesday night at the Miller Theater at Columbia University, and it proved a haunting description of what was to come.
As one might expect from this unusual musician, whose concerts draw an almost cultic audience, Mr.
Sherman's performances of Beethoven were often extraordinarily beautiful: the delicate suspension of time in the final pages of the Opus 111 Sonata, the pointillistic flutterings and bell-like intonations of two of the "Eroica" Variations, the pedaled recitatives that mysteriously well out of the keyboard in the "Tempest" Sonata (Op. 31, No. 2).
And in the midst of that beauty was also the strangeness, the eeriness, that stamped each performance with Mr.
Sherman's personal signature.


Vermont Stands for Political Independence
To the Editor:
The disappointment in our legislative process and the inability of our legislators to effect change is understandably reflected in an increased interest in independent political parties and candidates (The Week in Review, Oct. 2).
You would have been better served to focus attention on Vermont, rather than on Connecticut, Maine or Ross Perot.


Stuart Black, Writer And Producer, 45
Stuart Black, a freelance writer and television and radio producer, died on Monday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 45 and also had a home in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer of the esophagus and stomach, his family said.


A Last Belmont Look At Lure, a Champion
It was one year ago tomorrow, and Shug McGaughey doesn't need any reminders.
But whenever he looks down the row of stalls at Barn 20 on the Belmont Park backstretch, the reminders come flooding back: It was the day he saddled the winners of six races, including the Jockey Club Gold Cup and four other graded stakes, and no horse trainer ever had a more momentous day at the races.
"It runs through my mind every so often," he said yesterday, smiling at the understatement.
"What's left from that day? The memories, six trophies and three of the horses who are still racing: Heavenly Prize, Dispute and Lure."


Trimming the N.Y.P.D. Budget
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has finally signaled willingness to cut Police Department spending.
Or has he?
Last week City Hall told the department to come up with a relatively small reduction of $60 million in its $2 billion budget, an acknowledgment that the police must share in resolving New York City's budget crisis.
Then the Mayor seemed to hesitate, saying he hoped the cuts would not be necessary.
But they are.
The police have their share of bloat and should be asked to shed it at a time when other vital services are being slashed.
It is important, however, that the Mayor make cuts in the right way.
News reports suggest budget officials may want to shrink the department's civilian payroll by as much as one-third.
That could actually weaken patrol strength, a perverse result of a law designed to strengthen policing.


Exploring Myth to Find the Contemporary Psyche
Two masterpieces by Martha Graham, "Primitive Mysteries" (1931) and "Errand Into the Maze" (1947), as well as one of her most mysterious dances, "Herodiade" (1944), were the new entries on the "Radical Graham" program on Wednesday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Opera House.
That this series, part of the Next Wave Festival, is a hot ticket is hardly surprising.
The academy has provided a splendid presentational format with its concentrated dose of Graham's works, mainly from her earlier years.
Newcomers have learned what true believers already knew: that the superb Martha Graham Dance Company and Graham's genius exude a spirit that is nothing but contemporary.


Accounts
*
U.S.
Coast Guard, Washington, to Emmerling Post Inc., New York, to handle its integrated marketing program that includes Reserve recruitment advertising, previously at Bates USA, New York.
Billings are estimated at $4 million. *
Mintz &amp; Hoke, Avon, Conn., was awarded three accounts with combined billings estimated at $3.5 million: TCI Cablevision of Connecticut, West Hartford; the Connecticut Business and Industry Association, Hartford, and Cleveland Twist Drill, Cleveland, a manufacturer of drills and drill bits.


G.O.P. FILIBUSTER DEALS A SETBACK TO LOBBYING BILL
A Republican-led filibuster dealt a deadly blow today to legislation intended to reveal how much lobbying goes on in Washington and to prohibit members of Congress from receiving gifts.
Senate Republicans said they would try on Friday to revive the ban on gifts by proposing a change in the Senate rules.


Corrosive Gay Portrait In Numbered Segments
"Totally F***ed Up" was shown as part of last year's New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 9, 1993.
The film opens today at the Quad Cinema, 13th Street, west of Fifth Avenue, Greenwich Village.
"Everything that homos are supposed to like -- disco music, drag shows, Joan Crawford -- I hate," says one character in "Totally F***ed Up," Gregg Araki's fractured, corrosive portrait of a group of gay comrades.
Mr.
Araki, who has described his film as a "ragtag story of the fag-and-dyke teen underground," brings an angry intelligence to bear upon disaffected characters, so that his work plays vigorously as part movie, part manifesto.


Restaurants
Harvey Keitel is at the sushi bar.
A group of gorgeous six-foot models sits nearby, passing a telephone around the table.
And the man just behind me is shouting, "You've really never tried Prozac?"
Hollywood has invaded Manhattan disguised as a Japanese restaurant.
But as any of the Japanese travelers who flock to the restaurant will tell you, Nobu, despite its sushi bar and elegantly arranged plates of tempura, is not a Japanese restaurant.
It isn't really an American restaurant, either, but something that seems as if it were invented on an airplane 5 miles up and 1,500 miles inland from either coast.
The decor, a cross between an enchanted forest and a set for the movie "Mishima," places Nobu firmly in that fantasy restaurantland that recognizes no geographic boundaries.
When you walk through the door of this former bank, you must be prepared for a grand entertainment.


'I'm Proud of My Mother, the C.I.A. Operative'
To the Editor:
For 26 years I have maintained a proud silence, but on Sept. 14 I was afforded the opportunity of speaking my mind.
For it was on that day that you identified by name one of the Central Intelligence Agency's most senior female spies, Janine Brookner, my mother.


McCann-Erickson Making Changes
McCann-Erickson Worldwide has announced a number of personnel changes involving several units.
At McCann-Erickson Asia/Pacific, Marcio Moreira was named regional director, effective Jan. 1, succeeding Michael Ferrier, who will retire early next year.
Mr.
Moreira, 46, will continue as vice chairman and worldwide chief creative officer at McCann Worldwide.
Unlike Mr.
Ferrier, 58, who has been based in Hong Kong, Mr.
Moreira will remain based in New York.


Brazil Victor Vows Crusade On Inflation
Fernando Henrique Cardoso all but claimed victory today in the presidential election and sketched plans to keep inflation low.
Partial returns gave him more than twice the votes of his nearest rival.
"I will sit in the presidential palace," Mr.
Cardoso, a former Finance Minister, said with a broad grin in his first public appearance since the voting on Monday.
At a news conference here, he said his electoral rivals were "no longer adversaries" and talked of a Social Democratic administration to take power on Jan. 1.


Editors' Note
A front-page article on Tuesday reported that French Impressionist and Post-Impressionist paintings taken from private German collections by the Soviets at the end of World War II had been consigned to the State Hermitage Museum in St.
Petersburg.
The article said that until last week many of the paintings had been widely regarded as lost, and that one of them, a Degas masterpiece called "Place de la Concorde," had been believed destroyed.
In fact, in April 1991 Artnews magazine published an article, which was reported on by several newspapers including The New York Times, about secret repositories of the art from Germany in Russian museums.
The magazine reported in its summer issue that year that "Place de la Concorde" was at the Hermitage.


Waiting Out Japan's Trade Surplus
Even as the United States struggles to reach new market-opening agreements with Japan, some foreign and Japanese economists believe that natural forces could eliminate Japan's huge trade surplus within the next decade or two.
"The trade surplus will disappear toward the end of the decade," Robert Alan Feldman, the chief of economic research for Salomon Brothers in Tokyo, predicted.
Edward J. Lincoln, an economic adviser to the United States Embassy in Tokyo, said, "Certainly in the first decade of the 21st century it will disappear."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  DOUBT ON COLLECTIVE SUICIDE  Investigators raised doubts about whether the 48 members of the Solar Temple sect who were found dead in two Swiss villages had taken part in a collective suicide, saying that some were administered a powerful drug before they died.
A1  CULT DEATH TOLL RISES TO 53  Three more bodies, including a baby, were found in a house in Quebec that adjoined a chalet owned by Luc Jouret, leader of the Solar Temple sect, bringing the toll of cult-related deaths to 53.
A10  AN INNER CIRCLE OF FOLLOWERS  Mr.
Jouret built up an inner circle of followers who shared his belief in a coming apocalypse, said a Danish professor who monitors such groups.
A11  SLOW ROAD TO CAPITALISM  Their stories are different, but for many East Europeans the frustrating reality is the same: capitalism can't be built overnight.
It comes at a price few expected.
A1  MANDELA CALLS FOR WORLD AID  President Nelson Mandela of South Africa told a joint meeting of Congress that the U.S. and other wealthy nations must dedicate themselves to improving the lot of all the world's people.
A3  BOSNIAN SERB SOLDIERS MUTILATED  The mutilated bodies of 20 members of the Bosnian Serb military have been found just outside the demilitarized zone around Sarajevo, the U.N. said.
A7  U.S.
SEEKS NEW HAITI POLICE FORCE  With the interim police force it had hoped to install now in disarray, the U.S. is scrambling to form another force for Haiti's two largest cities and may soon hire "auxiliaries," American officials said.
A14  In a Haitian village, the civilian militia is still willing to fight.
A14  Fernando Henrique Cardoso all but claimed victory in Brazil.
A3  Kakata Journal: Peacekeepers face Liberia's resurging war.
A4  National A16-28  LOBBYING BILL THWARTED  A Republican-led filibuster all but killed legislation that would impose stricter reporting requirements on lobbyists and bar their gift-giving to members of Congress.
A1  How the Republicans' allies helped stymie the bill.
A22  RISE IN BLACK REPUBLICANISM  Although their numbers are still relatively small, there has been a surge in black Republican candidates this year.
A1  Four female senators came to the aid of Charles S. Robb.
A28  THE FAITHFUL AMERICAN  An authoritative study of American sexual practices paints a picture of marital fidelity, few partners and sexual practices more common than exotic.
A1  An effort to orchestrate publicity about the survey went awry.
A18  POVERTY MAINTAINS ITS HOLD  Median household income declined last year despite the growth of the economy, and more than a million Americans slipped into poverty, the Government said.
A16  The number of children without health insurance soared.
A16  ANOTHER SETBACK FOR SIMPSON  The judge in the O. J. Simpson case rejected a motion to bar evidence seized from the defendant's white Ford Bronco.
A20  'A VACANT SPACE IN THE LAW'  For two lawyers appointed to defend the man who killed a Florida abortion doctor, the trial proved to be a kind of purgatory.
A24  Easton Journal: It's harvest time in Maine's potato country.
A16  Law Page B8  THE COWING OF JUSTICE  Prosecutors around the nation say the intimidation and even killing of witnesses are on the rise, especially in gang-related crimes.
A1  California courts open a new gray area for libel.
At the Bar: Fate of a Simpson trial primer turns on the judge's ruling.
Metro Digest B1  DINKINS ENDORSES CUOMO  Former Mayor Dinkins ended weeks of wary hesitation and endorsed Governor Cuomo, pledging to "go anywhere and speak to anyone" to support his re-election.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-31  In Cold Spring, N.Y.
C1  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  "A Cheever Evening." C3  Film: "Hoop Dreams." C1  Dance: "Radical Graham." C3  Restaurants C24 Art: From Italy, with style.
C1  Television: TV Weekend D18  Obituaries D17  Danny Gatton, pop guitarist.
Sports B9-16  Basketball: Knicks and Nets open training camps.
B9, B11  Football: L. T. set for return to Giants Stadium.
B9  Hockey: N.H.L. owners irate at players' union.B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31  Editorials  Haiti: how broad an amnesty?
Trimming the N.Y.P.D. budget.
The nanny tax, improved.
Pushing back censors in Poland.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Congress, Haiti and ravens.
Anthony Lewis: Reward for a job well done.
Tom Reiss: Where Marx meets Perot.
Frank Cornelius: Crushed by my own reform.
Chronicle B6  Crossword C29


Reed Elsevier
The American depository receipts of both parents of Reed Elsevier P.L.C., Reed International and Elsevier, showed little movement on their first day of trading.
Reed Elsevier announced plans on Tuesday to buy the on-line division of the Mead Corporation.


Audiovox Corp.(VOX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Market Place; Is this finally the year for airline stocks? Well, not this time either.
SECOND marriages, Samuel Johnson said more than two centuries ago, represent the triumph of hope over experience.
The saying also seems fitting for investors in airline stocks.
Those who have sat through four straight years of industry losses have been hoping, after all, that this would be the year when the airlines would get a much-needed lift from a growing domestic economy.


For Beard, A Day of Promises And Smiles
Chris Morris, the Nets' forward, asked Butch Beard today if he could call him "the rookie coach." Beard paused and thought about it.
"Yeah, go ahead," Beard said.
He later added: "That's what I am. I don't have experience in the N.B.A. Hey, what are they going to say?"


On Stage, and Off
217 Bow at 'Show Boat'
If it had happened during the Tony broadcast, CBS would have torn its hair out.
After "Show Boat" opened on Sunday night, its director, Harold Prince, didn't just thank everyone.
He had them all come up and take a bow, the first time in several long memories that such a gesture had been made.
Pretty soon, 217 people were onstage at the Gershwin: 73 cast members, 30 musicians, 24 dressers, 16 electricians, 13 carpenters, 6 stage managers, the box-office folks, etc.
"This project was such a Herculean effort, and the only way to explain that to people, frankly, is to show them," said Garth H. Drabinsky, the producer.
"We thought it would be a nice way to say thanks."


Tables Turn Against the Republican in California Senate Race
After nine months of being on the offensive in California's 1994 Senate race, Representative Michael Huffington suddenly found himself on the defensive today, trying to fend off accusations that he is an inept legislator whose wife is running his campaign.
Mr.
Huffington, a wealthy Republican who has already spent more than $10 million of his fortune trying to unseat Senator Dianne Feinstein, said his opponent, with the help of the press, was out to "get" his wife, Arianna, a California writer and social figure who once was a member of a fringe religious group whose leader touted himself as more powerful than Christ.


U.S. SENDS FORCE AS IRAQI SOLDIERS THREATEN KUWAIT
Iraqi troops took up positions near Kuwait today, prompting President Clinton to dispatch Navy and Marine forces to the region and to warn that Washington would defend its Persian Gulf allies.
Pentagon officials said that Iraq had moved 10,000 troops, including forces from its elite Hammurabi division, to the area near Basra, about 30 miles from the Kuwait border, bringing the total number of Iraqi troops in the area to between 40,000 and 50,000.


Bosnians, Not Serbs, Shut Off Sarajevo Water
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis expresses indignation in "Suffer the Children" (column, Oct. 3) that the Serbs have turned off the gas and water in Sarajevo.
Water-treatment equipment installed by the Soros Foundation (costing millions) was operational in January 1993.
This equipment is capable of providing 300,000 people in Sarajevo with water for four hours a day -- safely in their homes.


Voters Give Cuomo a Struggle on His Home Turf
Whenever Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo talks about the old neighborhood -- and he does so at almost every campaign stop -- he invariably conjures up a Queens of old-world skeptics, a cranky borough with a reflexive immigrant suspicion of anyone who tries to push things too far.
"Do you know what they'd say to that back in the old neighborhood?" he'll say, deriding the latest Republican campaign proposal.
Or at a roadside news conference last week, referring to his opponent's tax-cut plan, "In the old neighborhood in Queens, there's an expression that went something like this: Fool me once, shame on you; fool me twice, shame on me."


A Dim Idea Switches On To Cut Costs
Into the relentless gloom of New York City's budget problems has come this bright idea: The administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has changed light bulbs at City Hall.
To save money in these fiscally dire days, workers this week replaced all the 90-watt incandescent bulbs in the five chandeliers in City Hall's lobby.
In their place went cheaper-to-use 30-watt fluorescent bulbs.


Stocks Rise on Job Data And Iraqi Troop Buildup
Stocks rallied yesterday after a three-session slide, bolstered first by the September jobs report and then by news of an Iraqi buildup of troops near the Kuwaiti border.
The Labor Department reported yesterday that nonfarm employment rose by 239,000 jobs, below widespread expectations on Wall Street of an increase of over 250,000.
In addition, the unemployment rate dropped to a four-year low of 5.9 percent, from 6.1 percent in August.


Syrian Envoy Demands A Quick Golan Pullback
Syria's Foreign Minister, Farouk al-Sharaa, told President Clinton today that his nation was eager to reach a peace agreement with Israel but still wanted a full Israeli withdrawal from the Golan Heights.
Demonstrating that Secretary of State Warren Christopher still has some major gaps to narrow when he travels to the Middle East this weekend, Mr.
Sharaa also called for a rapid Israeli pullback from the Golan Heights.
Israel has proposed a withdrawal over at least three years but has resisted Syria's pleas to commit to a total withdrawal.


Bill Allowing Vitamin Claims Wins Approval
The House of Representatives today passed a bill that would permit general health claims for vitamins and dietary supplements.  [ The Senate passed the measure early on Saturday and sent it to President Clinton, who is expected to sign it. ]
The bill, which covers the products' labels and advertising, ends a two-year dispute over vitamin labeling that has pitted the Food and Drug Administration against industry lobbyists.


JAZZ
Through a Musical Maze To a Place of Jubilation  Visiones
When he played them on Tuesday night, Bobby Previte's compositions begged for orchestration, the breadth and muscle of a big band.
His pieces slowly and carefully make their way to an incantatory place where jubilation reigns, and jubilation could always use some extra power.


A Seven-Hour Contemplation of Boredom, Decay and Misery
Brave souls in tomorrow's sold-out audience for "Satantango" will have ample opportunity to ponder the meaning of a seven-hour running time.
Is this a declaration of greatness, or simply a means of crushing viewers into submission?
Do the thoughts stirred by such an uncompromisingly long film fully occupy all the ruminative space they have been given?
Is time somehow altered when, thanks to the hypnotic effects of Bela Tarr's deliberately lulling direction, time is made to stand almost still?
"Satantango," Mr.
Tarr's bleak, imposing cinematic experiment, sometimes lives up to great expectations, but its unevenness allows many questions to creep in.
Moving at a pace that would suit a glacier, Mr.
Tarr contemplates a group of grim-faced, wretched characters whose agricultural collective has fallen into decay, and who engage in desperate forms of chicanery as a way of denying their failure.


At the Capitol, Much Talk But Hardly Any Action
Congress praised itself today, denounced itself and complained that the public misunderstood it, while crawling toward adjournment with hardly any votes on anything.
The most decisive action was a Republican victory.
The Senate voted not to vote on legislation requiring lobbyists to register and report who pays them and prohibiting members of Congress from accepting gifts and golf junkets.
The measure died after the Senate fell 10 votes short of the 66 needed to break a Republican-led filibuster against the bill, which the House passed last week.


Niels K. Jerne, 82, Authority on Immunology
Niels K. Jerne, a London-born immunologist and co-recipient of the 1984 Nobel Prize for medicine, died yesterday at his home in Pont du Gard in southern France.
He was 82.
He had been suffering from cancer of the throat for about a year, said a cousin, Campbell Moses of New York.


Investors Wary, Despite Mandela
South Africa's President, Nelson Mandela, seemed to cast a spell over more than 800 business executives at a dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel early this week, winning repeated standing ovations.
Yet his main goal -- attracting more American investment to South Africa -- may be harder than wowing the crowd.
Although a growing number of United States companies are tentatively entering South Africa, many executives who listened to Mr.
Mandela's appeal for investment say caution is likely to outweigh their initial excitement when it comes to plunking down enough money to open a factory that creates jobs.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
American Cast Takes On Roles in 'Prince Igor'  Lincoln Center
When the New York City Opera opened its new production of Borodin's "Prince Igor" last month, it presented a cast of Eastern European singers who were comfortable with the Russian style.
But the company has always prided itself on its ability to offer opportunities to American singers, and on Tuesday evening an American cast took over most of the principal roles.


If It Could Just Pick Winners
Want a cheap way to impress your technology-savvy friends, the ones who buy every new gadget?
When you're out on the town on Saturday night, pull them into a cash machine at Citibank.
Loudly say, "I've been meaning to sell my Microsoft stock and get into Motorola." Then type buy and sell orders for the stocks right into the cash machine.
Not quite a mind-bending virtual reality experience, but it is on the cutting edge.
Citibank this week became the first bank in the country to let customers make such trades on its cash machines.
The only charge is normal brokerage commissions.


Three Eagles Put the Second Stockton in First Place
The name recognition comes from his father, but the golf game is strictly his.
And today, on a placid day at Disney World, Dave Stockton Jr. played his particular brand of overpowering golf and showed once again that he is on the verge of building a reputation he can call his own.
Stockton, a 26-year-old rookie on the PGA Tour, eagled three holes on the aptly named Eagle Pines course at Disney, and his round of 64 gave him a total of 12 under par.
That gave him a one-stroke lead over Rick Fehr, Glen Day and Jim Gallagher Jr. after two rounds of the $1.1 million Walt Disney World Oldsmobile Golf Classic.


Paroled as 'Changed Man,' Killer Is Held in L.I. Slaying
Twenty-five years ago, a 16-year-old boy broke into a home in Philadelphia, intent on burglary.
But he encountered a woman, bound and gagged her, and then the crime took a tragic turn when she suffocated under the gag.
The youth was caught, convicted of murder and sentenced to life in prison without parole.
Last month, two other brutal crimes occurred a week apart and on opposite sides of the New York metropolitan area -- the rape and robbery of a 55-year-old woman in South Nyack in Rockland County, and the robbery and fatal stabbing of a 78-year-old woman in Floral Park in Nassau County.


Sports of The Times; No Cheering. No Dancing. No Nothing.
INCREASINGLY it appears that the people who oversee professional and college football wish that that every place could be like Pleasant Valley or Happyville, U.S.A.
Football helmets would be white, jerseys blue with no names on the back.
Shoes would be black high tops.
Hair would be crew cut.
Grass would be natural.
The teams would be of the "old" all-America variation: No slang.
No hip.
No hop.
Just a gaggle of "gee-whizzes" and apple pie.
Ah, for the joy of it.


Denver Celebrates Opening of Its Light Rail Transit System
With no particular destination in mind, Helen Jackson got on board the train, stepped off 15 blocks later and got right in line for a train going the other way.
"I just came for the ride -- it's just so much fun," said Mrs.
Jackson, a retired Government worker, adding with a conspiratorial whisper, "Of course, it helps that it's free."


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy The nation's unemployment rate fell to a four-year low in September.
But the report did not alarm financial markets because the job growth was not strong enough to force the Federal Reserve to move immediately on interest rates.  [ Page 39. ]  While job growth was seen in all regions of the country, the unemployment rate in New Jersey rose to 6.7 percent, from 6 percent.
In New York State, the rate fell to 6.2 percent, from 6.9 percent.  [ 47. ] An overhaul of the nation's bankruptcy laws was approved by the Senate.
The measure would set new rules making it easier for individuals to repay their debts on installment plans and harder for big corporate debtors to avoid their creditors.  [ 39. ] Recycling is becoming a big business as economic recovery and greater mill capacity increase demand for raw material.
Old corrugated boxes, waste paper, plastics and steel cans have been finding new and lucrative markets.  [ 1. ] The F.C.C. may let cable operators charge what they want for new channels or services as long as they do not dilute programming protected under current price restrictions.  [ 39. ] International U.S. executives remain wary about investing in South Africa, despite their applause for President Nelson Mandela earlier this week.
The licenses for interactive video services will be re-auctioned.  [ 41. ] Markets Stocks rallied.
Buyers were encouraged by the employment report, which lessened expectations of an immediate increase in interest rates.
The Nasdaq composite index rose 5.77 points.  [ 40. ] Treasury prices rose after the Government reported a rise in payrolls that was below market expectations.  [ 47. ] The dollar strengthened, rising above 100 Japanese yen.
The dollar was bolstered by gains in stocks and bonds and by a report showing a reduction in Japan's trade surplus.  [ 48. ] Crude oil prices jumped before falling back.
Traders bet a move by Iraqi forces toward Kuwait would not lead to an invasion.  [ 48. ] Your Money Peter Lynch has kept his investment approach startingly simple.
Mr.
Lynch, who produced huge gains as manager of Fidelity's Magellan Fund before going into semiretirement four years ago, has made some changes in his own investment portfolio.
Now, the renowned stock picker even buys bonds.  [ 37. ] Olde Discount is offering trades without commissions.
But there is a catch: the transactions must be in stocks recommended by analysts at the deep discount brokerage firm.  [ 37. ] Citibank customers can buy and sell stocks on cash machines.
Citibank, which began offering the service this week, is the first bank in the country to let customers make such trades.  [ 37. ] B'nai B'rith is sending members an offering this month for a group of mutual funds created for them.  [ 38. ]


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Silence and Salesmanship In a Program of New Music  Merkin Concert Hall
Parnassus's program on Thursday night dealt mostly with new music's established aristocracy, but some of its more interesting moments came from the younger and the less known.
Indeed, the poise and inventiveness of Matthew Greenbaum's "Enharmonicon" left a deep impression.
The combination of clarinet, trumpet and violin gives off natural, vivid color combinations.
The contrapuntal exchange of short phrases and single strokes, along with a use of silence, has both reticence and eloquence.
There is a quiet confidence here requiring no salesmanship.


A HAITIAN LEADER OF PARAMILITARIES WAS PAID BY C.I.A.
The leader of one of Haiti's most infamous paramilitary groups was a paid informer of the Central Intelligence Agency for two years and was receiving money from the United States while his associates committed political murders and other acts of repression, Government officials said today.
Emmanuel (Toto) Constant, the head of the organization known as Fraph, was on the C.I.A.'s payroll in October 1993, when his group organized a violent demonstration that prevented the docking of the Navy ship Harlan County, the officials said.


CHRONICLE
Who's minding the country?
President NELSON MANDELA of South Africa arrived last Saturday in the United States for a weeklong visit.
On his heels came Archbishop DESMOND M. TUTU, South Africa's Nobel laureate, who flew into New York on Wednesday.


Nature of Health Care Will Change, With or Without Reform; Risks of Reusing Gloves
To the Editor:
In "Conserve Medical Supplies, and Lower Costs" (letter, Oct. 4), Gregory Abel points out procedures he observed in Colombia and suggests that they be practiced here.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE FOOTBALL St.
John's Beats Hoyas  The freshman Mark Levine threw two touchdown passes to Tom MacPherson, including the 33-yard game-winner with 1 minute 33 seconds remaining, as St.
John's beat visiting Georgetown by 19-16 last night.
Levine finished 14 of 31 for 193 yards for the Red Storm (3-1, 1-1 Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference), including a 4-yard touchdown pass to MacPherson at 13:50 of the second quarter. (AP)
Hofstra Romps: In Hempstead, N.Y., Carlos Garay threw for two touchdowns and ran for two more as Hofstra remained undefeated with a 62-7 victory over Central Connecticut.
The senior quarterback scored on runs of 9 and 11 yards, and connected with Nick Johnson for 29 yards and Michael Wright for 20 for Hofstra (6-0).
Garay finished 10 of 20 for 195 yards. (AP) HARNESS RACING Bullville Victory Wins  Bullville Victory, winner of the Yonkers Trot, beat Victory Dream, winner of the Hambletonian, by a neck in a raceoff yesterday to win the $162,700 Kentucky Futurity in Lexington, the final jewel in trotting's triple crown.
Driver John Campbell also won his third consecutive Futurity, and fourth over all, as the favored Bullville Victory covered the Red Mile in a tactical 2:061/5 and paid $2.60.
The victory was worth $53,529 and increased Bullville Victory's career earnings to $736,098.
He has won 13 of 32 starts. (AP) ASIAN GAMES More Gold for China  The Chinese won in softball, shooting, fencing and weight-lifting to earn 11 gold medals yesterday at the Asian Games in Hiroshima, Japan.
Its total for the event is 54.
China failed to win one gold it was expected to take.
Masaru Nakashige, a Hiroshima police officer, won the individual gold in the men's free pistol, Japan's first shooting gold in 24 years. (AP) TENNIS Navratilova Loses  Top-seeded Martina Navratilova and No. 2 Mary Pierce were defeated yesterday in the quarterfinals of the European Indoors tournament in Zurich.
Helena Sukova upset Navratilova, 7-5, 3-6, 6-4, and Mirjam Oremans, a qualifier from the Netherlands, knocked out Pierce, 6-4, 6-7 (8-10), 6-3.
Navratilova had hoped to win Zurich for the first time and increase her career titles to 168, but Sukova kept in control with strong serving and had nine aces. (AP) Becker Wins in Straight Sets: Second-seeded Boris Becker won a marathon first-set tie breaker en route to defeating Jonathan Stark, 7-6 (11-9), 6-3, in the quarterfinals at the Australian Indoor event in Sydney.
Two Australians, Patrick Rafter and Mark Woodforde, also advanced to the semifinals.
Rafter faces seventh-seeded Richard Krajicek in one semifinal today, and Woodforde meets Becker. (AP) GOLF Irish Defeat Americans  Fred Couples squandered a three-stroke lead, and the United States lost to Ireland, 2-1, in the Dunhill Cup at St.
Andrews, Scotland.
Couples, a member of the American team that won the title last year, was three strokes in front of Darren Clarke until he lost his putting stroke and bogeyed three of the last nine holes.
Clarke, who shot 71, won by three.
Earlier, Curtis Strange shot a 74 to beat Paul McGinley by two strokes, and Philip Walton of Ireland's even-par 72 defeated Tom Kite by four.
When Japan beat New Zealand by 2-1, all four teams in Group One were tied, and all had an equal chance of gaining tomorrow's semifinals. (AP) Britain and Ireland in Lead: The combined team of Britain and Ireland moved to a one-stroke lead over the United States after Friday's second round of the world amateur team championship in La Boulie, France.
Lee James, the current British amateur champion who shot a six-under-par 66, led the combined squad to a 421 total, eight under par.
The United States has a 422 total and is one shot ahead of Australia.
Todd Demsey of Rancho Santa Fe, Calif., shot a second-round 69, and Allen Doyle of Lagrange, Ga., had a 70.
Tiger Woods, the United States amateur champion, shot a 75. (AP) VOLLEYBALL Dutch Men Defeat U.S.
The Netherlands rallied from a 2-1 deficit to beat the United States, 5-15, 16-14, 10-15, 15-8, 15-11, yesterday, sending the Dutch to the final at the men's world volleyball championship in Athens.
Italy, the defending champion, played strong defense in a 15-12, 8-15, 15-9, 15-2 victory over Cuba in the other semifinal match.
Cuba, which lost to Italy in the final four years ago, played aggressively with strong spikes.
However, after a shaky start, the Italian defense saved seemingly impossible shots for the victory. (AP)


CHRONICLE
And speaking of the Kennedys . . .
President Kennedy's brother Senator EDWARD M. KENNEDY, the Massachusetts Democrat, is bringing in some muscle for his re-election campaign, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


Nature of Health Care Will Change, With or Without Reform
To the Editor:
"Ills of Health System Outlive Debate on Care" (Week in Review, Oct. 2), your postmortem on health care reform, is on the mark.
Senator Phil Gramm, who proudly takes much of the credit for the defeat of health care reform, is just one of the anti-reformists who claim that the public's freedom to choose its own physicians and obtain high-quality care was being threatened.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  IRAQI THREAT TO KUWAIT  Iraqi troops moved toward the border with Kuwait, prompting President Clinton to send American forces to the region and to warn that the United States would defend its Persian Gulf allies.  1


Observer; Just Common Scents
The death of Harriet Nelson of "The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet" sent me rooting through the Basket of Great Ideas here on the desk.
In this basket weird letters and clippings from old magazines and newspapers gather mold while waiting to make themselves useful.
The search produced -- Aha!
Knew it was there! -- a science story ripped out of the March 1992 issue of Harper's magazine.
The title: "Scenting a Generation Gap." It's about the power of smell to evoke nostalgia.


Congress's Sour Finish
The dismal denouement of the 103d Congress is an insult to diligent members of both houses and to ordinary citizens who expect at least a rudimentary level of stewardship from their elected legislators.
But the 103d's pathetically unproductive final days also tend to obscure some important legislative achievements.
In its early days -- it requires an act of will to recall them -- Congress passed a budget bill aimed at reducing the deficit.
The same measure expanded the earned income tax credit, lifting more working families above the poverty line.
Congress also approved the valuable North American Free Trade Agreement, though not without a monumental struggle, as well as useful measures providing for family leave, easier voter registration and a modest program of national service.


INSIDE
Rare Manuscripts Stolen
Twenty-two medieval works are missing from Columbia University's rare books collection.
Their value to scholars: priceless.
Page B25.
Warrants in Swiss Deaths
Switzerland sought a religious sect leader as evidence grew that some of the 48 members who were found dead were not suicides.
Page 6.
Bankruptcy Bill Approved
The Senate approved an overhaul of the bankruptcy laws, making it easier for individuals to repay debts on installment plans.
Page 39.
Shift in Cable TV Pricing
The F.C.C. is considering allowing cable system operators to charge what they want for new television channels or services.
Page 39.


Beliefs; On sexual abuse by Catholic clergy: A time for bishops to seize 'the moment after suffering.'
"Time's cupped hand holds no place so lenient, so calm, as this, the moment after suffering," wrote Jessica Powers, an American poet, Roman Catholic nun and mystic.
The Rev.
Canice Connors, a Catholic priest, psychiatrist and expert on sexual abuse by clergy, quotes those words to describe his church's present situation.


Bosnians, Not Serbs, Shut Off Sarajevo Water; U.S. Policy Regresses
To the Editor:
We are disheartened by President Clinton's apparent retreat from what had been everywhere understood as a firm, clear-cut determination to proceed to the United Nations by Oct. 15 to demand multilateral approval of the lifting of the arms embargo against Bosnia.


Chinese Test Atomic Bomb Underground
China continued its testing of a new generation of ballistic missile warheads by exploding a nuclear device beneath its far western desert at Lop Nor today.
In Washington, the White House said it "deeply regrets" the Chinese test, and the State Department called on China to abide by a moratorium on nuclear testing, which has been honored by the other nuclear powers since 1992.
"We continue to urge China to consider the changed circumstances of global security affecting the role of nuclear weapons," the department spokesman, Michael McCurry, said.


East and West Meeting and Mixing
Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov wrote the book on orchestration, but alongside the Japanese composer Minoru Miki in the New York Philharmonic concert at Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday evening, Rimsky seemed a piker.
Kurt Masur led the orchestra in Mr.
Miki's "Symphony for Two Worlds," which combines a full Western orchestra with a 16-member band playing Japanese instruments: here, Pro Musica Nipponia, founded by Mr.
Miki in 1964.
In this symphony, which was commissioned by Mr.
Masur's other orchestra, the Leipzig Gewandhaus, for its 200th anniversary in 1981, Mr.
Miki seeks to build bridges but works squarely within the Western symphonic tradition.
Although the Japanese instruments, few and mostly ancient, stand up to the larger, sleeker ensemble remarkably well in Mr.
Miki's exquisitely gauged scoring, in the end they add little more than color.


G. Joseph Tauro, 88, Massachusetts Judge
G.
Joseph Tauro, whose career as Chief Justice of the Massachusetts Supreme Court and the Massachusetts Superior Court spanned nearly 15 years in the 1960's and 1970's, died on Thursday at Salem Hospital in Salem, Mass.
He was 88 and lived in Swampscott, Mass.
The cause of death was pneumonia, a spokesman for the family said.


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press in some editions yesterday about a Louisiana man accused of shooting at an anti-abortion protester misstated the suspect's name.
He is Ernest Robertson Jr., not Ernest Robinson.


POP
Rock for the Middle-Aged, About Money and Motherhood  Maxwell's
Rock-and-roll may have started out as a music of youthful rebellion, but it doesn't have to remain that way.
Moe Tucker, who appeared on Tuesday night at Maxwell's in Hoboken, N.J., is one of the few musicians performing powerful rock songs about the frustration of middle age.
In "I Wanna," Ms.
Tucker, a 49-year-old single mother of five, who was the drummer in the Velvet Underground in the late 60's, flipped the punk-rock battleground of the home around by singing lyrics like, "I want some quiet, and these kids won't hush."


Bicyclist Is Arrested in 3 Sidewalk Stabbings
A brisk-pedaling man on a mountain bike was arrested early yesterday after he stopped, stabbed a 32-year-old singer walking down a street in midtown Manhattan and then rode off into the night, the police said.
Detectives said that the cyclist was a suspect in two other late-night pedestrian stabbings in the last two weeks and that he had been arrested last year for wheeling up to a City Council member and punching him in the mouth.


Holiday on Monday
The Columbus Day holiday will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  PARADE Tomorrow, the Hispanic Columbus Day Parade begins at 12:30 P.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street and proceeds north to 72d Street and east to Third Avenue.
Monday, the Columbus Day Parade begins at 10:15 A.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street, proceeding north to 86th Street and east to Third Avenue.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state and municipal closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Alternate-side rules suspended or Monday.
SANITATION No collection, street cleaning or recycling.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Open.
TRANSPORTATION Subways, buses, Metro-North and Long Island Rail Road on regular schedules.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Closed.
BANKS Local option.
SCHOOLS Local option.
TRANSPORTATION N.J.
Transit trains on regular schedules, bus schedules vary, holdiay or regular.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Closed.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION New Haven Line on regular schedule.


Defender of the Faithful: Her Struggle to Save Pets
FLO PHILLIPS is tired of people treating their pets like animals.
Specifically, she's tired of the people who get downright inhuman when a dog is lost because of carelessness or crime.
Knowing little about their pet when they had it, they often know less when it comes time to search.
Besides, a consumer culture makes it easy to shrug off the loss as a fact of urban life.


Demand for CD-ROM Titles Lifts Broderbund Earnings
Shares of Broderbund Software Inc., a leading producer of educational and entertainment software, surged today after the company reported higher-than-expected earnings and a stock split late on Thursday.
Broderbund shares closed at $57.50, up $5.125, or almost 10 percent, in Nasdaq trading.
Broderbund's rise led to more modest gains for other entertainment and educational software shares.
Electronic Arts, which earlier this year had attempted to acquire Broderbund, closed at $21.75, up $1.625, and Davidson &amp; Associates closed at $20.25, up 50 cents.


In New Survey, Pataki Leads Slightly
The contest between Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and his Republican challenger, State Senator George E. Pataki remains close, according to recently released polls.
A poll of 811 people who said they would probably vote conducted for The Daily News and WNBC-TV by Louis Harris &amp; Associates, released yesterday, has Mr.
Pataki ahead of Mr.
Cuomo by 7 percentage points.
The results include voters who said they were undecided but leaning toward a candidate and has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points.


Today's Tax Cuts Are Tomorrow's Bills
To the Editor:
Being a parent with college-age children, as well as a college teacher, I am deeply distressed that many of our politicians are selling cheap the well-being of the next generation.


Sex, American Style
"The real purpose behind the current sex survey proposal," Senator Jesse Helms thundered in 1991, "is not to stop the spread of AIDS, but to compile supposedly scientific facts to support the left-wing liberal argument that homosexuality is normal, just another life style." Ducking the storm, the Senate promptly blocked Federal financing for the first major study of American sexual behavior since the Kinsey research of 1948 and 1953.
Fortunately, several private foundations ponied up the money.
The result, published this week, is a 700-page tome titled "The Social Organization of Sexuality," and a surprising finding.
Sexually speaking, this is a nation of squares.


Iraqi Denounces Sanctions
Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister told the General Assembly in a scathing speech today that sanctions imposed against his country had caused unbearable hardships and should be lifted because Iraq had complied with most United Nations demands.
Mr.
Aziz said that the United States seemed intent on maintaining a punishing oil and trade embargo "forever," even as other nations seemed ready to move toward easing the sanctions.
He made no mention of the Iraqi troop movements near the border with Kuwait.


In High-Octane Gas, We Pay for Excess
To the Editor:
The anticipated rise in gasoline prices (letter, Oct. 1) is exacerbated by the practice of the major oil companies of selling gasoline with a higher octane rating, and subsequently a higher cost, than is needed by almost every car on the road.


Baseball Talks Still On Hold
Negotiators for baseball's club owners and striking players, still seeking a fifth negotiating session in this, the 58th day since the game was shut down, spent yesterday in neutral.
New talks may occur by the end of next week, Donald Fehr, the executive director of the Major League Baseball Players Association, said last night.
But no talks are scheduled and there has not seen a full negotiating session since Sept. 9.
The stalemate has resulted in most other baseball business grinding to a halt.
That includes negotiations on the owners' contingency proposal on how to conduct off-season business in the middle of a strike.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BIRMINGHAM STEEL CORP., Birmingham, Ala., said it would build a $110 million bar and rod mill in Cuyahoga Heights, Ohio.
CASTLE HARLAND INC., a minority shareholder in Long John Silver's Restaurants Inc., said it had sued to block New York-based Triarc Cos.' plan to purchase Long John Silver's for $525 million.


A Firefighter Is Laid to Rest


New Marker Added at Kennedy Grave Site


From the Debris, a Community Garden


Swiss Authorities Seek Cult's 2 Top Leaders on Homicide Charges in Followers' Deaths; Slain Couple's Car Found
A car that belonged to a couple killed in sect deaths in Quebec has been found abandoned at an airport near here and may have been used by a killer to escape to Europe, the Quebec police said today.
The stabbed bodies of the couple and their 3-month-old son were found on Thursday, bringing to 5 the number of deaths here linked to 48 deaths in Switzerland of members of the Order of the Solar Temple, the police said.


Milk Price Regulation Protects Consumer
To the Editor:
In 1937, as Congress debated New Deal legislation to aid farmers, Vermont's Governor, the singular George Aiken, sent a terse telegram to Capitol Hill.
Informed that the Senate was stalled on a procedural issue, Governor Aiken wrote in true New England style: "Dairy industry in peril. Act without delay."


Dr. Robert K. Match Dies at 68; Former L.I. Hospital President
Dr.
Robert K. Match, a former president and chief executive of Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, L.I., died on Thursday in an accident on the Long Island Expressway.
He was 68 and lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan and in East Hampton, L.I.
He died after a collision with a gasoline tanker, which flipped onto the car he was driving and exploded, the police said.
The accident took place on the border of Islip and Smithtown near Commack in western Suffolk County.


What's a Hurricane in Reverse? Miami Doesn't Want to Know
The stakes have never been higher.
Pay no attention to the surface numbers, and the fact that Saturday night's meeting between Miami and Florida State will mark the first time since 1987 that neither the Hurricanes nor the Seminoles is ranked first or second.
Not since 1986 has one of the teams been out of the top 10.
But as the credentials have lessened, the sense of urgency has intensified.
After Miami's loss to Florida State this time last year, followed by a loss at West Virginia, followed by a spanking by Arizona in the Fiesta Bowl, followed by the home-victory-streak-breaking defeat against Washington here on Sept. 24, the direction of the Hurricane program could be negatively defined this weekend.


Opening Night No. 2 Could Be Gone
Opening Night I has come and gone. Opening Night II hasn't come, but it could be gone.
Negotiators for National Hockey League owners and their locked-out players will not meet until Monday at the earliest, leaving them little time to reach an agreement that would insure the opening of the season next Saturday.
That's the date Commissioner Gary Bettman designated when he postponed the scheduled Oct. 1 start.


Officer Threatens Suicide in Station House
A New York City police officer threatened to kill himself yesterday afternoon inside the busy muster room of a station house in the Harlem precinct that has been at the center of a corruption scandal, the police said.
Minutes after roll-call at the 30th Precinct station house, the officer raised a .38-caliber service gun to his head in apparent distress over rumors that officers would be transferred out of the precinct as part of a shake-up, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police department spokesman.


Prices of Treasuries Rise Sharply
Prices of Treasury securities rose sharply yesterday for the first time this week, despite a gain in the number of jobs added to payrolls.
While the 239,000 increase in September payrolls was strong, it was below market expectations of a gain of 254,000.
Analysts said the employment report was a mixed bag: weak payrolls, but a surprising dip in the unemployment rate.
As a result, the report provided little reason for the Federal Reserve to change its pattern of more aggressive but less frequent tightening of credit.


Kodak Is Fined $5 Million For Toxic Chemical Leaks
Facing a Federal lawsuit, Eastman Kodak Company has agreed to pay a $5 million fine and spend tens of millions more to repair sewers and cut the use of toxic chemicals at its manufacturing plant in Rochester, the Environmental Protection Agency announced yesterday.
Federal officials called the out-of-court settlement a model for the Clinton Administration's plan to deal with industries that leak hazardous chemicals into the ground.
The fine represents the largest penalty a company has paid after being threatened with a lawsuit under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, the officials said.


A Perfect Match Lights the Bombs
It takes a while before Sylvester Stallone and Sharon Stone meet face to face in "The Specialist." He plays an explosives expert whom she wants to wipe out a few members of a crime family.
Her idea of a job offer is to compliment him in a suggestive voice on his reputation for carefully targeted fireworks, but he is reluctant.
Things might have moved faster if they had noticed they had cute little rhyming names.
He's Ray, she's May, and they're obviously meant to be a perfect match.
In a completely unintended way, they are.
Mr.
Stallone's Ray is stony-faced and monosyllabic, with a wide-eyed stare that is meant to hint at sad depths but instead makes him seem to be struggling to stay awake.
Ms.
Stone does what she does best in movies.
She struts and poses, sometimes half naked, as if she were just hanging around the house waiting for a Playboy photographer to ring the doorbell.
Her acting range never moves beyond that, though May is supposedly a tortured soul who saw her parents killed before her eyes when she was a child and is obsessed with getting the men who did it.
Mr.
Stallone and Ms.
Stone trying to act together is a meeting as disastrous as the Hindenberg crashing into the Titanic.
Though "The Specialist" is full of giant explosions, the biggest bomb is the movie itself.


Back on the Dribble


Lewis and Trainer Split
LENNOX LEWIS, who lost his World Boxing Council heavyweight title to OLIVER McCALL, has parted company with his trainer, PEPE CORREA.
The trainer was criticized for his tactics in Lewis's second-round loss to McCall on Sept. 25 at Wembley Arena in London. (AP)


Public &amp; Private; Quid Pro Quo
Well, I haven't seen so much tippy-toeing around since the last time I went to the ballet.
When members of the arts community were asked this week about one of their biggest benefactors, Philip Morris, and its requests that they lobby the New York City Council on the company's behalf, the pas de deux of self-justification was so painstakingly choreographed that it constituted a performance all by itself.
An official of one group put it thus: "We were not lobbying on behalf of Philip Morris; we were lobbying on behalf of ourselves and the money pool."


Fixing the Mess at Youth Services
This week many New York City teen-agers found after-school and weekend programs severely cut back or eliminated.
That is because the Department of Youth Services experimented with a new contracting process that may have looked good on paper but produced disastrous results.
Groups with a track record of helping city youth lost out to neophyte groups with little experience.
Some weeding out was inevitable as the department suffered a $4 million budget cut this year.
New groups will offer fresh approaches.
But the new process was not rational.
About 74 providers abruptly lost city support, including the Door, a respected group that helps runaway and homeless teen-agers, and the Y.W.C.A. of New York City, which runs the only citywide program for disabled teens.
In their place are 99 new groups.


Jobless Rate at 5.9%
The nation's unemployment rate fell to 5.9 percent in September, the lowest level in four years, from 6.1 percent in August, as the economy continued to show growth.
Page 39.


Man Acquitted in Fire Admits Drug Guilt
Eric Jackson-Knight, who was acquitted in August of helping set a notorious fatal fire for which he had already served 10 years in prison, has pleaded guilty to charges of drug possession and resisting arrest stemming from an encounter with the police last month.
The police said that two officers spotted him on a Brooklyn street at 5 A.M. on Sept. 25 with a gun butt poking out of his waistband.
They caught and subdued him after he tried to flee, and found an unloaded .44-caliber handgun and the stem of a crack pipe with a residue of crack.


How Insurance Works
To the Editor:
State Senator Leonard Stavisky's objection to higher rates for insurance for the elderly (letter, Oct. 1) seems to indicate that he does not understand the principle of insurance.
The idea is to charge according to the risk as indicated by statistics.


While Ewing Takes Dip, Knicks Enlist at Camp Riley
As Patrick Ewing continued to rehabilitate his injured right knee, his teammates endured the first day of another Pat Riley training camp.
The Knicks are uncertain when their All-Star center will return to full workouts.
After undergoing arthroscopic surgery July 6, Ewing's knee remains too weak to endure a rigorous training camp.


Royals Go With Boone As Their New Manager
BOB BOONE, whose father and son have also played in the major leagues, was hired as manager of the Kansas City Royals yesterday and given a two-year contract.
Boone, a catcher in the majors for 19 seasons, replaces HAL McRAE, who was dismissed Sept. 15.
"It's been a dream that I had ever since I got to the major leagues to be a manager," said Boone, who managed the Oakland Athletics' Class A team in Tacoma, Wash., in 1992 and 1993.
He was bench coach for the Cincinnati Reds this season.


Clinton Assails G.O.P. for Effort To 'Kill It or Just Talk It to Death'
After months of watching Congress shoot huge holes in his legislative agenda, President Clinton fought back today, saying the Republicans had pursued a strategy to "stop it, slow it, kill it or just talk it to death."
Mr.
Clinton's accusation of obstructionism, issued as Congress prepared to leave town without a crowning achievement and with the midterm elections now little more than four weeks away, was meant to transfer blame to Republicans for inaction that polls indicate has left many voters disillusioned with Congress and with Washington in general.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Named Bert Blyleven pitching coach of Cedar Rapids in Midwest League.
Waived John Dopson, pitcher, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Named Bob Boone manager.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Exercised the 1995 contract option of Kevin Elster, shortstop.
Basketball National Basketball Association  INDIANA PACERS -- Signed John Williams, forward.
LOS ANGELES CLIPPERS -- Signed Elmore Spencer, center, to a two-year contract extension through the 1996-97 season.
MILWAUKEE BUCKS -- Signed Johnny Newman, forward, to a one-year contract.
ORLANDO MAGIC -- Signed Greg Grant and Stacey Poole, guards.
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Signed Clarence Weatherspoon, forward, to a multiyear contract and Sharone Wright, forward, and B.J.
Tyler, guard.
PORTLAND TRAIL BLAZERS -- Signed Jaren Jackson and Elmer Bennett, guards, and Shawnelle Scott and Kevin Thompson, forwards, to one-year contracts.
SACRAMENTO KINGS -- Signed Michael Smith and Trevor Wilson, forwards; LaBradford Smith and Jimmy Oliver, guards; and Mike Peplowski, center.
Renounced the rights to Alex Holcombe, guard.
Continental Basketball Association  SIOUX FALLS SKYFORCE -- Signed Darryl Dawkins, center.


Tenneco Unit To Help Chile Energy Plan
A subsidiary of Tenneco Inc. has signed agreements to develop two natural-gas-fired power plants in Chile as part of an ambitious project to build a natural gas industry in the country.
The power plant portion of the project is valued at $600 million.
Tenneco Gas and its partners -- the Chilean power company Pehuenche and British Gas P.L.C. -- will develop a 350-megawatt plant near Polpaico, the companies said late Wednesday.
Tenneco will take the lead in building a 350-megawatt plant near San Isidro.
A third power plant near Concepcion will be converted to natural gas from coal and its capacity increased to 310 megawatts from 100.


Manuscript Mystery; 22 Rare Works Vanish From Columbia
The first clue that anything was amiss in the rare books collection of Columbia University came on a hot day last July.
A librarian preparing a catalogue entry went to the shelves on the sixth floor, where medieval manuscripts are stored in boxes.
But one of the boxes was empty.


Three Years After Gulf War, Sense of Siege Grips Kuwait
With its gleaming high-rises, lavish shopping malls and well-groomed beltways, Kuwait looks as if it has lifted itself out of the destruction and morass of war.
But the glitter and affluence mask a country that has lost faith in itself, lives in fear of a resurgent Iraq and sees a future darkened by forces beyond its control.
"There is a scramble to get another passport, to teach children other languages besides Arabic and to keep our money outside the country," a leading businessman, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said in Kuwait City this week.
"There is a feeling that if Iraq to the north does not get us, the fundamentalists, backed by a growing movement in Saudi Arabia, will."


Anderson Still Finds Shooting Is Real Pain
It is a tiny scar, maybe one-and-a-half inches long.
It begins in a straight line on the inside portion of Kenny Anderson's left wrist and then veers abruptly to the left, toward his thumb.
Minuscule in appearance, the injury looms large for the Nets and their All-Star point guard as the club began practice today at Princeton University's Jadwin Gymnasium.


Corrections
A picture caption in some editions yesterday about the New Jersey Legislature and new automobile emission rules misidentified the man second from the right.
He is Kevil Duhon, an aide to the State Senate Committee on Natural Resources, Trade and Economic Development, not Frank Wilson, the Transportation Commissioner.


No Charge To Trade, But There Is a Catch
In the price war among deep discount stockbrokers, the Olde Discount Corporation has found the floor.
Commissions are being dropped entirely on some customer transactions.
The offer comes in two forms, Smart Trade and Smart Trading.
Devised for the wealthier client, Smart Trade allows someone with an account balance of $500,000 to trade 1,000 or more shares of a company's stock at no cost.
Each share must cost at least $5.


Overcoming Obstacles to a Career
Since he was a child, Brian Cruise, of Bay Shore, L.I., has dreamed of being a sports journalist.
The hurdles have been considerable, given that he has spinal muscular atrophy, which leaves him without use of his arms or legs.
His first attempt to get financial aid to attend college in preparation for such a career was rejected.
But at age 36, he has put the pieces together.


Timothy Asch, 62, Professor Who Filmed Remote Societies
Timothy Asch, an anthropologist whose ethnographic films captured the life and rituals of remote societies, died on Monday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 62.
The cause was lymphoma, his family said.


Mock Auction of Slaves: Education or Outrage?
Here on Monday afternoon, four blacks -- two men and two women -- are scheduled to be auctioned to the highest bidder.
They will stand outside a tavern while a dozen people look them over and call out how much they are willing to spend.
The event is open to the public.
The "slaves" will be actors and the auction a drama, part of a three-day program called "Publick Times" designed to re-create life in Colonial Williamsburg.
Organizers say the auction is intended only to educate visitors about a brutal yet important part of black American history.
But critics around the state contend that education could be trivialized into entertainment and that, in any case, slave auctions were too painful to revive in any form.


Burstein and Vacco Clash in First Debate
The two principal candidates for New York State attorney general clashed on just about every subject that came up during their first debate last night, from the death penalty to gun control to term limits, often issues that they will have no jurisdiction over if they are elected.
The Democratic candidate, Karen S. Burstein, a former Family Court judge, repeated her previous statements that she opposes the death penalty.


No Headline
"We're going to assign these people to work in parks, in vacant lots, on city streets to clean up the city." -- MAYOR GIULIANI, announcing a plan to put childless welfare recipients to work.  [ 1:2. ]


Bombay Journal; As the Plague Ebbs, India Is Overcome by Guilt
As India gains confidence that the worst of its plague epidemic is over, the country is being swept by a wave of anger and self-reproach.
In place of the panic that broke out as the plague swept across the country in the last two weeks, the mood has shifted in recent days toward demands for something lasting to be done to attack levels of urban squalor that many Indians say are among the worst anywhere.
In addition, there have been calls for urgent action to improve levels of health care that international agencies have said are among the most underfinanced anywhere.


Circumstance Has Smith On Gold Cup Long Shot
"The chief difference," said Mike Smith, previewing the pros and cons of the $750,000 Jockey Club Gold Cup today, "is that they won't have Holy Bull in there."
And, if that seemed too obvious, the star jockey and regular rider on Holy Bull went on to say: "It means Go for Gin or anybody else can show the early speed. But none of them can dictate a race like Holy Bull. And when they come down to the finish, whoever held the early lead, or whoever stalked the early lead, is going to have a lot of company."


Hampton Set to Play Against the Vikings
If there had been any doubts about Rodney Hampton playing against the Vikings at Giants Stadium on Monday night, there are none now.
"Rodney's ready," Coach Dan Reeves said after the Giants' practice today.
"If he gets hurt now, it's my fault because we're going out tomorrow in just helmets."


South Korea President Lashes Out at U.S.
After weeks of watching in silent frustration as the United States tries to negotiate a halt to North Korea's nuclear program, President Kim Young Sam of South Korea lashed out at the Clinton Administration today in an interview for what he characterized as a lack of knowledge and an overeagerness to compromise.
Mr.
Kim said that he supported the Administration's efforts and that ties between Seoul and Washington were strong.
But Mr.
Kim directly attacked Washington's basic stance in the discussions with North Korea as naive and overly flexible.
He said that the North Korean Government was on the verge of an economic and political crisis that could sweep it from power, and that Washington should therefore stiffen its position in pressing Pyongyang to abandon its suspected nuclear weapons program.


New Publisher At New Yorker
Diane Silberstein, publisher of Elle, was named senior vice president and publisher of The New Yorker yesterday.
She replaces Larry Burstein, who left in August to become publishing director of Esquire.
Before she joined Elle in 1992, Ms.
Silberstein was advertising director of Allure.
She has also held positions at Vogue and Glamour.
At The New Yorker, which is published by Advance Publications, she will report to Thomas A. Florio, president of the magazine.


Looser Cable Pricing Rules Weighed to Spur Investment
The Federal Communications Commission, which during the last year has infuriated cable television companies by imposing strict price regulation, may soon give them freedom to price new services as high as the market will bear.
Commission officials are now circulating a proposal that would let cable operators charge what they want for new channels or services as long as they did not dilute programming protected under current price restrictions.


Pataki Raising Money Faster Than Cuomo
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has spent more than his Republican rival, State Senator George E. Pataki, in the campaign for governor, but Mr.
Pataki is raising money more quickly, according to campaign filings released yesterday.
The filings show that both candidates now have roughly $2 million in cash to spend on television commercials and get-out-the-vote operations in preparation for the election Nov. 8.


Spreading Its Wings


A Business Gathering Focuses on Crime
Usually, the annual meeting of the Business Council, a gathering of nearly 300 current and past heads of the country's largest corporations, is devoted to hearing reports on the economy and playing spirited rounds of golf.
But this year, amid talk of handicaps and the direction of interest rates, another subject is being highlighted: crime and violence.
"I think most of us feel that violence and crime is a real issue for the country, if not the No. 1 issue," said D. Wayne Calloway, chairman and chief executive of Pepsico, who organized this year's meeting.
"This is an attempt to get some understanding and for all of us to get some common basis to talk about the issue."


Labor Report For Region Is Mixed
The unemployment rate in New York State fell to 6.2 percent in September, a low for the year, from 6.9 percent in August, according to Federal data released yesterday.
But in New Jersey, where the rate had fallen to a 1994 low of 6 percent in August, there was an increase, to 6.7 percent, in September.
In New York City, the unemployment rate sank to 7.2 percent in September, a sharp decline from 8.5 percent in August.
The improvement occurred in part because many summer job seekers, including large numbers of students, returned to class and removed themselves from the job market in September.


Justices Take On Welfare Benefits Case
The Supreme Court added important cases on welfare benefits and health care regulation to its docket today, insuring that the Court as well as Congress will be a focus of attention as debate on these subjects proceeds over the coming months.
Accepting an appeal by the State of California, the Justices agreed to decide whether states could limit welfare benefits for recent arrivals from other states.
A 1992 California law, which was declared unconstitutional by a Federal appeals court earlier this year, limits newcomers for the first year of their California residence to the welfare benefits they would have received in their home states.


Crews on L.I.E. Rush to Reopen Lanes Closed In Fiery Crash
As workers began rebuilding a Long Island Expressway overpass severely damaged by a gasoline tanker explosion, state officials estimated today that traffic would be flowing in both directions sometime over the weekend.
The reopening of the westbound lanes at Exit 53 at 4:15 A.M. today spared New York City-bound commuters the nightmare of a morning rush without the full use of the Island's key highway.
But state officials said they could not reopen the eastbound lanes in time for the evening rush because they had to reinforce the steel-and-concrete overpass, parts of which buckled from a fire that reached 2,000 degrees.


Corrections
An article in Business Day last Saturday, about a $1 billion loss at Mitsubishi Bank Ltd. of Japan, misstated an estimate of the cost of shoring up two finance companies affiliated with the bank.
When Walter Altherr, a banking analyst at Merrill Lynch Japan, estimated the cost at $2 billion, he was referring to two rescue operations in the last 12 months, not just the one announced last week.


Haitian Bill Doesn't Exempt Military From Prosecution
The Haitian Senate approved an amnesty proposal today that would force Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras and other military leaders to relinquish power without receiving any exemption from prosecution for many of the crimes they are accused of committing.
The bill adopted 9-0 this afternoon, with one senator abstaining, was identical to a measure approved Thursday night by the lower house of Haiti's National Assembly, the Chamber of Deputies.
It would allow Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to pardon those accused of political offenses, but it does not extend to crimes like murder, rape, torture and other human rights abuses.


Andre Racz, 77, Artist and Professor
Andre Racz, who taught painting and sculpture at Columbia University for three decades and who was known for his drawings and etchings, died on Sept. 29 at the Englewood Hospital in Englewood, N.J.
He was 77 and had homes in Demarest, N.J., and Vinalhaven, Me.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son, Andres, of Santiago, Chile.


Syracuse Finds Success in Humility and Unity
As Albert Fortunato laid out shirts and ties one afternoon this week, he gave an impressive soliloquy about Syracuse football.
First of all, he said, last fall was a disaster.


Antarctica's Ozone Layer Is Threatened By Depletion
Once again a seasonal hole the size of North America has appeared in the protective ozone layer above Antarctica, allowing a flood of dangerous ultraviolet radiation to reach the ground.
But scientists see some consolation in the fact that the depth and extent of the hole are no greater than at the same time last year.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration reported yesterday that various American instruments aboard a Russian spacecraft, on high-altitude balloons and on the ground had detected a springtime ozone hole over Antarctica, in which the concentration of atmospheric ozone has fallen to 90 Dobson units from the normal concentration of about 250.
Dobson units are a measure of the ability of the atmosphere to absorb certain wavelengths of light, especially in the ultraviolet range.


Outraged Autobiographies Make a Collage of Gay Life
If any American artist in the past decade can be said to have lobbed verbal hand grenades into the culture, it is David Wojnarowicz, the New York-based artist and poet who died of AIDS two years ago.
In his writings, paintings, photographs and installations, Wojnarowicz transmuted his rage as an H.I.V.-positive gay man into explosively visceral polemics that railed against society's hatred of homosexuality, his fatal illness and governmental indifference.
Wojnarowicz's autobiographical books, "Close to the Knives" and "Memories That Smell Like Gasoline," which inspired Steve McLean's film, "Postcards From America," evoke a life of desperate alienation.
A runaway child from an abusive father, Wojnarowicz was a New York street hustler in his early teens.
As an adult, he pursued anonymous sex in situations often fraught with physical peril.


Yankees Keep Elster
The Yankees announced yesterday that they had retained their option on shortstop KEVIN ELSTER for next season.
Elster, 30, was hitless in his 20 at-bats as a Yankee before incurring inflammation in his right shoulder and going on the disabled list July 7.
Elster is viewed as a possible backup shortstop if 20-year-old DEREK JETER makes it to the majors.


Giuliani Plans to Require Work From Able Welfare Recipients
New York City will soon require thousands of able-bodied childless people who receive welfare benefits to work for the city, doing jobs like snow removal, street cleaning and park maintenance, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday.
The Mayor also said he would begin a much tougher review of the eligibility of these welfare recipients, who are in a program known as Home Relief.
The state-mandated program provides benefits to 244,000 people in New York City who are not raising children.


Recycled Material Is Finding A New and Lucrative Market
Recycling is being transformed from a gesture to help the environment into a solid business.
Used paper, cardboard and newspaper that had recently languished in warehouses are now hot commodities.
The reasons: an economic recovery that has increased demand for raw materials, and a commitment by manufacturers to build the mills that can process recycled products.
The surge in demand has sent prices soaring, and has made it more likely that what is rescued from the trash at home and in the office will find a valuable use somewhere else in this country.
In the past, much of the trash collected for recycling was exported because of low domestic prices.


Minority-Owned Firm Has 3 New Offerings
Brown Capital Management, one of the nation's largest minority-owned investment managers, has begun three funds with investment approaches ranging from conservative to aggressive.
Eddie C. Brown, the firm's founder and a former portfolio manager for T. Rowe Price, is managing the BCM balanced fund, equity fund and small company fund.


In High-Octane Gas, We Pay for Excess; Oxygenates Safe
To the Editor:
The concerns over alleged health hazards of oxygenated fuels expressed by Jay Taylor (letter, Oct. 1) are not supported by any of the extensive health studies conducted by the Environmental Protection Agency and others.


Carjack Survivor Relives Terror at Trial


Book Put Up for Award Is Kept From Reviewers
For the first time anyone can remember, a book that has not yet been published and that has been withheld by its publisher from reviewers has been nominated for the National Book Award.
The book, "Strange Justice: The Selling of Clarence Thomas," is an analysis of the process by which Judge Thomas was named to the Supreme Court, including the hearings before the Senate confirmation committee that examined the charges of sexual harassment brought against Judge Thomas by the Oklahoma law professor Anita Hill.


Small Strides in Curbing Arms
By concluding useful agreements with China and Russia, the Clinton Administration has made modest progress in stopping the spread of nuclear arms and missiles.
But it is missing an opportunity for making even greater strides.
This week the Administration wrung the first explicit pledge from China not to export M-11 missiles and technology to Pakistan or anywhere else.
China also agreed to join talks to ban production of fissile material for bomb-making.


Bridge
The diagramed deal is a constructed one, and the reader may wish to consider what is interesting about it before reading on.
It was created many years ago by Waldemar von Zedtwitz, an aristocrat among bridge players who died in Hawaii 10 years ago this month.
When he was a baby, his father, a German Baron, was killed in a yachting accident.
On his mother's side, he was descended from John C. Breckenridge, who was Vice President of the United States just before the Civil War.
As a young man, he served in the German Army in World War I, then settled in New York.
He eventually won a long legal battle to recover his mother's fortune, which had been impounded because he was an enemy alien.


Labor Relations Board to Investigate City's Role in Negotiations on Legal Aid Contract
The National Labor Relations Board is investigating whether the Giuliani administration violated Federal labor law by insisting that the Legal Aid Society include a no-strike clause in its new contract with the city, a Federal labor official said yesterday.
Daniel Silverman, the regional director of the Labor Relations Board, said in an interview that his agency had begun an inquiry into the city's role in the tumultuous contract negotiations between the society and its lawyers.
The lawyers are employees of the Legal Aid Society, not of the city, Mr.
Silverman said.


Catch of the Day


Bankruptcy Bill Passed By Senate
The Senate approved today the first comprehensive overhaul of the nation's bankruptcy laws in 16 years, setting new rules that will make it easier for individuals to repay their debts on installment plans and harder for big corporate debtors to avoid their creditors.
The House passed the same bill on Wednesday night, so the Senate vote in the early hours of this morning sends the bill to President Clinton.
Administration officials said that the President planned to sign it into law.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.77
2.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.89
4.94
2.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.32
5.37
3.06
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.68
7.76
5.25
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.90
7.95
5.92
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.76
8.80
6.87
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.70
6.70
5.41
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Free Concert in Honor Of Archbishop Tutu
A free concert to honor Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu is to take place at 5 P.M. today at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Morningside Heights.
The concert is titled "Rainbow People of God," the name of the Archbishop's book, which is to be published this month by Doubleday.


Swiss Authorities Seek Cult's 2 Top Leaders on Homicide Charges in Followers' Deaths
Amid mounting evidence that some of the 48 members of a religious sect found dead here on Wednesday were murdered and did not commit suicide, the Swiss police said today that the two top leaders of the group were wanted on suspicion of premeditated homicide and arson.
The decision suggested that the police believed that the sect leader, Luc Jouret, and his associate, Joseph di Mambro, were not among the dead even though only 38 of the victims have so far been identified.


Limited Amnesty in Haiti
The Haitian Senate approved a narrow amnesty for military leaders, which is expected to increase pressure on them to leave the country when they stop down.
Page 4.


METRO DIGEST
GIULIANI PLANS WORK FOR WELFARE New York City will soon require thousands of able-bodied, childless people who receive welfare benefits to work for the city, doing everything from snow removal to park maintenance, Mayor Giuliani said.
Page 1.
The inspiration for Westchester County's workfare program was a slew of dead, smelly fish called mossbunkers.
Page 26.
CUOMO BATTLES FOR QUEENS VOTES Governor Cuomo had no trouble persuading his borough to send him to Albany once, twice, even three times.
But as he requests a fourth term, he is finding that his homely expression about trust and doubt carries a double meaning, for there is no longer much enthusiasm for Mario Cuomo in Queens.
He will probably win the borough again next month, both professional and amateur analysts predict.
But he may do so by default, and with a far more slender margin than he has previously enjoyed.
Page 1.
Governor Cuomo has spent more than Senator Pataki, but Mr.
Pataki is raising money quicker, according to campaign filings.
Page 28.
The contest between Governor Cuomo and Senator Pataki remains close, according to recently released polls.
Page 28.
The two principal candidates for New York State attorney general clashed on just about every subject during their debate.
Page 29.
NEW YORK CITY  LEGAL AID DISPUTE UNDER INVESTIGATION The National Labor Relations Board is investigating whether the Giuliani administration violated Federal labor law by pressing the Legal Aid Society to include a no-strike clause in its new contract with the city, a Federal labor official said.
Page 27.
BICYCLIST IS ARRESTED IN STABBING A brisk-pedaling man on a fat-tire mountain bike was arrested after he stabbed a 32-year-old singer walking down a street in midtown Manhattan, then rode off into the night, the police said.
The cyclist is a suspect in two other pedestrian stabbings in the last two weeks.
Page 27.
A BRIGHT IDEA AT CITY HALL Into the relentless gloom of New York City's budget problems has come this bright idea: Light bulbs at City Hall are being changed.
Workers replaced all the 90-watt incandescent bulbs in the five chandeliers in City Hall's lobby.
In their place went cheaper-to-use 30-watt fluorescent bulbs, which are projected to save as much as $1,400 a year.
Page 27.
REGION  KODAK IS FINED FOR TOXIC LEAKS Facing a Federal lawsuit, Eastman Kodak Company has agreed to pay a $5 million fine and spend tens of millions more to repair sewers and cut the use of toxic chemicals at its sprawling manufacturing plant in Rochester, the Environmental Protection Agency announced.
Page 29.
SURVIVOR RECOUNTS FATAL CARJACKING The only witness and survivor of a deadly carjacking recounted for a Rockland County Court jury how he was able to witness the execution-style shooting of his best friend last January near the Nanuet Mall.
Page 29.
Chronicle....24  About New York by David Gonzalez....27  Holiday schedule....27


2 Knee Operations Later, Emtman's on Solid Footing
In 1965, in the first preseason game of Joe Namath's rookie season, Pete Perreault, an offensive guard, suffered torn knee cartilage.
When the team returned home at 2 A.M., the last people off the plane were Perreault and Dr.
James Nicholas, the Jets' orthopedic surgeon.
They headed to a hospital for surgery.
"I'll be out 10 to 12 weeks," Perreault said.
"I'm lucky. If it was a ligament, it would be a year or more or forever."


Excerpts From Clinton's News Conference on His Programs
Following are President Clinton's opening statement and excerpts from his news conference at the White House today, as transcribed by the Federal Information Systems Corporation, a private transcription service:
Ladies and gentlemen, 20 months ago I came here to make a start to make America work for ordinary citizens again, to take on some tough issues too long ignored, to get our economic house in order.
There have been some tough fights along the way, but I believe they were the right fights for our future.
We came here with an economic strategy that was comprehensive and direct: reduce the deficit, expand trade, increase investment in people and technology and reinvent the Government to do more with less.
We pursued this strategy with discipline.
Now we have fresh evidence that the national economic program we put into place last year is beginning to work for America.


Fish Story Ends in 'Workfare' and Sweet Smell of Success
The inspiration for Westchester County's so-called workfare program -- which Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani wants to copy in New York City -- was a slew of dead, smelly fish called mossbunkers.
When the fishkill hit the shores of Rye, Mamaroneck and Larchmont some years ago, county officials thought about who they could assign to clean up the mess -- and had a brainstorm.
Why not the single, able-bodied people receiving welfare from the county?


Unemployment Falls to 5.9%, Lowest in 4 Years
The economy generated solid job growth in September as the unemployment rate fell to 5.9 percent, the lowest level in four years, the Labor Department reported today.
Hiring was substantial enough to swell payrolls by 239,000 and to indicate that the economy was expanding only a bit less briskly than during the unsustainably robust first half of the year.
Payroll gains were revised upward for July and August.


NEW YORKERS &amp; COMPANY
Rikers Island Project Aims To Keep Everybody Safe
A Manhattan management construction company, Lehrer McGovern Bovis, has submitted the winning bid to modernize the Rikers Island fire safety system.
"Obviously it's going to be a challenging job," said Joseph J. Monaco, a senior vice president, "because it's a prison."


Keeping Reserves Sound
THE lobby is shabby.
The roofs will need replacing within a year or so.
The steps to the clubhouse are chipped.
Even the entry sign by the front gate is beginning to look battered and worn.
If it sounds familiar it's because more and more condominiums and homeowner associations are facing a structural midlife crisis.
After several decades of wear and tear, they're beginning to fall apart.
Even worse, many of their residents are discovering that the reserve funds originally set up to take care of the natural aging process are falling woefully behind actual needs.


Life Is Just a Bowl of Rhubarb Crisp (And So Easy!)
MARTHA STEWART IS CUTting up.
Maybe it's because she has spent three hours sprinkling fistfuls of dried rose petals and lavender blossoms into little sachet bags over and over in front of a television crew crammed into her country kitchen.
Or maybe it's because she has forgotten that she is wearing a hidden microphone.
Whatever the reason, Ms.
Stewart, who has inspired legions of women to tie leek ribbons around their lamb chops and dip chocolate truffles in gold leaf, is drolly parodying her image as Our Lady of Gracious Living.
"If you really want to be an obnoxious house guest, take your hostess a pie kit," she deadpans, displaying a basket of fresh peaches, a porcelain pie dish, a rolling pin, a frozen pie crust and a handwritten recipe card an assistant arranges before her.
"It will force her to bake you a pie." The crew cracks up.


Rwanda Asks Quick Start Of Tribunal
The President of Rwanda made strong appeals this week for the quick installation of an international tribunal in Rwanda to try those accused of crimes against humanity over the last year of civil strife.
The establishment of the tribunal has been stalled in the Security Council.
In a speech to the General Assembly on Thursday and at a news conference on Friday, the Rwandan President, Pasteur Bizimungu, said further delays could lead to acts of vengeance for massacres against ethnic minority Tutsi by Hutu-dominated militias.
Without an international tribunal, Rwanda may have to begin trials on its own, Mr.
Bizimungu said.
More than 6,000 Rwandans are already in custody, charged with atrocities that began last April.


Peggie J. Kerby, Thatcher G. Brown
Peggie Jane Kerby, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Kerby of Santa Barbara, Calif., was married there yesterday to Thatcher Gihon Brown, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thatcher M. Brown 3d of New York.
The Rev.
Hazen Simpson performed the ceremony at the Faith Baptist Church.


After Frantic Maneuvering, Senate Breaks Filibuster and Passes California Desert Measure
Long-suffering Democrats, after weeks of being trammeled by the opposition, managed today to break a Republican-led filibuster on a piece of major legislation, passing a bill to protect the California desert.
The effort required the rerouting of several Senators who had already headed home to begin their campaigns, and a crucial vote was held up for several tense minutes as the lawmakers awaited the arrival of Senator Carol Moseley-Braun, who was locked in her garage.
She finally escaped, hailed a cab, raced to the Capitol and cast the deciding vote to break the filibuster.


Boyz II Men at the Head of the Class
THE FOUR SINGERS IN BOYZ II Men come across as the good boys of rhythm-and-blues.
Individually and collectively, Wanya Morris, Nathan Morris (no relation), Michael McCary and Shawn Stockman are polite, sincere and respectful; they are neat and even color-coordinated.
They seem almost too good to be true, just the kind of fresh-faced young men a lot of mothers might wish for their daughters.
Their dazzling success in the record industry doesn't hurt.
Boyz II Men's refinement of doo-wop's close harmonies and unbridled romance has quickly taken the quartet to the head of the current class of rhythm-and-blues vocal groups and, along the way, helped rejuvenate the Motown record label.


Study Says True Santa Fe Style Is Bold, Not Faded
Under a microscope at Los Alamos National Laboratory that is routinely used to study human DNA, Keith Bakker, a furniture conservator trained at the Smithsonian Institution, slips specks of wood to probe a different sort of mystery: New Mexico's colonial past.
His findings are surprising museum curators and furniture and crafts experts.
Mr.
Bakker says he has discovered that the Santa Fe style -- that rough-hewn, faintly tinted, gently dilapidated look that has exploded over the last decade into an estimated $1.5 billion Southwest furniture market -- is based on fantasy rather than fact, its look a product of the New Mexican sun and an esthetic misunderstanding by tenderfoot, romantic Easterners.


Chili in Season
ARIZONA 206 *** (212) 838-0440; 206 East 60th Street; $$$; all major credit cards


Raising Money in Designer Style
IMAGINE, Albert Hadley, the legendary designer of the Manhattan-based interior decorating firm Parish-Hadley, collaborating with unknowns on a project already generating a feeding frenzy in the design press.
Bright, wild colors, magical kingdom animals, diminutive paper plates and plastic -- these are not the elements normally associated with the elegant, timeless interiors Mr.
Hadley has executed for royal and society families.
No, this project represents a new direction for the Fairfield County resident: an unprecedented collaboration that is likely to start a trend.


A Pair of Towers Trapped in Gray Flannel Suits
ALTHOUGH THE UNITED STATES Courthouse and the Federal Office Building, two new projects now nearing completion just off Foley Square, will not be finished until later this year, it's not too soon to examine their impact on the lower Manhattan cityscape.
The two buildings have more in common than their location.
Nearly identical in height (just under 30 stories) and similarly clad with classically inspired gray stone facades, the buildings propose an image of dignity for Federal architecture.
And both end up partly trapped within the image they project.
Watching the stone go up on these buildings over the past few months, I've experienced something like the distraction that has overtaken me more than once while watching televised hearings of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
It's hard to pay attention to what the senators are talking about after you start to focus on their haircuts, their lapels, their expressions.
Couldn't they devote just one morning session to a discussion of wardrobe and grooming?
It might actually shed some light on their handling of more important issues.


Growing Up Female
To the Editor:
Cathy Young reviewed Judy Mann's book "The Difference: Growing Up Female in America" on Aug. 21.
I take great exception to Ms.
Young's comment in reference to the wage gap between men and women:
"When upper-middle-class teen-age girls sit around griping about 'getting a bad deal' (unaware that, for instance, the wage gap they lament has almost closed for young women), Ms. Mann delights in their 'healthy anger.' "


Vows; Virginia Haven, William Dwight
WILLIAM DWIGHT took great delight in telling friends he was going to marry a younger woman.
And he did.
Mr.
Dwight is 91, and Virginia Haven, whom he took as his bride here on Oct. 1, celebrated her 90th birthday in June.


In This Puzzle No Answer Seems Right
With the election for mayor a month away, The Washington Post is faced with three choices, all unpleasant.
One alternative would be for the paper, whose endorsement has often been the deciding factor in local political contests, to endorse former Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr., who handily won the Democratic primary last month.
But The Post reviled Mr.
Barry in its endorsement of one of his opponents in the primary and again in an editorial three days after the vote.


Julie E. Spivack, Paul Reiferson
Dr.
Julie Ellen Spivack, a fellow in gastroenterology at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, is to be married today to Paul Jay Reiferson, an associate at James D. Wolfensohn Inc., an investment bank.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Richard Chapin is to perform the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 30, graduated magna cum laude from Yale University and received her M.D. degree from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
She is a daughter of Carol and Dr.
Morton Spivack of Riverdale, the Bronx.
The bride's father is a professor of medicine and pathology at Einstein College, in the Bronx.
Her mother is the director of the Riverdale Temple Nursery School.


'Made in Japan' (Without the Inferiority Complex)
Born in the west, transistor radios, plastic robots and plywood chairs are among the scores of products significantly transformed by Japan.
And the excellence of many of these items has long been recognized by museums and the marketplace.
Now, finally, comes the first comprehensive review of the subject anywhere, in "Japanese Design: A Survey Since 1950," an exhibition of 250 objects -- electronics, toys, furniture, fashions, automobiles, motorcycles and posters -- at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, through Nov. 20.
For those who recall the time a half century ago when "made in Japan" meant cheap items, poorly crafted, the displays here may be a revelation.
Following World War II, Japanese goods changed radically in quality, going from shoddy to superior as the American occupation gave Japanese industry a jump start and spurred an awareness of design that continues to this day.
This evolution is traced in both the show and its catalogue ($29.95).


A Vested Right
To the Editor:
In his review of "Summing Up" (Sept. 4), Yitzhak Shamir's autobiography, David B. Green misrepresents my views on the legality of Jewish settlements on the West Bank.
He says I am "virtually alone" in believing that Israel's legal claim to those territories is stronger than that of any other possible claimant, a view Stephen Schwebel of the International Court of Justice advanced some years ago.
Julius Stone, among other experts in the field, also supported this view.
The Carter Administration is the only American Administration that ever said the Israeli settlement policy was illegal.
In any event, being "virtually alone" in a professional opinion is hardly a reproach a scholar should take to heart.
His task is different.


An Open Letter to the N.H.L.'s Powers That Be
The turmoil surrounding the Rangers and the increasingly bitter National Hockey League contract negotiations raise concerns that, like baseball, the interests of the fans are being lost in a hard-nosed struggle over money.
Just what sports at its best can mean to the inhabitants of a city was shown in the days after the Stanley Cup finals when New York defied its stereotypic hard-boiled, blase image and was bathed in a sweet collective euphoria.
To show how much the cup meant to the fans on an even more personal level, permit me to recount one of the legendary "eight million stories in the 'Naked City.' "


Corrections
The Perspectives column last Sunday, about marketing apartments in Park Slope, misstated the initial taxes expected for apartments at 70 Eighth Avenue.
They are estimated to average $150 a month, not a year.


RECORD BRIEFS
Troubadour and Trouvere Songs  Russell Oberlin, countertenor; Seymour Barab, viol.
Lyrichord LEMS 8001; CD.
This reissue of a recording made in 1958 is an elegant, charming souvenir of the infancy of the modern early-music movement, the days when doublets and plumed hats were de rigueur.
Mr.
Oberlin, like many early-music performers of that era, is a musicologist and a founder of the New York Pro Musica, one of the first American groups to attempt performances of medieval and Renaissance music in a "historically correct" style.


Virginia Extends Park Camping Season
In response to public demand, Virginia State Parks are extending their cabin and camping season until December for the first time in five years.
In addition, the minimum stay has now been reduced from a week to two days for the rest of this year.
Many cabins have been renovated recently and all available cabins are now heated.


A Grand Goodbye
Celebrating George Weissman, who has retired as chairman of Lincoln Center, at the State Theater, Oct. 3.


Corrections
A photograph last week with an article about Frank Rainone, director of the film "Me and the Mob," was printed in error.
The picture showed a group of people unrelated to the article.


A Preacher With a Dark Side Led Cultists to Swiss Chalets
In the end, the full truth about Luc Jouret may become known only after Swiss pathologists determine whether he chose to die alongside members of his esoteric sect here this week or whether he slipped away after arranging a mass murder disguised as collective suicide.
What is already known, though, is that well before 48 bodies were found dead in two Swiss villages this week, things had started to go wrong for Mr.
Jouret and his secretive Order of the Solar Temple.


Gina C. Pistone, Robert J. Plansker
Gina Celeste Pistone, a daughter of Rachael and Anthony D. Pistone of Manhasset Hills, L.I., was married yesterday in Kings Point, L.I., to Robert John Plansker, the son of Barbara and Robert G. Plansker of Hauppauge, L.I.
Msgr.
Anthony Baretta performed the ceremony at the United States Merchant Marine Academy, of which the bridegroom is a graduate.


Holiday Tomorrow
Columbus Day will be observed tomorrow.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  PARADE Today, the Hispanic Columbus Day Parade begins at 12:30 P.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street and proceeds north to 72d Street and east to Third Avenue.


Pushing for the Free Trade Pact From 1,500 Feet Down
FIFTEEN hundred feet under the sagebrush of the southwestern Wyoming desert here lie the world's biggest soda ash mines.
One mine alone has 2,400 miles of tunnels, nearly five times the combined length of the streets of Manhattan.
So plentiful are the deposits that geologists estimate they could supply the entire world for 2,300 years at current rates of consumption.
Soda ash is similar to baking soda and serves as the raw material for glass, toothpaste, powdered soaps and laundry detergents.


A New Era for the Celtics
M.
L.
Carr, who once waved sweaty towels at the end of the bench, was airing dirty laundry as the most well-leveraged member of the Boston Celtics' brass.
Friday was the first day of training camp at Brandeis University, and already Xavier McDaniel was volunteering to break the logjam at small forward, if Carr could be so kind as to find another place for him to go.
Dino Radja was saying he wanted a long-term extension of his contract, and soon.
Reporters were demanding from Carr definitive news on the condition of Pervis Ellison's knees and Dominique Wilkins's back.


Renee Keller, Michael Johnson
Renee Susan Keller, an associate editor of Parade magazine in New York, and Michael Johnson, a quality control manager for the magazine, were married yesterday at Holy Cross Church in the Bronx.
The Rev.
Michael Tyson performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.


Game Will Go On
To the Sports Editor:
William C. Rhoden's column "Game Stays; Ballplayers Come and Go," (The Times, Sept. 17) is a refreshing and welcome change from the almost unanimous opinion of the print and broadcast news media that baseball is all but dead, that the greedy owners and players have dealt the game a mortal blow.
As Ken Burns pointed out in his television documentary, there is nothing new in this year's confrontation: player-owner animosity is as old as the professional game itself.
I agree with Rhoden's column: baseball is bigger than either the players or owners.
I saw my first game in 1936 -- the Giants-Dodgers, Hubbell versus Mungo.
I have been playing, coaching, umpiring and, most important, watching baseball ever since.
Today each game is as fresh and new to me as the first one almost 60 years ago.
My son and now my grandsons share this enthusiasm.


Ruth Laredo to Open Season Of Chappaqua Chamber Group
THE Chappaqua Chamber Orchestra offers its first concert of the season next Saturday at 8 P.M. at the First Congregational Church.
The music director, James Sadewhite, has chosen Handel's "Water Music" Suite and Mozart's "Serenata Notturna" to preface a guest performance by Ruth Laredo of another Mozart masterwork, the Piano Concerto in C (K. 467).
The number to call for more information is 769-4890.
"For 70 years now, we have been serving the community," said Anthony Aibel, the 26-year-old music director of the Westchester Symphony, who has chosen to begin the orchestra's anniversary season with Beethoven's Ninth Symphony.
The concert, which takes place at the Performing Arts Center at Purchase College next Saturday, begins at 8 P.M.


The World: Cardoso, the Global Salesman; Brazil Thinks Big, Again
FOR only the second time since 1960, Brazil held presidential elections last week.
But voting in the hemisphere's second largest democracy -- which brought to power Fernando Henrique Cardoso, a former Foreign Minister and Finance Minister with big plans -- failed to draw any television crews from the hemisphere's largest democracy, the United States.
Without a military coup to grab headlines or a nuclear bomb to inspire fear, Brazil is huge in just about everything but the amount of outside interest it generates.
It has always been thus, it seems.
Regardless of the global aspirations its leaders proclaimed and the country's obvious potential in resources, Brazil long failed to find the right political structure or, when it did, the right person to lead it from the third world to the world stage.
First there were two decades of clunky military rule, then a transition to direct voting leading to the election of a youthful, smooth-talker who proved too smooth -- that is to say corrupt -- followed finally by his replacement with a safe but lackluster caretaker.


Maureen Nolan, Stephen Fearon
Maureen Mildred Nolan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Nolan of Massapequa Park, L.I., was married yesterday to Stephen John Fearon Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fearon of Riverdale, the Bronx.
The Rev.
James R. Dolan, a Roman Catholic priest who is an uncle of the bride, officiated in the Chapel of the Immaculate Conception at the College of Mount St.
Vincent in Riverdale.


Real Lightweights
'They're not machines," one pilot of real airplanes says. "They're toys."But as many as 30,000 people fly them anyway. The contraptions are called "ultralight" aircraft because their weight does not exceed 254 pounds empty, with a fuel capacity of no more than five gallons. They cost $4,000 and up. You don't need a pilot's license. And there's nothing to protect you if you crash.
Some of the ultralights like the Pterodactyl above, one of the first of the breed, look almost like airplanes, with a fixed wing and a seat for the pilot.
Others are really powered parachutes.
Sometimes the propeller is strapped to the flier's back.
Or it may be attached to the back of a three-wheeled buggy.


Erica T. Stracher, Jonathan E. Fields
Erica Terri Stracher, the daughter of Drs.
Alfred and Dorothy Stracher of Roslyn, L.I., was married last evening to Jonathan Eliot Fields, the son of Gilbert and Anita Fields of New York.
Rabbi Lee Friedlander officiated at Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.
Mrs.
Fields, 28, and her husband, 30, graduated from Amherst College.
She received a master's degree in early childhood and elementary education from the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father is a professor and the chairman of the biochemistry department at the State University Health Science Center at Brooklyn.
Her mother is a professor of education at Dowling College in Oakdale, L.I.


The World; The Iron Fist in Haiti Begins to Lose Its Grip
THE military apparatus that has terrorized Haiti for three years watched resentfully but helplessly last week as the balance of power shifted decisively to supporters of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the country's exiled President.
A raid by American troops on the headquarters of the paramilitary group that has done much of the junta's dirtiest work started the process, which accelerated when the despised chief of the national police fled ignominiously into exile in the Dominican Republic.
Equally important, Haiti's once-spineless Parliament approved a limited amnesty plan designed to force Gen.
Raoul Cedras and his associates to step down next week, as required by the agreement they signed last month, without the sweeping pardon they had anticipated.
Instead, Father Aristide, who has promised reconciliation tempered by justice when he returns to Haiti by Oct. 15, was empowered to grant the political amnesty he deems appropriate, and General Cedras was under pressure to join his police chief, Michel Francois, in exile.
Praise for G.I.'s
The marked change in the political atmosphere was greeted with jubilation by ordinary Haitians, who began hauling out old Aristide banners and posters that have been in storage since the Sept. 30, 1991, coup and cautiously tested their new-found ability to exercise their rights with gatherings in the streets and pointed criticisms of the military in the press.
There was also widespread praise for the American soldiers who are the guarantors of the new, more open climate.
But the festive mood was sullied when it was revealed that Emmanuel Constant, leader of the paramilitary group Fraph, which was responsible for hundreds of government-ordered murders and rapes, had been a paid informer for the C.I.A. and was on its payroll when his group committed some of its worst crimes.


A Sampling of the Mediterranean World
COOKING from the Mediterranean has never been more popular than it is now.
The food of that region is showing up with increasing frequency on menus across the country, where restaurants with Mediterranean themes have been opening, and a plethora of cookbooks has appeared on the subject.
It all started two years ago when a group of scientists, doctors and nutritionists got together at Harvard and cited the countries of the Mediterranean for their low incidence of heart disease and cancer.
Vegetables play an enormous part in this cooking, as do grains, nuts and parsley.
Meat has a secondary role and is not served in large quantities.
And, of course, olive oil is used much more than butter.


Only Daly Can Save Himself
John Daly is in a deep hole right now.
He has fallen into a ditch of his own digging.
This might seem like a bad thing.
It is not.
In fact, it is a good thing.
As anyone with even a passing knowledge of addictive personalities will attest, there often is no improvement until the addict hits rock bottom.
This might not quite be rock bottom for Daly, an admitted alcoholic.
But it is the closest he has come to it since that day in 1991 when he burst into our collective consciousness with his storybook victory at the P.G.A.
Championship.
After that, regardless of the problem, Daly was absolved by his public, his managers, his sponsors, his friends.
There were fines and two suspensions, but they seemed only to somehow increase his popularity.


Prestige Photography Michael W. Sexton, Julie J. Chanchien
Julie Jamie Chanchien, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Tsunie Chanchien of Potomac, Md., was married yesterday to Michael Wang Sexton, a son of Sherman and Moon-shia Sexton of Washington.
The Rev.
Roger Bowen performed the Episcopal ceremony at the National Cathedral in Washington.
Mrs.
Sexton, 25, is a financial services associate at Coopers &amp; Lybrand Consulting in New York.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University.
Her father is a physician in Berwyn Heights, Md.


Topics of The Times; No Swearing Allowed
Who says you can't legislate morality?
The homey borough of Raritan, N.J., may soon enact an ordinance that prohibits "rude or indecent behavior," including profanity or "making insulting remarks or comments to others" on its quiet streets.
The ordinance would outlaw not only the vagrancy other municipalities try to ban, but also "unnecessary congregating in groups . . . to the annoyance of other persons."
In short, no cussin' on Main Street, or any other unusual conduct the Raritan council might be worried about.
Is there a problem that needs this remedy in that hamlet of 5,800 souls, mostly senior citizens?
"Not now," says Mayor Anthony DeCicco, "This is just an ounce of prevention."


Eve Rittenberg and Jeffrey Liebman
Eve Rittenberg, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen Rittenberg of Larchmont, N.Y., is to be married today to Jeffrey Blackburn Liebman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lance M. Liebman of New York.
Rabbi Carole Balin is to perform the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride, 26, is a research assistant at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and she received a master's degree in clinical psychology from Boston University.
Her father is a psychoanalyst in Larchmont.
Her mother, Barbara Rittenberg, is a ceramics artist.


Check It Out: Multiplication by Offshoot
A FRIEND is noted for her spectacular displays of clivia, grown in large clay pots around one side of a swimming pool.
The first time this scene was visited, the clivia was in full bloom with huge orange flowers.
There were probably a dozen or more pots.
The display was dramatic, but since clivia is not one of the cheaper pot plants, also suggestive of quite an expenditure.
When asked about the considerable outlay needed to achieve the effect, my friend smiled and said, "They all came from two plants I purchased when the children started high school." They have since graduated from college, and still the clivia thrives.
Her secret?
Clivia's natural multiplication by offsets.


Indonesia Forest Fires Blanket Southeast Asia
Much of Southeast Asia is choking beneath massive clouds of thick black smoke as a result of forest fires in Indonesia that are burning out of control and have destroyed an estimated 1.4 million acres of tropical woodland.
The fires, which began in late August and are among the largest ever recorded in Asia, have spread an acrid haze over thousands of square miles of Indonesia and neighboring Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE BUCCANEERS By Edith Wharton.
Completed by Marion Mainwaring.
Penguin, $10.95.
When the author died in 1937, she left this work unfinished.
Readers were left wondering what became of Nan St.
George, a young American who made an unhappy marriage to a dull English duke and then dared to leave him.
Marion Mainwaring's addition of new chapters has resulted in "a fairy-tale novel, miraculously returned to life," Wendy Steiner said here last year.
TRAVELS WITH LIZBETH By Lars Eighner.
Fawcett Columbine, $11.
For a number of authors, homelessness has been an experiment, an experience to be tried and then written about.
For Lars Eighner, it was no literary choice.
This chronicle, selected as one of the best books of 1993 by the editors of The New York Times Book Review, describes the three years in the 1980's that Mr.
Eighner, jobless and destitute, spent on the road with his dog, a Labrador mix named Lizbeth.
Our reviewer, Jonathan Raban, said, "If there's any justice in the world it should guarantee its author a roof over his head for the rest of his days."  TROUBLE By Fay Weldon.
Penguin, $10.95.
There's plenty of it in the life of Annette Horrocks, a first-time novelist: She's pregnant and her husband, Spicer, has rejected her in favor of New Age psychotherapy and extramarital affairs.
For her humorous adventures "we must praise and thank Ms. Weldon and her wicked pen," Tama Janowitz said here last year.
EXIT INTO HISTORY: A Journey Through the New Eastern Europe By Eva Hoffman.
Penguin, $11.95.
The author investigates the cultures of six countries that used to be part of the Communist bloc, including her own homeland, Poland.
She concludes that their identities are too often reductively described.
Last year our reviewer, Robert D. Kaplan, said, "Ms. Hoffman's book provokes fresh imaginings about a part of Europe where change is just beginning to unfold."  21 SUGAR STREET By Lynn Lauber.
Norton, $10.
This first novel centers on two characters from the author's collection of short fiction, "White Girls." In 1970 Loretta Dardio, a white teen-ager in love with a black man, Luther Biggs, is forced to give up their baby daughter for adoption.
Their story is "wisely observed and well written," Mark Childress said here last year.
THE GOLDEN THIRTEEN: Recollections of the First Black Naval Officers Edited by Paul Stillwell.
Berkley, $15.
During World War II, the Navy finally allowed black men to become officers.
But such progress did little to halt racist behavior.
Last year our reviewer, William H. Honan, called these reminiscences -- from the eight survivors of the original 13 black officers and from three white commanders -- "fascinating and moving." Racial prejudice in the military is also explored in ASSAULT AT WEST POINT: The Court-Martial of Johnson Whittaker, by John F. Marszalek (Collier/Macmillan, $12), an account of the experiences of the third black man to enter the academy.
Originally titled "Court Martial," the book tells how Whittaker, a former slave, was court-martialed in 1881 for supposedly faking a brutal assault against him.
"It reads like a well-paced courtroom fiction," The Book Review said in 1973.
THREE NOVELS: The Deep, Beasts, Engine Summer By John Crowley.
Bantam, $12.95.
This volume gathers together early science fiction works by a master of the genre.
In "The Deep," John Crowley's first novel, warring societies on an Earthlike planet are visited by an emissary on a strange mission.
In 1977 our reviewer, Gerald Jonas, said, "Paraphrase is useless to convey the intensity" of the prose.
"Beasts" takes place in an anarchic future in which the United States no longer exists and a new species -- part lion, part man -- plays an important role.
The author "displays a prodigious inventiveness," Mr.
Jonas said here in 1976.
There is still another post-apocalyptic vision in "Engine Summer." In 1979 our reviewer, again Mr.
Jonas, praised its "ingenious, well-made plot."  THE CIVIL WAR By Geoffrey C. Ward, with Ric Burns and Ken Burns.
Vintage, $13.
This edition of the companion volume to the acclaimed 1990 PBS series doesn't have the photographs that appeared in the hardcover, but it faithfully reproduces the text, which includes narratives by politicians, soldiers and slaves.
It is "thoroughly researched" and "vividly written," David Haward Bain said here.
A particularly poignant passage in Civil War history is chronicled in THE LAST FULL MEASURE: The Life and Death of the First Minnesota Volunteers, by Richard Moe (Avon, $15), the story of the 262-man regiment assigned the suicidal task of stopping the huge force of Confederate soldiers who were about to divide the Union Army at Gettysburg.
Last year our reviewer, Richard E. Nich olls, called it "a vigorous, haunting celebration." Also reissued is WITHOUT CONSENT OR CONTRACT: The Rise and Fall of American Slavery, by Robert William Fogel (Norton, $14.95), which expands upon the theses of the author's 1974 book, "Time on the Cross." This history acknowledges slavery's horrors while analyzing the sometimes questionable moral practices of its abolitionist opponents.
"Mr. Fogel has the good judgment to moderate the polemical tone" of his earlier work, C. Vann Woodward said here in 1989.
TONY AND SUSAN By Austin Wright.
Warner, $5.99.
Susan Morrow's ex-husband has returned to her life: he wants her to comment on his first novel.
Last year our reviewer, Brendan Bernhard, called this fiction "a brain-teasing page turner." LAUREL GRAEBER


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


Savers Suffer At Most Banks
ONCE again, the American economy is showing surprising strength, with the unemployment rate down to 5.9 percent.
Wall Street thinks it is all but inevitable that the Federal Reserve will be pushing short-term interest rates up again.
Again?
If your money is in bank money market accounts -- you remember, the accounts that were introduced a decade ago as the alternative to money market funds -- you may not have noticed anything happening on the interest rate front.


Giant Keeps Coverage Behind Him
It is what makes Chris Calloway good, what has given him the inspiration and drive to go from a Plan B free agent to an up-and-coming star.
It is what makes someone who stands 5 feet 9 inches and weighs about 185 pounds knock bigger men off their feet.
It flows through him, powering him, energizing him to the point where, despite not being that fast by pro football standards, he seems to always find some way to get behind the secondary.
It is confidence that drives Chris Calloway.
So do not be surprised by what he is about to say, a statement made this week after he was asked if he feels he is as good as any wide receiver in the National Football League.
Any wide receiver.


Not So Hasty on Surgery to Prevent Stroke; Another Approach
To the Editor:
Re your Oct. 1 front-page article on preventing stroke by surgically removing plaque accumulations in the carotid arteries: It may be possible to allow the lesions that cause the plaque to accumulate to heal, thus substantially reducing plaque throughout the body without invasive procedures.
Millions of people with heart and circulation problems might benefit.


Commercial Property/Disaster Recovery; A Business Whose Clients Hope Never to Use It
FIVE years ago, Exchange Resources opened a center in Minneapolis where financial traders could go if their workplaces were hit by a fire, flood or other disaster.
The center had 440 seats, complete with desktop computers, Reuters and Quotron machines -- tools of the trader's trade.
"It was the field of dreams, except we built it and nobody came," recalled Kenneth Israel, the company's founder.


Neither Rain, Nor Snow, Nor Residence in Brooklyn . . .
The newly appointed Brooklyn Postmaster has vowed to correct a year's pattern of lost, undelivered and late mail that has infuriated business owners and residents in some sections of Brooklyn, hundreds of whom appealed to their Congressman to intervene.
Since early 1993, the office of Representative Edolphus Towns has been swamped with letters from people living or working in neighborhoods from downtown Brooklyn to Red Hook complaining about days without service, rude station managers and Christmas cards that arrived in the spring.


Eric Lopez, 24, Dies; Fought Rare Disease
Eric Lopez, a leader in the fight to raise public awareness of epidermolysis bullosa, the rare, debilitating skin disease from which he suffered, died yesterday at his home on Staten Island.
He was 24.
The cause was kidney and liver failure due to complications of the disease, said his mother, Arlene Pessar.


The Piano
It was a voice crying, well, actually singing, in the wilderness, and it had accompaniment too -- piano, violins, cellos, viola and clarinet.
The occasion was the Moab Music Festival in Utah last month, one of whose events was a concert at the Grotto, above, in Canyonlands National Park on the Colorado River.
The spot is reachable only by boat.
So the piano, other instruments, performers, crew and an audience of 100 all had to be transported by jet boat 30 miles from the town of Moab to the concert site.
The piano, shown being tested above, was taken apart for the boat trip, then reassembled at the site.


I.B.M. Software's Description Is Dispuited
To the Editor:
"Having a Network Nightmare? Let The Software Take Over," (The Executive Computer, Sept. 18) contained several misleading statements that need to be addressed, mainly because of how critical and difficult network design and management are to businesses.
First, the statement that the Hewlett-Packard Company's Open View and I.B.M.'s Net View for the International Business Machines Corporation's AIX version of the UNIX operating software are both more narrowly focused is incorrect.
In fact, both products attempt to provide solutions for the whole spectrum of network and systems management challenges, of which design is one, albeit a very important one.


A Bare-Bones but Complete Bargain in a Lobster Dinner
THE sweet tender meat of a fresh lobster tastes no better at a fancy restaurant where it is priced at $15 or more a pound than it does at the Reef in Bayville, where a complete one-and-a-quarter-pound lobster dinner costs $7.95.
The Reef Restaurant, at 355 Bayville Avenue (628-3718), is a bare-bones kind of place that will appeal to penny-wise diners who want the most lobster for the least money.
It is half working-class bar and half neat, clean restaurant.


Disney Does Broadway
Weren't we supposed to have four sky-blotting Philip Johnson office towers where Peepland is by now?
This is a stray musing and not meant to be taken as a potshot at the city's Times Square redevelopment plans, which have many powerful supporters, including the people who are paying me to write this article.
It's just that, after years of promises, Times Square remains so . . .
Times Square-y.
True, MTV has recently expressed interest in moving to 42d Street, and a few seedy movie theaters, now boarded up, have been graced with bourgeoisie-tweaking art installations.
But whether or not bourgeoisie-tweaking art installations are an improvement over proletariat-pleasing double bills like "Penitentiary II" and "Faces of Death" is a question the reader will have to answer for him- or herself.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York House
1.
Trade: Vote to approve the rules of debate for legislation to allow the United States to participate in a new worldwide trade agreement.
Approved 298 to 123, Oct. 5.
2.
Haiti: Vote on a Republican-supported resolution that sought an immediate orderly withdrawal from Haiti and that said Congress would vote no later than Jan. 21, 1995, on requiring the President to remove all troops within 30 days.
Rejected 225 to 205, Oct. 6.
3.
Haiti: Vote on passage of a nonbinding resolution urging the withdrawal of United States troops from Haiti as soon as possible.
Approved 236 to 182, Oct. 6.
1
2
3
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
2. Gejdenson (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
3. DeLauro (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
4. Shays (R)
Yea
Yea
Nay
5. Franks (R)
Yea
Yea
Nay
6. Johnson (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Nay
Yea
Nay
2. Hughes (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
3. Saxton (R)
Yea
Yea
Nay
4. Smith (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
5. Roukema (R)
Yea
Yea
Nay
6. Pallone (D)
Nay
Nay
Nay
7. Franks (R)
Yea
Yea
Nay
8. Klein (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
9. Torricelli (D)
Yea
Nay
Nay
10. Payne (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
11. Gallo (R)
A
A
A
12. Zimmer (R)
Yea
Yea
Nay
13. Menendez (D)
Yea
Nay
Nay
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D)
Nay
Nay
Yea
2. Lazio (R)
Yea
Yea
Nay
3. King (R)
Yea
Yea
Nay
4. Levy (R)
Yea
Yea
Nay
5. Ackerman (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
6. Flake (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
7. Manton (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
8. Nadler (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
9. Schumer (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
10. Towns (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
11. Owens (D)
Nay
Nay
P
12. Velazquez (D)
Nay
Nay
Yea
13. Molinari (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
14. Maloney (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
15. Rangel (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
16. Serrano (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
17. Engel (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
18. Lowey (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
19. Fish (R)
Yea
Yea
A
20. Gilman (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
21. McNulty (D)
Yea
Yea
Nay
22. Solomon (R)
Yea
Yea
Nay
23. Boehlert (R)
Nay
Yea
Yea
24. McHugh (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
25. Walsh (R)
Nay
Yea
Yea
26. Hinchey (D)
Nay
Nay
Yea
27. Paxon (R)
Yea
Yea
Nay
28. Slaughter (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
29. LaFalce (D)
Yea
Nay
Yea
30. Quinn (R)
Nay
Yea
Yea
31. Houghton (R)
Yea
Yea
Nay
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present. Senate
1.
Nomination: Vote to shut off debate on the nomination of Ricki Tigert to be the chairwoman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
Approved 63 to 32 (60 votes were needed), Oct. 4.
2.
Education: Vote on passage of a bill reauthorizing for five years the Elementary and Secondary Education Act.
Approved 77 to 20, Oct. 5.
3.
Lobbying: Vote to shut off debate on a bill to tighten disclosure rules for lobbyists and to prohibit members of Congress from receiving gifts.
Failed, with 52 in favor and 46 opposed (short of the two-thirds needed), Oct. 6.
4.
Haiti: Vote on a nonbinding resolution urging withdrawal of United States troops from Haiti as soon as possible.
Approved 91 to 8, Oct. 6.
1
2
3
4
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Yea
Lieberman (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Yea
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Nay
Lautenberg (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Yea
New York
D'Amato (R)
Nay
Yea
Nay
Yea
Moynihan (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Yea
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Sex in a Bottle
WHEN MY FRIEND L. TALKS about fragrance, she speaks the language of shopping -- she wears Romeo Gigli perfume because she loves his clothes though they never fit right; she buys Annick Goutal's Gardenia Passion as gifts because it comes in such a pretty package.
When I talk about fragrance, however, I'm talking about sex.
My inability to separate scent from sex can probably be traced to an early imprint, when I found a bottle of Tabu, "the forbidden fragrance," in my parents' bedroom.
On the box was a drawing of a man holding a violin high with one arm, and clasping a woman with the other.
She was rising from the piano stool to greet the embrace.
Trying in vain to relate this woman to the person I knew as Mom (housewife, mother of four; we didn't even own a piano) I decided that this bottle of Tabu belonged in the dark realm of what grown-ups did when children weren't around.


Death Sentences Are Upheld for Prostitute Who Killed Travelers
The Florida Supreme Court has upheld four murder convictions and death sentences for Aileen Wuornos, a prostitute found guilty of luring travelers off Florida highways into secluded areas and killing them.
On Thursday the court unanimously rejected three of the appeals from Ms.
Wuornos, 38, who has been portrayed by her lawyer as a victim of child abuse.
Last month, the court affirmed Ms.
Wuornos's first murder conviction and death sentence.


BUSINESS DIARY
THE ECONOMY A Strong Jobs Reports, but Inflation Alarms Stay Silent
The financial markets were jittery all week about -- what else? -- inflation.
One day the Dow dropped 45 points for no other discernible reason, and the 30-year Treasury bond yield flirted with an unheard-of 8 percent, as most eyes were focused on the unemployment report looming on Friday.
When it appeared, it was -- in Labor Secretary Robert Reich's words -- "steady as you go." Unemployment did fall to 5.9 percent, the lowest level in four years, but the 239,000 added payroll jobs were lower than expected.
So the markets decided, yet again, that inflation wasn't pounding on the door, Treasury yields eased a bit, and the Dow rose 21 points.
Of course, the latest tension in Iraq had a clear effect, lifting oil stocks (on speculation of a supply disruption) and the dollar (a traditional haven when nations draw their swords).
Whose Economy Is It, Anyway?
Wait a second.
What, exactly, does a strong economy look like?
As in a house of mirrors, it depends on where you stand.
The jobs data give a far-off, brute-force sort of picture, but last week the Census Bureau gave another snapshot, showing a few more warts.
This economy's dirty secret, Census figures show, is that it's "in danger of splitting into a two-tiered society," in Labor Secretary Reich's words.
Because while the rich got car phones, the family in the middle lost $300 (in real dollars) last year.
On top of that, more than a million Americans slid into statistical poverty.
"This," Mr.
Reich said, "is not anyone's idea of progress." Interactive?
No, Thanks
So there's all this money pouring into enabling a technology-besotted public to shop at home, say, or order movies -- "interactive" services, they're called.
But did anyone ask that public if it was interested?
Actually, yes -- and the companies pouring that money may not like the answers.
In a poll out last week, people showed scant interest in interactive services -- far less than in plucking out information.
One big reason seems to be that people have a nagging fear that with all that computing power loose in the land, marketers will latch onto any information they can and bombard armchair shoppers with sales pitches.
When privacy safeguards were mentioned, the interest doubled.
But will shoppers' privacy ever be intact again?
See the Movie, Buy the Shrimp
It's a familiar scene: a 7-year-old, after seeing "The Lion King" 42 times, spirals into tears because the Nala doll -- Simba's pal -- is sold out everywhere.
On such grief is a multi-zillion-dollar industry built: if you've seen the movie, kids, badger Mom or Dad to buy every movie tie-in doodad in sight.
Adult movies, of course, are above such merchandising silliness -- at least they used to be.
"Forrest Gump" has already defied gravity by hitting No. 5 on history's blockbuster list -- without a space alien or animated critter in sight.
And now -- are you ready for this? -- there's everything from Gump T-shirts to table-tennis sets to Bubba Gump Shrimp.
Hundreds of millions of dollars' worth.
So brace yourself: next summer there'll be a dozen movies starring floating feathers.
Did That Quiz Turn a Profit?
City schools are a huge problem in this country, and -- in sheer dollars -- they're also a huge business.
They're not run like businesses, though -- with trained business people calling the shots -- and some people say that's where the problem lies.
Like the people in Hartford, which has Connecticut's largest school system, and one of its most troubled.
So last week Hartford acted on that theory, taking the radical step of hiring a private company called Education Alternatives to run its schools -- the first whole system turned over to private hands.
There's something unsettling about the idea, of course -- the whole notion of treating those young minds as so many widgets -- but Hartford clearly decided that the schools' current sad state was even more unsettling.
Flash!
Something Worked!
Occasionally, just occasionally, some grand Government plan actually works.
So as titillating as it is to recount horror stories, let's pause for a moment over one that appears to be a success.
Seven years ago, with the semiconductor industry battered by Japan, the Government -- urged on by chip makers -- set up a federally financed consortium called Sematech to give the industry a lift.
Over the years, Washington has invested $690 million, with Sematech members -- like I.B.M., Motorola and National Semiconductor -- matching that.
And lo and behold, America leads the world again -- so last week Sematech told Washington that chip makers would soon go solo, weaning themselves from Federal financing by 1997.
INTERNATIONAL Seal of Approval for South Africa
Ending apartheid was only a start.
South Africa badly needs rebuilding after years as a global outcast, but it could borrow cash to do so only at loan-shark rates.
For even with all the investment capital sloshing around the globe, South Africa lacked one vital ticket to the party: the blessing of a top credit-rating agency.
But last week -- as Nelson Mandela visited the United States in search of investment -- it finally got it, as Moody's declared South Africa an investment-grade sort of place.
Standard &amp; Poor's still held back, saying it wanted more time, but it indicated that it could come around soon.
Moody's rating, though, might get the money moving.
Giving Russia Some Time
One of the world's biggest, most important question marks is whether Russia can make the giant leap to a market economy.
To do so, it argues, it must have some breathing room before having to pay back its huge debts.
World governments have already postponed interest payments repeatedly, and last week it got another much-needed break: foreign banks made a deal to give Russia a five-year grace period during which it need not pay interest or principal on $26 billion in loans.
The breakthrough came when Russia was granted "sovereign immunity" from having funds seized abroad if it defaults.
But it still has to pay all the money back.
COMPANIES McHospital
Who needs a national health care system when we've got Columbia/HCA Healthcare?
At this rate, there'll be as many Columbia/ HCA hospitals across the landscape as there are McDonald's.
The company's already the nation's biggest for-profit hospital chain, but why stop there?
Why indeed.
Last week, Columbia heard that Healthtrust, No. 2 in the industry, was thinking of merging with a rival, and Columbia jumped in and merged with Healthtrust itself -- to create a giant with 311 hospitals in 31 states.
The idea is that with shorter patient stays and more home care, a hospital chain must hammer away at efficiency.
The merged company will still account for just 4 percent of the $350 billion spent in the nation's hospitals annually.
But the day is young.
Have a Coors -- After Work
Loyal employees should certainly be encouraged to use their employers' products.
Editors should read their own newspapers, toothpaste packers should be politically correct at the sink.
But enough, sometimes, is enough -- which is what Coors decided.
It used to let workers at its Colorado headquarters drink Coors at lunch and during breaks -- the last big brewer to allow on-the-job drinking.
But tomorrow that policy ends.
In March, it seems, a Coors worker died in a car accident after he left work, reportedly with too much alcohol in his blood, but Coors said the drinking policy had been under review since "well before the accident." Remember Us?
We Pay the Bills
Many people have unkind things to say about Philip Morris, but arts organizations aren't among them.
For years, the company has been one of nation's biggest backers of the arts -- giving millions a year to museums, dance groups, you name it -- and asked nothing in return.
But Philip Morris has a little problem -- New York City's proposed anti-smoking bill -- so it was time to ask a few favors.
Its executives have been calling arts groups asking them to put in a good word with the City Council.
Not to lobby, mind you -- just to gently remind officials of Philip Morris's good works.
And though arts-group officials may have been tempted to hang up in an air-purifying huff, little voices said, "Remember the money." As one official put it, "It's a very tricky situation." The City Council got a lot of calls.
Watch Kidder Shrink
General Electric doesn't like surprises, and it does like investments to pay off.
Kidder, Peabody has failed on both counts.
It took a beating in the bond market, and the Joseph Jett scandal was probably the last straw.
So last week the G.E. executives who waded in to straighten things up cut Kidder down to size -- the size G.E. wants, that is.
That means a 10 percent cut in staff -- 550 jobs -- plus $100 million in cost cuts and the sale of $30 billion in assets.
In other words, a far smaller firm.
Most notable, perhaps, is the scrapping of plans to move Kidder uptown to G.E. headquarters.
G.E. may be about to banish the errant firm from its tidy corporate family.
Nobody's denying it.


Athletic Approach to Increasing Business
NOW the business consultant is a coach.
"We inspire a desire to win big," said Anthony Smith, a partner in Valenti, Smith &amp; Associates, a management-consulting company with offices in Manhattan and Cortlandt Manor.
Using what they call "breakthrough coaching techniques" in addition to conventional consulting and training methods, the consultants say they can help clients achieve impressive goals.
"We think of our clients as professional athletes on the championship level, people who are already good at what they do," said Angelo Valenti, 45, a former educational materials representative, who started the company with Mr.
Smith in 1990.
"With coaching, they just get better. Our method encourages people to achieve breakthroughs."


Mason Gets Into the Act As Syracuse Runs Wild
The Syracuse tailbacks, who have built a reputation of formidable proportions this season, ran wild again this afternoon.
But this time Kevin Mason, the Orangemen's quarterback, ran wild with them as Syracuse won its fifth straight game, shellacking Pittsburgh, 31-7, before a homecoming crowd of 47,622 at the Carrier Dome.
Until this afternoon, Mason, a 6-foot-4-inch senior in his first year as a starter, had more or less been the straight man for an awesome running routine of Kirby Dar Dar and Malcolm Thomas, and a collectively crushing offensive line.
Before today, Mason's role was confined to pitching out, handing off and even passing efficiently, but only when he had to.


Currency
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen100.65
99.27
106.20
per Dollar
German Mark1.5465
1.5502
1.6035
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.3470
1.3432
1.3304
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.5865
1.5774
1.5355
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$391.00
$394.40
$395.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


For Women on L.I., The First Triathlon
TRACY MCGUCKIN'S first triathlon was really a quadathlon.
Before swimming, bicycling and running, she had to conquer driving, on the Long Island Expressway.
When Mrs.
McGuckin learned there was to be an all-female triathlon on Long Island she decided to compete in it.
When she learned it was to start at 7:30 A.M. she decided to commute to it.
But the triathlon was in Southampton.
Mrs.
McGuckin lives in Bayville.
"So we left at 10 to 5," she said.
She and her husband, Richard, were concerned about traffic.
They weren't alone.


BENEFITS
'Show Boat' Fund-Raiser  TUESDAY -- The Eleanor Roosevelt Monument Fund plans to erect a statue and to restore part of Riverside Park near 72d Street, where the monument will be built next spring.
To raise money, the group is sponsoring an evening that will include a performance of "Show Boat." A cocktail buffet from 5:30 to 7:30 at the Judson Grill, 152 West 52d Street, will precede the 8 o'clock performance at the Gershwin Theater.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 685-1095, or at the door.
Liza Minnelli to Be Honored  THURSDAY -- Liza Minnelli is to be honored by the Arlene Walters Shevell Foundation, which offers help to parents and families of drug- and alcohol-dependent children.
Barbara Walters will be the host of the evening, which will begin with cocktails at 7 at Tavern on the Green, followed by dinner, awards and dancing.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 608-2060, extension 206.
For Cancer Research  THURSDAY -- A performance of "Show Boat" will benefit the Cancer Research Institute.
A 5:30 P.M. cocktail buffet at the Symphony Cafe, 950 Eighth Avenue (56th Street), will precede the 8 o'clock show at the Gershwin Theater.
Tickets, $300, or $150 for the show alone, from (212) 688-7515.
A Variety Show  THURSDAY -- The Delta Society, which combines therapy, service and pets to aid physically and emotionally disabled people, is sponsoring a "Super-Dog Variety Show" featuring Stacy Moore and His Mess of Mutts at the Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College, 695 Park Avenue (68th Street).
George Plimpton is to be the master of ceremonies.
Sarah Jessica Parker, the actress, is a chairwoman of the event, which will begin at 7 P.M.
Dinner at 8:30 in Hunter's third-floor dining room will follow the show.
Tickets, $250, or $100 for the show alone, from (212) 675-9474.
Antiques Preview  THURSDAY -- A preview of the International Fine Art and Antique Dealers Show at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 67th Street, will benefit the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
The show itself will open to the public on Friday and will continue through Oct. 20.
The benefactors' preview will begin with a tour of the exhibits at 6 P.M., followed by a dozen or so private dinners at restaurants and homes in Manhattan.
Tickets, $1,000; $500 for the preview alone, or $200 for admission to the preview at 7 P.M., from (212) 874-5457.
For Citymeals-on-Wheels  THURSDAY -- An evening of fun and games with professional sports figures, including Johnny Mitchell of the Jets, Jeromy Burnitz of the Mets and Brad Daluiso of the Giants, will raise money for Citymeals-on-Wheels.
The event, from 7 to 10 at the Plus One Fitness Center, 1 World Financial Center, 200 Liberty Street (West Street), will include an open bar, buffet and a raffle for weekend trips and restaurant dinners.
Tickets, $80, from (212) 945-2525, or $100 at the door.
A Music Festival  FRIDAY -- The National Coalition for the Homeless will benefit from the first New York Singer-Songwriter Festival at Carnegie Hall.
The program, which will feature Freedy Johnston, Rory Block, Mike Reid, Julie Gold and others, will begin at 8 P.M.
Tickets, $25, $35, $45 and $75, from (212) 995-9400 or from Carnegie Charge, (212) 247-7800.
Politicians in the Park  FRIDAY -- Mark J. Green, Charles E. Schumer, Peter F. Vallone, Alan G. Hevesi and other government officials will perform in a musical parody, "The Legislative Review," at the Queens Theater in the Park in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
The event, which will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by the show and a dinner-dance, will raise money for the theater.
Black tie.
Tickets, $175, or $100 for cocktails and the show, from (718) 760-0064.
Planting Fields Antiques Show  FRIDAY -- A preview of the Long Island Antiques Show at the Planting Fields Arboretum, Planting Fields Road at Route 25A in Oyster Bay, will benefit the North Shore University Hospital Community House, a drug and alcohol treatment center in Glen Cove.
The show will be open to the public on Saturday and next Sunday.
A 6 P.M. cocktail party and preview tour of the show will include a buffet and an auction of vacation trips and art objects.
Tickets, $100, from (516) 926-8852.
Scholarship Fund Dinner  FRIDAY -- Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is to speak at a dinner-dance for the Det.
Keith L. Williams Memorial Scholarship Fund at Antun's, 9843 Springfield Boulevard (Jamaica Avenue), in Queens Village.
The fund, named for a Queens detective who died in the line of duty in 1989, provides scholarships for Queens residents.
The black-tie event will begin with cocktails at 8 P.M.
Tickets, $60, from (718) 468-0732.
For Boys' Towns of Italy  FRIDAY -- The junior committee of Boys' Towns of Italy is sponsoring a dinner-dance at Landmark on the Park in the Universalist Church at 160 Central Park West (76th Street).
The event will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by dessert and dancing at 9:30.
Tickets, $100, or $55 for dessert and dancing only, from (212) 980-8770.
Celebrity Table Settings  FRIDAY -- Film stars and fashion designers have been paired with their favorite interior designers to create elaborate table settings at the Lockwood-Mathews Mansion, 295 West Avenue in Norwalk, Conn.
Among the design teams are Bill Blass and Chessy Rayner, and David Solomon and Sigourney Weaver.
The beneficiary will be the after-school programs of the McGivney Center, a community center in Bridgeport, Conn.
The evening will begin with cocktails at 6:30, followed by dancing.
Tickets, $75, from (203) 656-1109.
Music and Magic for Unicef  FRIDAY -- The Westchester Friends of Unicef is sponsoring a dinner-dance to raise money for refugee relief in Rwanda and other projects.
Bill Herz and Michael Weber, both magicians, will perform, as will Alex Donner and His Orchestra.
The festivities will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M. at Pepsico headquarters, 700 Anderson Hill Road in Purchase, N.Y.
Tickets, $175, or $125 for those 40 and younger, from (914) 422-9235.  'The 1940's Radio Hour'  SATURDAY -- Big Sisters Inc. in New York, the family-services agency, will benefit from performances of a musical theater piece, "The 1940's Radio Hour," at Playhouse 91, 316 East 91st Street.
The benefit performances will continue next Sunday and on Oct. 19, 20, 21 and 22.
Tickets, $18.50, from (212) 988-9102 or from Ticketmaster, (212) 307-4100.
For American Ballet Theater  Oct. 17 -- Members of American Ballet Theater will perform in a benefit for the company at the Four Seasons.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception in the Grill Room will be followed by dinner, the performances and dancing in the Pool Room.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 477-3030.
For Traveling Exhibitions  Oct. 17 -- The American Federation of the Arts will honor Richard Oldenburg, the retiring director of the Museum of Modern Art, with a dinner-dance at the Rainbow Room.
The event, which will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M., will raise money for the federation's traveling exhibitions.
Black tie.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 988-7700, extension 49.
For Hamilton-Madison House  Oct. 17 -- Hamilton-Madison House, a settlement house on the Lower East Side, will celebrate its 96th year with a black-tie dinner-dance at the Grand Hyatt.
The evening will begin with cocktails at 6.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 349-3724.
Theaterworks Dinner-Dance  Oct. 17 -- Theaterworks/USA, a nonprofit theater for young audiences, is holding its 11th annual dinner-dance.
The event at the Essex House will begin with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Lester Lanin and His Orchestra will perform.
Black tie.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 677-5959. 'Celebrate Children'  Oct. 17 -- The Children's Defense Fund will honor Jacques d'Amboise, the artistic director of the National Dance Institute, at a fund-raiser called "Celebrate Children" at the Sheraton New York.
Dinner, children's dance performances and dancing will follow the 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception.
Stockard Channing will be a host for the event.
Tickets, $350, or $150 for those 30 and younger, from (212) 722-6226.


Wall Street; Of Whistle-Blowers and Layoffs
WHEN you tell the boss about dirty dealings in the office in October and get fired in December, is it a coincidence of the timing of corporate cutbacks?
Or is it a nifty way to gag a troublemaker who knows too much about the way things work?
A former senior trader on the bond trading desk in Merrill Lynch &amp; Company's Dallas office says he wound up on the street because management didn't want to hear his tales of malfeasance in the trading room.
In the end, he claims, his boss told him if he spilled the beans to company lawyers he risked being blacklisted on Wall Street.


Now Professional, Players Think Big
YOUTHFUL, young, new the words exude a springtime zest as Anthony Aibel, music director and conductor of the Westchester Symphony, describes the orchestra he leads.
A relative hatchling himself in a field of Old World maestros, the 26-year-old conductor has pledged to make the 70-year-old orchestra an ensemble of note in a music-loving county.
Unionized now for the first time in its history, the orchestra has been transformed from the amateur group that began in 1924 as the White Plains Symphony Orchestra.
A move toward professionalism that began in 1982 with Mr.
Aibel's predecessor, Martin Canellakis, is now complete.
The orchestra plays subscription concerts in the Performing Arts Center at Purchase College, conducts an education program at the County Center and will celebrate its 70th anniversary by playing Beethoven's Ninth Symphony next Saturday at 8 P.M. at the college.


Cynthia Henry, David L. Hazard
Cynthia Joy Lanning Henry, the daughter of Joyce Ford of Neshanic, N.J., and the late Donald E. Henry, was married yesterday to David Lincoln Hazard, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald T. Hazard of Hanover, N.H.
The Rev.
Richard Ringenwald performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Manchester Village, Vt.
Mrs.
Hazard, 32, is the manager of community affairs and promotions at Tiffany &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her mother is an import coordinator at the Hoechst Celanese Corporation, a textile and chemicals manufacturer in Somerville, N.J.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Michael Ford.


Giuliani's Plan For Welfare Stresses Work, Not Training
Under Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposal to require able-bodied, childless welfare recipients to work for their benefits, job training would no longer be a priority and would be offered only to the most industrious and dependable recipients, the official designing the program said yesterday.
The official, Richard Schwartz, a senior adviser to the Mayor, said the administration believed that work, even in menial jobs, would ultimately be more effective than training in reducing the number of people dependent on welfare.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF U.S.
Advances to Semifinals of Dunhill Cup  The United States, trying to defend its Dunhill Cup title, beat New Zealand by 3-0 yesterday in St.
Andrews, Scotland, to advance to the semifinals.
The Americans will face England, which won all nine of its matches in the first three rounds, in one semifinal today.
The other semifinal in the $1.5 million event will pit South Africa against Canada.
Tom Kite shot a three-under 69 and took advantage of bogeys by Grant Waite on the last two holes to win by two shots.
Curtis Strange (69) beat Frank Nobilo by one, and Fred Couples (72) survived a bogey at No. 17 to defeat Greg Turner by two.
The results left the Americans and Irish, who beat Japan by 2-1, tied atop the Group One standing with two victories each, but the United States advanced because it had six victories in individual games to Ireland's five. (AP) U.S.
Is Back in Lead: Tiger Woods's five-under-par 67 boosted the United States back into the lead of the world amateur team championships in La Boulie, France.
With three of four individual scores counting, the Americans finished the third round with a 16-under 629 total, one better than a team of golfers from Britain and Ireland and four better than Australia.
Woods, 18, said a tip from a golf writer -- that his hip turn was too big -- helped him shoot eight birdies and three bogeys on his third trip over the 6,734-yard French National layout.
Allen Doyle, a veteran of amateur play, shot a 69.
Todd Demsey shot 71 and John Harris a 72 for Americans.
The best round of the tournament came from 21-year-old Jason Dawes of Australia, who shot a course-record nine-under 63. (AP) ASIAN GAMES China Sweeps Women's Swimming  While the Chinese completed a clean sweep of women's swimming at the Asian Games yesterday in Hiroshima, Japan, five countries won their first golds.
Kuwait and Saudi Arabia won their goal medals in shooting, while Malaysia won in bowling, Vietnam in taekwondo and Turkmenistan in weightlifting.
China has 62 gold medals, followed by 24 for South Korea, which won in archery, shooting and its native taekwondo.
Japan has 22 after winning in bowling and men's swimming.
In the pool, the world-record holder Le Jingyi was disqualified for a false start in the 50-meter freestyle and Lu Bin raced to victory in 25.68 seconds for her fourth gold.
Officials announced the expulsion of Thailand's soccer captain, Sirisak Kadalee, for testing positive for stimulants.
He was the first athlete expelled from these games for doping.
The Asian Football Confederation said he has been suspended at least until December. (AP) VOLLEYBALL Italy Wins Men's Volleyball Title
The defending champion, Italy, beat the Netherlands by 3-1 yesterday to win the men's world championship in Athens.
The United States beat Cuba, 3-1, to capture third place.
Italy stopped the Netherlands, 15-10, 11-15, 15-11, 15-1, and the United States got past Cuba, 15-6, 14-16, 15-8, 15-9.
Brazil beat host Greece by 3-0 for fifth and Russia defeated South Korea by 3-0 for seventh. (AP) CROSS COUNTRY Runner From Saratoga Springs Wins  Erin Davis of Saratoga Springs High School won the Eastern States girls championships at the Manhattan College Inter-Scholastic Invitational yesterday at Van Cortlandt Park.
She ran the two and a half miles in 14 minutes 13.0 seconds.
Shenendehowa, another upstate team, won the 300-school event with 85 points, led by fourth-place finisher Dana Ostrader (14:23.4).
Saratoga Springs was second.
STEEPLECHASE Jockey Becomes Top Amateur George Sloan became the winningest American amateur steeplechase jockey yesterday when he won aboard Sagishi in the Morvan Park Maiden Hurdle in Lessburg, Va.
The 55-year-old Sloan, a corporate lawyer and businessman from Franklin, Tenn., has 148 victories to surpass Rigan McKinney, who ended his career in 1940.


Catherine Masinter, C. G. Hildenbrand
Catherine Diane Masinter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edgar M. Masinter of White Plains, is to be married there today to Christian George Hildenbrand, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert R. Hildenbrand of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Rabbi Daniel Wolk is to perform the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride, 27, is a producer for Nickelodeon, the cable television network, in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.


Abortion Access Law Was Tested Before
To the Editor:
Contrary to your Oct. 6 news article, the trial of Paul J. Hill, found guilty under the Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances law in the murders of a Pensacola, Fla., abortion doctor and his security guard, is by no means the law's first legal test.


Lure and Smith Caught Off Guard and At Wire
Mike Smith didn't see it coming until it was too late.
Smith, the top rider in the nation last year, looked as if he thought he had yesterday's Kelso Handicap won as he and his magnificent miler, Lure, roared down the Belmont lawn toward yet another apparent victory.


Wanted: New Uses for 14,000 Old Toilets
It's cheaper and more environmentally sound than building new sewage treatment plants and water supply systems.
But this week, as Stuyvesant Town and Peter Cooper Village begin to replace water-guzzling toilets with modern water-saving models, that project has created a new ecological problem: What to do with 14,000 outmoded commodes?
It's a question that won't be going away soon, either.
To reduce water usage and sewage flow, the city this year began a $270 million program to finance the installation of 1.5 million water-conserving toilets all across the city by reimbursing building owners up to $240 per fixture.


An E-Mail Message for Help
Cornell University recently found itself confronted with a new twist on an old problem.
A student posted a long message to the Internet describing his intention to kill himself.
The message soon reached the attention of university officials, who acted quickly and saw to it that the student was brought to a local hospital, where he was held overnight for evaluation.
After the event, the student posted another public message describing his frustration and anger at the intervention.
There has been plenty of discussion, on line and off, about when electronic communication should be considered private.
In this case the student's initial posting was thoroughly public, like crying "Help" in a crowded theater.
The issue here is more practical -- how to post for help anonymously.
What if you want to talk about how bad you feel but don't want anyone knocking on your door?


Nassau Board And Arcane System
In "A Lame-Duck Agenda for Nassau's Board"  [ July 24 ]  concerning the Nassau County Board of Supervisors you report that Judge Arthur D. Spatt found the weighted voting system "an arcane curiosity."


Check It Out: Multiplication by Offshoot
A FRIEND is noted for her spectacular displays of clivia, grown in large clay pots around one side of a swimming pool.
The first time this scene was visited, the clivia was in full bloom with huge orange flowers.
There were probably a dozen or more pots.
The display was dramatic, but since clivia is not one of the cheaper pot plants, also suggestive of quite an expenditure.
When asked about the considerable outlay needed to achieve the effect, my friend smiled and said, "They all came from two plants I purchased when the children started high school." They have since graduated from college, and still the clivia thrives.
Her secret?
Clivia's natural multiplication by offsets.


Shore Merchants Breathing Sighs of Relief After Rise in Summer Business
THE magnificent homes with manicured lawns along Ventnor Boulevard, as well as the private toll bridge that charges 50 cents to get both in and out of this bedroom community of Atlantic City, tells one immediately that it is not a typical Jersey Shore town.
What is typical, though, is the kind of summer Margate had this year.
It was good.
Beach tag revenues were up about $1,000 -- from $163,000 in 1993 to $164,000 this summer, said Thomas D. Hiltner, the City Clerk.
And most businesses, including Robert Hammerschlag's Deli Express, report doing a great business.
But business, they say, is seldom really bad here.


THE WHITE WIFE
Adams angrily points to racism as the explanation for our fascination with the Simpson murder case.
Perhaps, she ought to examine how free her own feelings are from prejudice.
She claims that white Americans "perceive  [ African-Americans ]  only when they're looking down their noses or recoiling in fear or disgust." Isn't it bigotry when someone makes sweeping generalizations about another ethnic group?


Oct. 2-8: Pushed Out; White House Gets Espy To Leave the Cabinet
White House aides expressed a little regret and a lot of relief last week when Mike Espy resigned as Agriculture Secretary.
Indeed, some of President Clinton's aides congratulated themselves for engineering a more or less graceful exit that avoided the kind of tizzy that had accompanied some of Mr.
Clinton's earlier shedding of personnel problems.


WHAT'S DOING IN SINGAPORE
No one is quite sure whether Singapore's tourism industry was helped or hindered by the furor that put the tiny authoritarian city-state on the map for millions of Americans.
Last spring, the caning of Michael P. Fay, an American teen-ager accused of spray-painting cars, outraged the Clinton Administration and human rights groups.
At the same time, the controversy served to remind foreign visitors that the Singapore Government is ruthless about keeping the city safe and clean. (And also drug free. A Dutch businessman was hanged last month three years after he was arrested when heroin was found in his luggage at the airport.)


Where Children Are Supposed to Be Heard, Not Simply Seen
LITTLE people scurry about the old wooden building, sliding down a pole in a miniature firehouse, yelling, squealing, tossing plastic fruit and vegetables into a basket in a little grocery store, ringing a cash register, making the lights flash on a rail crossing signal, feeling the skull of a grizzly bear or a real crocodile's skin, shaking plastic bottles that show how waves and hurricanes form.
This is the old East Lyme Library building on Main Street in the village of Niantic.
Once known as a place to be quiet, it is now the Children's Museum of Southeastern Connecticut.


Hit or Miss, U.S. Presses Hunt for Arms in Haiti
It was still pitch black this morning when the raiding party rumbled out of the United States Army base in a convoy of Bradley fighting vehicles, Humvee utility vehicles and five-ton trucks, but the fetid, muddy streets were already coming alive.
Women balancing bundles on their heads, men wrestling out carts to haul cargo, people bathing in stagnant canals -- all turned silently to watch soldiers with the 10th Mountain Division as they passed by, helmeted and tense, their rifles locked and loaded, a round in the chamber.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
OPINION  REASONABLE CREATURES  Essays on Women and Feminism.
By Katha Pollitt.
Knopf, $22.


Oct. 2-8; Psst. Want to See a Good Degas?
It is yet another measure of the obsessive secrecy and pervasive philistinism of the dead Soviet Union.
Only now can the State Hermitage Museum reveal that it has a large trove of French Impressionist and Post-Impressionist art that was looted from private collectors in Nazi Germany a half-century ago.
The museum's director, Dr.
Mikhail Pyotrovsky, has finally admitted what the world pretty much knew, and has boldly decided to put some 70 of the paintings on display in March.
The paintings, by artists like Degas, Cezanne, Renoir, Monet and van Gogh, were untouched in a secret vault since the end of World War II.
They include a Degas masterpiece, "Place de la Concorde," that had been believed destroyed.


Ellen C. Conniff, Roger Marment
Ellen Cara Conniff, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Conniff of Brooklyn, was married yesterday in Riverdale, the Bronx, to Roger Marment, a son of Arthur Marment of Letchworth, Hertfordshire, England, and the late Gwendoline W. Marment.
The Rev.
John F. Kiesling performed the Roman Catholic ceremony in the Chapel of the Immaculate Conception at the College of Mount St.
Vincent, of which the bride is a graduate.


Ellen Feldman and Stephen P. Reibel
Ellen Feldman, a novelist, and Dr.
Stephen Paul Reibel, a psychiatrist, both of New York, were married last Monday.
Jean Kotkin, a leader of the Society for Ethical Culture, officiated at her apartment in New York.
Ms.
Feldman is keeping her name.
Her latest novel is "Too Close for Comfort." She graduated from Bryn Mawr College, from which she also received a master's degree in history.
She is a daughter of the late Ruth B. and Moe S. Feldman.


Corrections
The introduction to some excerpts from scholarly articles about soap operas on Sept. 25 misstated the date when broadcasts of serial drama began on television.
They began with the infancy of television in the late 1940's, not in 1956.


Marcya Chudy, Peter A. Roberts
Marcya Chudy, the creative director at the College Savings Bank in Princeton, N.J., and Peter A. Roberts, the bank's chairman, were married yesterday at the Bay Head (N.J.) Yacht Club.
Mayor Robert A. Roman of Mantoloking, N.J., officiated.
Mrs.
Roberts, 33, graduated from the University of Kansas.
She is a daughter of Joseph and Helen Chudy of Bay Head.
Her father retired as a machine maintenance technician at Johns-Manville Corporation, the former asbestos supply company, in Bridgewater, N.J.
Her mother, also retired, was a laboratory technician at Johnson &amp; Johnson in Bridgewater.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Kim D. Watkins, M. A. Rodriguez
Kim Danielle Watkins, the daughter of Patricia C. Watkins of Corona, Queens, and Mel Watkins of New York, is to be married today to Michael Anthony Rodriguez, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rico A. Rodriguez of Baldwin, L.I.
The Rev.
Wesley Chenoweth, a minister of the United Church of Christ, is to perform the ceremony at Coral House in Baldwin.
The bride is a senior financial accountant at Johnson &amp; Johnson Hospital Services in Piscataway, N.J.
She is a graduate of Drexel University.
Her father, a former editor at The New York Times Book Review, is a critic and author whose most recent book is "On the Real Side." Her mother is an elementary school teacher at Public School 174 in Rego Park, Queens.


FORGET PCB'S. RADON. ALAR.
In "Forget PCB's. Radon. Alar." (Sept. 11), Gregg Easterbrook focuses much needed attention on those in some developing countries who breathe air and drink water hundreds of times poorer in quality than any in the industrialized world.
And he is right on target when he identifies population growth as the driving engine of environmental degradation, and improved maternal and child health as key factors in slowing that growth.
But I do not agree, as Easterbrook implies, with his dismissal of environmental hazards in industrialized nations and of changes in the global environment like global warming as "minor ecological problems."


The Currency Risk Straw Man
To the Editor:
"Facing the Currency Risk Question" (Mutual Funds, Sept.4) perpetuates the outdated belief among some American investors that investing overseas carries a unique complication related to currency matters.
Yet the same investors may very comfortably buy, for example, Coca-Cola stock, unconcerned that Coke's ability to pay its dollar dividends depends on the 80 percent of its revenues that comes from sales in nondollar countries.
Of course, Coke may at times hedge the currency exposure and may at times get it right -- or wrong.
But the pricing of the stock treats that risk as only one -- and hardly the most important -- of the many global business risks Coke faces.
If it's O.K. for Coke, why not for investors?
If American investors are considering, for example, global auto stocks, I might suggest that they face far more complex risks in buying into a company whose executives have been bailing out of its stock than in buying a company whose shares are traded on a nondollar exchange.
MALCOLM MITCHELL Stamford, Conn., Sept. 7 The writer is a management consultant to investment firms specializing in global portfolio decision making.


Tricia Moynahan, William A. Spehr
Tricia Ann Moynahan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Moynahan Jr. of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to William Arthur Spehr, a son of Linda V. Spehr of East Setauket, L.I., and the late Henry A. Spehr.
The Rev.
David Yocis officiated at St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church.
The Rev.
Susan Trucksess, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Spehr, 31, graduated from Arizona State University and received a master's degree in physical fitness and sports management from New York University.
She is the program coordinator for corporate fitness services at the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in New York.
Her father is an executive vice president of the company.


Diplomats See New Belligerence in Iraq
As improbable as it may seem, Saddam Hussein appears to be pushing Iraq toward a confrontation with the forces that drove him from Kuwait over three years ago, senior Kuwaiti officials and Western diplomats said today.
"Saddam Hussein has always been unpredictable and inscrutable," a Western diplomat said.
"When he invaded Iran in 1980 he took everyone by surprise. The same was true when he invaded Kuwait 10 years later. We do not know if he will use force, but his efforts to find a diplomatic solution to lift the oil embargo appeared to have ended. At this point, we cannot rule anything out."


Antiques on View at the Getty
The head of a large Cycladic idol from about 2,500 B.C., with traces of its original painted detail, will be one of more than 200 objects on view in "A Passion for Antiquities: Ancient Art From the Collection of Barbara and Lawrence Fleischman" at the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif.
The exhibition opens Oct. 13 and will run until Jan. 15, 1995.
The collection, most of which will be displayed publicly for the first time, includes works from ancient Greece, Rome and Etruria, dating from 2,600 B.C. to A.D. 400.
Significant artifacts include a large South Italian lekythos (a container for perfumed oil), painted in about 350 to 340 B.C. with scenes from the Garden of the Hesperides; a fourth-century grave stele from Macedonia, depicting the figure of a hunter; a life-size bronze head of the young god Dionysus; and a late-Hellenistic bronze vessel with relief decoration and silver inlays.


Marco Polo's Itinerary
To celebrate the 700th anniversary of Marco Polo's epic voyage, Abercrombie &amp; Kent has organized a lavish, 24-day tour with visits to some of the sites Polo made famous.
But unlike their predecessor, 20th-century explorers will fly to Beijing on a 60-passenger MGM Grand Air jet, travel along the Malay Peninsula on the new Eastern &amp; Oriental Express train -- and pay $29,500 a person for the entire trip.
The itinerary includes shopping in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam; a visit to Buddhist pagodas in Pagan, Myanmar; a masked ball in Venice and a "flightseeing" tour over the Himalayas.
Call (800) 323-7308.


C.I.A. Spent Millions to Support Japanese Right in 50's and 60's
In a major covert operation of the cold war, the Central Intelligence Agency spent millions of dollars to support the conservative party that dominated Japan's politics for a generation.
The C.I.A. gave money to the Liberal Democratic Party and its members in the 1950's and the 1960's, to gather intelligence on Japan, make the country a bulwark against Communism in Asia and undermine the Japanese left, said retired intelligence officials and former diplomats.
Since then, the C.I.A. has dropped its covert financial aid and focused instead on gathering inside information on Japan's party politics and positions in trade and treaty talks, retired intelligence officers said.


Ms. Severiens And Mr. Parke
Liesbeth Christien Severiens, a daughter of Elizabeth and Dr.
Johannes C. Severiens of Irvington, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Richard Edmund Parke, a son of Joan L. Parke of Califon, N.J., and Dr.
Richard E. Pelosi of Saddle River, N.J.
The Rev.
David R. Harkness officiated at the Irvington Presbyterian Church.
The bride, 32, is an advertising sales manager for U.S.
Banker , a banking trade publication in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father owns Elysian Management, an investment concern in Irvington.
Her mother is a paralegal coordinator at Shearman &amp; Sterling, the New York law firm.


Call It Disneyland Paris
Euro Disney has not attracted the millions of visitors -- and billions of francs -- its creators forecast.
But perhaps Disneyland Paris can.
The two-and-a-half-year-old theme park outside Paris has quietly, if unofficially, changed its name.
Its legal name remains Euro Disney, but the name Disneyland Paris will appear on everything the public sees and buys, from tickets and T-shirts to billboards.
"Disneyland is a kind of trademark," said a spokesman in Paris.
"And we believe there is a kind of synergy between Disneyland and the City of Light." TERRY TRUCCO


Linda G. Perillo, Devin Buonanno
Linda Grace Perillo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mario Perillo of Saddle River, N.J., is to be married there today to Devin Eugene Buonanno, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Buonanno of North Tarrytown, N.Y.
Msgr.
Paul Bootkoski is to perform the ceremony at St.
Gabriel the Archangel Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, 27, is the director of public relations at Perillo Tours Inc. in Woodcliff Lake, N.J.
Her father is the chairman of the company.
The bride graduated summa cum laude from Mercy College, from which the bridegroom also graduated.


In the Borough Of Muggleton
To the Editor:
Regarding the Muggletonians, the subject of two letters to the editor (June 12 and Aug. 7), may I remind your "omnivorous" readers of the famous cricket match between Muggleton and Dingley Dell described in Chapter 7 of "The Pickwick Papers."
You will, of course, remember that the superior skill of All-Muggleton gave them a well-earned 54-0 victory.


Why Seiko Has 3,000 Watch Styles
ONCE there were sneakers -- inexpensive canvas shoes with rubber soles that you wore to play in, whatever the game.
Now there are tennis shoes, basketball shoes, walking shoes, hiking shoes, jogging shoes, running shoes, aerobics shoes, bicycling shoes.
Nonprescription sunglasses once were uniform commodities, too.
Today, they have been "sneakerized." In 1993, fashion and premium sunglasses, highly varied, accounted for almost half of this $2 billion market.
Bausch &amp; Lomb's Revo line comes in 80 frame styles, for example, with a choice of four lens tints for each.


You're Invite


New Tactics In Fighting Prostitution
The sad truth for those who live near many traditionally industrial neighborhoods is that jackhammers and trucks are the bane of the blocks by day, and prostitutes are by night.
The 78th Precinct is trying to stymie the latter not by arresting the prostitutes, but by aggressively pursuing their customers.
The police mark those who gravitate to Third Avenue near DeGraw Street, in the Gowanus section, an area that bustles in the daylight hours with factory life but that draws a less savory form of business once the sun sets.
The precinct is the latest one to begin campaigns in which potential customers are arrested when they approach female police officers posing as prostitutes.
In one police operation, customers' cars are confiscated, in a rare application of a state forfeiture law usually used to seize cars used in drug deals.
The police crackdown began in the Public Morals Division in January 1991, with the hope of curbing spots throughout the city where prostitution was a particular problem.
In 1993, the division arrested 581 people for soliciting decoys, and impounded 181 automobiles.
This past summer, the division began training individual precincts to conduct independent stings.
So far, several precincts have started their own programs, and find that they are successful at nabbing customers and vexing them with the car seizures.
But it is unclear whether the drive actually slows business.
In Prospect Park, for example, officers go out once a week for a few hours, rotating randomly between simple arrests and the confiscation of cars, and have found that they can barely keep up with the number of customers, said Capt.
Richard Rosa of the 78th Precinct.
"It takes us two hours to pick up 10 cars," said Captain Rosa.
"In one night, we had 20 bodies in three hours. We had a medical doctor -- you think he'd know better -- to middle-class to working-class guys," he said.
Once the customers are arrested, the captain said he is forced to keep the female decoy officers nearby, or else other potential customers try to pick them up while they are busy with their initial arrest.
"We roll up with lights flashing, sirens going; you think they would get the message," said Captain Rosa, whose unit has made 70 arrests and confiscated 32 cars since mid-August.
The officers, usually two or three each time, are scantily clad and are wired, so that when approached, they can tape a conversation, Captain Rosa explained.
The officers never proposition a man, but will ask them what they want.
"As soon as monetary money is mentioned, we just pull up and get them," he said.
A suspect is generally booked, then released, but must appear in court the next day, where he is usually issued a summons.
The cost of recovering a car can be 20 percent of its value.
J.S.


A Consumer Watchdog Is Eliminated
Iris E. Greene, a nurse's aide, desperately needed help several years ago after she had paid usurious interest rates -- $3,300 in installments for $2,800 worth of furniture -- at a store here, and still had it repossessed for having missed a few payments following a heart attack.
"I cried as they carried it away," Ms.
Greene recalled.
A state agency, the Department of the Public Advocate, stepped in.
The department, New Jersey's chief consumer advocate, convinced the State Attorney General to go to court on Ms.
Greene's behalf and, last March, a judge ruled in her favor.


A Terrible Way to Start the Week
WALL OF BRASS  By Robert Daley. 409 pp. Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $22.95.


Smoke Signals
Smoke is a potent medium.
It can be gentle; it can be fierce.
It never goes unrecognized.
Smoke, after all, is the holy ghost of fire.
Just as a bonfire of brown, broken leaves is thrilling because it banishes the sad spectacle of death, a hint of smoke in food suggests that time and decay have been suspended, at least temporarily.
On the surface, the flavor of smoke resonates with the smell of autumn air.
But the long tradition of smoking summer's bounty touches an even deeper chord, giving the cook the archaic satisfaction of having battened down the hatches.


Habitats/The Earth House; Cozifying an Anomaly
THE house on the suburban street is an anomaly, a behemoth rising from 50-foot berms of earth, its multi-stepped and seamed copper roof dull but not green, its hundreds of horizontal glass blocks glittering, casting sky light on a slate-bordered indoor swimming pool.
There is a blank concrete wall jutting out from the side of the house.
There are patios and 5,800 trees and shrubs.
It is hard to find the front door.


P.S. 307 Gets Health Clinic For Basic Care
Responding to a need for basic neighborhood health care, the Brooklyn Hospital Center, with the help of a group of nursing students, has started a clinic at Public School 307 in Fort Greene.
The clinic, which opened last week, offers a doctor certified in pediatrics and infectious diseases as well as a full-time nurse practitioner, to be assisted by nursing students and a "community health advocate" who will make occasional visits to students' homes to insure they are receiving proper care and medicines.
The clinic is open weekdays during school hours.


A Heritage Reclaimed; From Old Artifacts, American Indians Shape a New Museum
Seven years ago, Lynne Harlan, then a researcher for the Smithsonian Institution, was rummaging through a dark, battered warehouse in the East Bronx when she stumbled on a grim fragment of her people's past.
Amid endless racks of dusty artifacts -- about one million objects, collected decades earlier by the oil heir George Gustav Heye -- she discovered boxes of human remains and sacred items, including six masks from her own tribe, the Qualla Boundary Cherokee of North Carolina.


Dangerous Medicines
Oriental medicines are big business.
Each year hundreds of thousands of packages of tablets, tonics and ointments are imported into the United States.
Unfortunately, according to a recent report from Traffic U.S.A., an arm of the World Wildlife Fund, some of the ingredients come from a variety of animals, some of them endangered, like tigers and rhinoceroses.
Here are a few examples:
Armadillo Counter Poison Pill, an all-purpose antidote: scales of the pangolin (a protected anteater species), ground freshwater turtle shell and orchids.


Martha Raimon, Craig Wolff
Martha Lee Raimon, the director of the family law unit of South Brooklyn Legal Services, is to be married today to Craig Wolff, an assistant professor of journalism at Columbia University.
Rabbi Lawrence Edwards is to officiate at the Fountainebleau Inn in Alpine, N.Y.
Ms.
Raimon is keeping her name.
She received undergraduate and law degrees from Cornell University.
She is a daughter of Robert L. Raimon of Ithaca, N.Y., and the late Eunice D. Raimon.
The bride's father is a professor emeritus of labor economics at Cornell, in Ithaca.


Check It Out: Multiplication by Offshoot
A FRIEND is noted for her spectacular displays of clivia, grown in large clay pots around one side of a swimming pool.
The first time this scene was visited, the clivia was in full bloom with huge orange flowers.
There were probably a dozen or more pots.
The display was dramatic, but since clivia is not one of the cheaper pot plants, also suggestive of quite an expenditure.
When asked about the considerable outlay needed to achieve the effect, my friend smiled and said, "They all came from two plants I purchased when the children started high school." They have since graduated from college, and still the clivia thrives.
Her secret?
Clivia's natural multiplication by offsets.


For Hostos, a Campus to Match its Reputation
In the 1960's, as much of the borough began to decline, Bronx residents fought for the construction of a new college in the South Bronx.
Through the 70's, as the area's continued deterioration came to symbolize the plight of urban America, a nascent Hostos Community College struggled to survive and to expand.
Now, 25 years after it was established in a former tire factory on 149th Street and the Grand Concourse, Hostos is finally getting a campus that befits the school's reputation for education in the community.
On Friday the school, which is part of the City University system, will officially open a new, 240,000-square-foot building that for the first time offers amenities most college students take for granted -- a student lounge, cafeteria and gym -- as well as a cultural center that would do any major university proud.


A Self-Made Man
IN THE LAKE OF THE WOODS  By Tim O'Brien. 306 pp.
Boston: Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin Company. $21.95.


In the Region/Connecticut; Builders Seek to Turn Economies Into Extra Space
BUILDERS in Connecticut are responding to home buyers whose mantra for the 90's is value.
Gas fireplaces and radiant-heat ceiling panels are selling briskly.
Vinyl siding has shed its bourgeois image and steel framing is emerging as an alternative to lumber's unstable prices and scarcity.
Builders say that most buyers, sometimes surprised to learn that what looks like wood siding is vinyl and what appears to be a real fireplace is a gas-burning fake, accept them readily as a trade-off for more square footage and better-equipped kitchens and bathrooms.


Columbus Contractor Hunts for Parking
The two-year-long, $65 million reconstruction of Columbus Avenue, which began in August, has long been the object of fear and loathing on the part of nearby residents and business owners.
Now, less than a week before the northern half of the project is to start, city officials and the construction company in charge of the project say they have been unable to find enough storage space in the neighborhood for the company's equipment and supplies.
Edward Cruz, president of E. E. Cruz, the Holmdel, New Jersey-based company that is under contract to refurbish the avenue from 86th Street to 110th Street, said last week he had found less than a quarter of the nearby space he needs to do the job efficiently and without delays.
"We're in a very busy, congested area," said Mr.
Cruz.
"Until we get an adequate staging area, we're going to have big problems."


He's Here, He's There, He's in Your Face!
If Anthony Mason has his way, it is going to be a special season.
The Knicks will win the championship.
Mason will get the new contract he wants, giving him long-term financial security.
He will make the National Basketball Association's all-defensive team.
Basically, the versatile forward will have the best season of his career.
Thinking big is one thing.
Delivering is another.
But coming off a stellar performance during the Knicks' playoff run, Mason feels poised to have the best season of his career.
And he will use almost anything, or anyone, for motivation.
Like the people who never thought he would make the N.B.A. when he wasn't drafted after college.
Like the people who questioned his attitude after he was suspended for three games by the Knicks in April.


Not So Hasty on Surgery to Prevent Stroke
To the Editor:
In "Surgery Is Found to Fight Stroke: Artery Operation Cuts Risk by Half, Researchers Say" (front page, Oct. 1), you report on the preliminary findings of a randomized trial of carotid endarterectomy, an operation to remove fatty deposits from a major artery in the neck, in people with no outward symptoms of disease.
You hype the apparent benefits and relegate the concerns to a short paragraph at the end.


Tracey Steinmetz, Jeffrey R. Minich
Tracey Anne Steinmetz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Steinmetz of Spruce Head, Me., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Robert Minich, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul R. Minich of Washington.
The Anglican Bishop of Bermuda, William J. D. Down, performed the ceremony at St.
Anne's Church in Southampton, Bermuda.
The bride, 32, is a manager of business development at Fujisankei Communications International in New York, Japan's largest media conglomerate.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is an architect and artist in Spruce Head.


The Nation: Raking Mud; The New Press Criticism: News as the Enemy of Hope
CRITICISM of the press is in vogue again.
That may be due in part to what might be called the O.J. effect, the odd reality that the same public that consumes tabloidism also loses respect for the medium that conveys it.


A Sampling of the Mediterranean World
COOKING from the Mediterranean has never been more popular than it is now.
The food of that region is showing up with increasing frequency on menus across the country, where restaurants with Mediterranean themes have been opening, and a plethora of cookbooks has appeared on the subject.
It all started two years ago when a group of scientists, doctors and nutritionists got together at Harvard and cited the countries of the Mediterranean for their low incidence of heart disease and cancer.
Vegetables play an enormous part in this cooking, as do grains, nuts and parsley.
Meat has a secondary role and is not served in large quantities.
And, of course, olive oil is used much more than butter.


Faulk Has Already Achieved Escape Velocity With Colts
After his spectacular career at San Diego State, Marshall Faulk seemed sure to become a pro football star.
But this good?
This quickly?
"I'm surprised at my success, definitely," Faulk said.
"Nobody has been able to do the things I've done that fast."


E. L. Brebach, Hunter Reichert
Elizabeth Leigh Brebach, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gresham T. Brebach Jr. of Marblehead, Mass., is to be married there today to Jonathan Hunter Reichert, a son of Forest Reichert of Chagrin Falls, Ohio, and Ursula Mackey of Exeter, N.H.
The Rev.
John P. Potter, a minister of the United Church of Christ, is to perform the ceremony at the Old North Church.
The bride, 27, is a mathematics teacher at St.
Anne's-Belfield, a private school in Charlottesville, Va.
She graduated from Northwestern University and received a master's degree in mathematics from Columbia University.
Her father, who was formerly a director of McKinsey &amp; Company in New York, is a consultant on information systems technology in Marblehead.


Topics of The Times; Gotham as Tinsel Town
Things are so bad, or so good, in New York City that a Hollywood studio is taking over City Hall next month -- to shoot a big-budget movie with Al Pacino as mayor.
Uptown, Bruce Willis has been bombing around for "Die Hard 3" cameras.
On an abandoned pier in the Hudson River, new TV studios are taping Bill Cosby's mysteries and episodes of "Law and Order."
"Variety," the show-business weekly, says New York has "an entertainment ecology." But movie and television work is still shaking off the devastating effects of a stand-off between local unions and the big studios in 1991, when the majors halted filming in the city, talent drifted west for jobs and local movie-supply businesses went under.


Homeless in Motel Ignite Local Fears
"They're terrorizing the neighborhood," said Joan DaCorta, president of the Astoria Heights Homeowners and Tenants Association, last week.
Her organization is leading residents in a protest against the placement of 36 homeless families in the Westway Motel -- a protest that has gathered new momentum after an incident last month involving a new tenant and an elderly woman.
The incident occurred on the evening of Sept. 15, two weeks after the first homeless families moved into the motel.
Neighbors of the elderly woman said she was walking by the entrance of the motel when a young woman standing outside seized her arm and held her until she broke free.
The elderly woman was not seriously injured.


This Group Isn't Just Skating in the Wings
A week ago, the Detroit Vipers were making their minor league debut before a major league crowd in a major league arena called the Palace of Auburn Hills.
During the game, a telephone message arrived for Rick Dudley, the coach and general manager of the team.
The message was from Doug Gilmour of the Toronto Maple Leafs, one of the best players in the National Hockey League.


Sara Parsons, Richard Schaberg
Sara Olmstead Parsons, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman G. Parsons of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Richard Alan Schaberg, a son of Theresa H. Schaberg of New Canaan, Conn., and William P. Schaberg of Norwalk, Conn.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Walker officiated at Christ Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Schaberg, 29, is a vice president of corporate banking at Nationsbank in Washington.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father retired as the president and chief executive of Group Health Inc. in New York.


The Smoking Bill Struggle
Last March City Council Speaker Peter Vallone introduced a bill that, by putting sweeping new restrictions on smoking in public places, would go a long way toward insuring fresher, cleaner air for New Yorkers.
But as the Smoke-Free Air Act plods toward enactment -- presumably by the end of the year -- the controversy surrounding it gets more contentious by the minute.
The original version of the bill required employers of all sizes to restrict smoking to enclosed, specially ventilated rooms, with a limit of one room to each floor of a building.
Smoking was to be restricted to separate rooms in pool halls and separate sections of outdoor cafes, and banned in Shea and Yankee Stadiums except in separately ventilated rooms.
Nightclubs and bars not attached to public areas in restaurants or hotels were exempted, as were restaurants seating fewer than 50 people.
That last exemption was removed, however, after the vast majority of speakers at the Council Health Committee's first public hearing on the bill, in June, clamored for even stronger legislation.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
INSANITY DEFENSE
"Nuts" by Tom Topor, which opens at the Schoolhouse Theater in Croton Falls on Friday, has scheduled performances on Fridays and Saturdays at 8 P.M. and Sundays at 4 through Oct. 30.
The play, based on an actual 1970's news story, opened in New York in 1979.
It was one of the first critical examinations of the use of insanity defenses to circumvent jail terms for people being tried for serious crimes.


Oct. 2-8; Father of One H-Bomb Embraces Another


Lisa C. Colgate, Stephen R. Green
Lisa Cooper Colgate, a daughter of Mrs.
Howard Leach of San Francisco and John K. Colgate Jr. of Mill Neck, L.I., was married on Friday to Stephen Ridgely Green, a son of Camilla C. Borg of White House, Md., and Samuel A. Green Jr. of Gulfstream, Fla.
The Rev.
John G. B. Andrew performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Thomas Church in New York.
Ms.
Colgate is keeping her name.
She is a special projects director at Fortune magazine in New York.
She graduated from Wheaton College.
Her father is an owner of Silver Star Motors, an automobile dealership in Manhattan.
Her great-great-grandfather William Colgate founded the Colgate-Palmolive Company.


Campus SWAT Team
Does anyone remember the days when phrases like "the groves of academe" didn't seem embarrassing?
Is it possible that students used to make a distinction between campus life and the real world?
If anyone cherished such out-of-date notions, recent developments at the University of California at Berkeley should wake them up.
The university has attracted a media blitz by forming its own SWAT team, called the High Risk Entry Team, complete with black fatigues, automatic weapons and special training.


American Dreams And Lies
IT must be daunting having artistic charge of a small professional theater in Stamford, a city that scores 100 percent in the arts, according to a Money magazine survey.
And under the very same roof where the Royal National Theater of Britain had an American premiere last year, with Lynn Redgrave stopping by later in the season and Vanessa Redgrave on the way next month.
No wonder Ugo N. Toppo is intimidated.
Mr.
Toppo is the artistic director of the Rainbow Theater company, which rents the Leonhardt Studioinside the Rich Forum of the Stamford Center for the Arts, where classy theater is the norm and stars like Bill Cosby and Liza Minnelli are simply expected.


When Worlds Collide, on the Operatic Stage
THE MOST FAMOUS PART OF DELIBES'S opera "Lakme," which is now being performed by the New York City Opera, is the Bell Song.
It is a coloratura showpiece in which Lakme, the daughter of an Indian Brahmin, imitates the tinkling of a magician's bell.
The song is also supposed to have magical power, to lure the imperialist English soldier who has violated the holy ground of a Hindu temple and captured Lakme's heart.
In her realm, the fluid world of dream holds sway.
In his realm, responsibility and duty have their claims.
The Bell Song is a musical bridge between the two cultures; even its words speak of connecting disjointed worlds.
Perhaps it is just a coincidence, but many of this season's operatic offerings have similar preoccupations with the meeting of cultures.
The City Opera is presenting Borodin's "Prince Igor," a tale of medieval confrontations with barbarian hordes who seem to threaten Russia with either seduction or annihilation.
Recently, Leon Botstein and the American Symphony Orchestra also offered a rare concert performance of Bizet's "Djamileh," an opera in which the composer tried to submerge himself in the supposedly erotic world of the Orient.


Hilton's Belfast Deal
Hilton International wasted little time in acknowledging last month's Irish Republican Army cease-fire in Northern Ireland.
Two days after the Sept. 5 cease-fire, the company announced it would build a 187-room, $26.3 million hotel in downtown Belfast.
The deal had been in the works for months, a company spokeswoman said.
Hilton is the first international hotel chain to venture into Belfast.


The Cotton Blossom's in the North
'Show Boat' docks at the Plaza for an opening night celebration, Oct. 2.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
MIDTOWN Cross an Ocean But Stay in Town
Every two years, the Ocean Liner Museum -- which has 500 members but no fixed home -- finds the space and puts together an exhibit.


Rancor Leaves Its Mark on 103d Congress
The 103d Congress quit for the elections today, leaving behind a bitterly disputed record of legislation passed, defeated and put off.
As it closed its books, the Senate overcame the 28th Republican filibuster in two years and voted to protect millions of acres of California desert.
Some senators who had already returned to their states to campaign had to fly back to the capital to vote, and Senator Carol Moseley-Braun of Illinois arrived at the Capitol by cab to vote on the bill after escaping from a garage that had a broken electronic door opener.  [ Page 28. ]


K. L. Marshall, David Nissenbaum
Katherine Latimer Marshall, a financial analyst at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the New York investment bank, is to be married today to David Nissenbaum, a fellow in urban land-use law at the Municipal Art Society of New York.
Judge Michael R. Sheldon of the Connecticut Superior Court in Hartford is to perform the ceremony at the Avon Old Farms Hotel in Avon, Conn.
The bride, 25, graduated from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul N. Marshall of Avon.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 9, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
2
3
THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A revised edition of a 1985 novel about a young girl's mysterious disappearance.
3
3
PEARL IN THE MIST, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) The ordeals of a girl beset by a hostile stepmother and a troubled twin sister.
4*
2
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a man and a woman and for her first lover.
5
3
CHAMPIONS OF THE FORCE, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
6
17
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
7
15
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
8
12
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.
9
2
HIDDEN FIRES, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $5.99.) A 1982 novel about a Texas preacher's daughter who is tricked into marriage.
10
6
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
11*
7
GONE, BUT NOT FORGOTTEN, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) The wives of several Portland, Ore., businessmen disappear.
12
8
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Love and hope -- plus recipes -- on a Mexican ranch.
13
8
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
14
16
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's daughter.
15
25
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights drug lords in Colombia.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
3
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
4
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
3
39
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
4
1
FIVE PATIENTS, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99) A 1970 book about the practice of medicine and the ways of hospitals.
5
6
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
6
570
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
7
20
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business innovation.
8
2
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
9
1
LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Fawcett, $6.99) The country singer's memoirs.
10
39
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
11*
21
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their effects.
12*
86
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
13
23
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
14*
6
YOU BELONG TO ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $6.99.) Six true-crime cases reported by a veteran policewoman.
15
2
DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great Plains.
16*
22
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A memoir of a young woman's mental illness.
17*
69
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50) Menopause and today's women.
18*
12
A BOOK OF ANGELS, by Sophy Burnham. (Ballantine, $10.) Encounters with celestial beings as recorded by people past and present.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
7
GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.) The witticisms of a fictional slow-witted wanderer through history.
2
1
HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.."
3
186
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
4
48
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Advise for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 17, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Clamor Over Death Penalty Dominates Debate on Crime
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo often points out that he has built more prisons than all New York's governors before him combined.
But that record eluded Louis J. Pristero last week as he watched Mr.
Cuomo address the 178 newest members of the state police, Mr.
Pristero's future son-in-law among them.
"I feel less safe," Mr.
Pristero said, adding that he knew only one thing about State Senator George E. Pataki, Mr.
Cuomo's Republican rival, and that was enough.
"The death penalty for me is No. 1," he said.
"The man cannot do any worse, on crime or anything else."


Paula A. Sollami and John A. Covello
Paula Anne Sollami, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Paul J. Sollami of Trenton, is to be married today to John Anthony Covello, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald R. Covello Sr. of Princeton Junction, N.J.
The Rev.
Raymond A. Schroth is to perform the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Good Counsel Church in West Trenton, N.J.
The bride, 30, is the executive director of the New Jersey School Ethics Commission in Trenton.
She graduated from Villanova University and received a law degree from the New England School of Law.
Her father is a judge in the Office of Administrative Law in Trenton.
Her mother is a real-estate agent at Weidel in Ewing, N.J.


Corrections
A review in The Times Book Review today, about "In the Lake of the Woods," by Tim O'Brien, misstates the command responsibility of First Lieut.
William L. Calley Jr. in the killing of Vietnamese civilians at My Lai on March 16, 1968.
He commanded a United States Army platoon, not the platoon's parent company.


Kathleen Reich, Kenneth Meyer
Kathleen Danielle Reich, a graduate student in public policy at Harvard University, is to be married today to Kenneth Michael Meyer, a researcher at National Economic Research Associates in Cambridge, Mass.
Rabbi Nathaniel Ezray is to perform the ceremony at Temple Emanuel in Newton, Mass.
The couple, both 23, graduated from Yale University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


The Stirrings Of a King
LEONARD BERNSTEIN CALLED Elvis Presley "the greatest cultural force in the 20th century." In a new book, "Last Train to Memphis: The Rise of Elvis Presley," Peter Guralnick portrays the evolution of Elvis's own music, placing it in a rich social and cultural context.
In this excerpt, Mr.
Guralnick describes an 18-year-old Elvis paying $4 to make a "personal record" at Sam Phillips's Memphis Recording Service in 1953.


'Jocund Day Stands Tiptoe'
To the Editor:
In his review of Richard Holmes's "Dr. Johnson &amp; Mr. Savage" (Sept. 4), Pat Rogers notes that the adjective "jocund" was in literary use long before Wordsworth, citing Milton and Gray.
I would like to add Shakespeare to the list, and to submit that he has provided perhaps the supreme example of its use in "Romeo and Juliet," Act 3, Scene 5.
After their night of love, Romeo reluctantly says to Juliet that he "must be gone and live, or stay and die," because "Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day / Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops." W. M. MCLAMORE Gales Ferry, Conn.


Help for Places That Help
The United Hospital Fund starts its 116th fund-raising campaign with honors, awards and a party, Oct. 3.


Amy S. Wies and Kevin J. Porter
Amy Susan Wies, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Wies of Huntington, L.I., is to be married today to Kevin James Porter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Porter Sr. of Hampstead, N.H.
Msgr.
Thomas Hartman is to officiate at the C. W. Post Interfaith Chapel in Brookville, L.I.
Cantor David Benedict will take part in the ceremony.
The bride graduated from Ithaca College.
She is a vice president and associate media director at Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas Inc., the advertising agency, in New York.


Metro-North Employees Seek Pay Parity
A threat of a strike by some Metro-North workers has brought attention to a longstanding complaint of some of the railway's workers: that in many instances, their counterparts on the Long Island Rail Road are paid more.
While it is unclear if the dispute will lead to a walkout, last Thursday the railway's electrical workers rejected a contract in part because it failed to address the imbalance.


Hustler


Clinton Gets a Wiretapping Bill That Covers New Technologies
A last-ditch lobbying effort by the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation helped save legislation that forces phone companies to make their networks accessible to law-enforcement wiretaps as they switch to digital technology.
The bill passed the Senate unanimously late on Friday and goes to President Clinton, who has said he favors the legislation.
"Congress worked diligently over a period of many months to fashion this crucial legislation," the F.B.I.
Director, Louis J. Freeh, said in a statement after he spent Friday on Capitol Hill.
Lobbying, he said, had overcome "problems that once seemed insurmountable."


Flight Path: Hawks on the Wing
"SUMMER is over and people think it's time to turn their backs on gardens," said David Manning, a spokesman for Wave Hill, the gardens in Riverdale, but "heading into the fall season the whole environment is even more spectacular as the leaves turn and garden colors start emerging."
Not to mention the hawk migrations: Wave Hill is along the hawks' autumn north-south skyway.
"Because of the sweeping views along the Hudson," Mr.
Manning said, "it makes a great place to watch for them."


An Artist Armed With One-Liners Goes After Pretentions
THE seeds for the current exhibition at Creative Arts Workshop in New Haven were sown earlier this year at the Alternative Museum in Manhattan.
The event was called "Art Depot," this one is "Selected Work from Five Decades," and each stars Sam Wiener and his alter ego Evangeline Tabasco.
In a joint photograph, Mr.
Wiener's half-face wears a mustache and eyeglasses, Ms.
Tabasco's sports false eyelashes and has a flower across her upper lip.
They should make it a cabaret act.


Shortcomings Of Shore Trips
JUDGING from reader mail and telephone calls, shore excursions are often a sore point among cruise passengers.
According to Cruise Line Inc., a Miami agency, they are a main source of passenger complaints, right after air trips sold as part of the cruise package.
The situation has worsened recently, according to Joyce Landry, a partner in Landry &amp; Kling, a cruise marketing company and agency in Miami.
"In the good old days -- 10 years ago," she said with a laugh, "cruise lines offered shore excursions as a service. Now, like everything else, the excursions are increasingly commercial, and the goal of both the operator and the line is to make more money."


Dr. Daruwalla's Quest
To the Editor:
I thoroughly enjoyed reading Robert Towers's review of John Irving's latest novel, "A Son of the Circus" (Sept. 4).
The main character, Dr.
Farrokh Daru walla, feels compelled to take blood samples from achondroplastic circus clowns in India, hoping to find a genetic marker for this very common form of nonlethal skeletal dysplasia.
As Mr.
Irving mentioned in your interview with him, Dr.
Daruwalla's quest has just recently come to fruition.


When Babies Die: What the Numbers Mean
A recent study by the city's Health Department indicates a sharp increase in the infant mortality rate of Central Harlem, from 15.9 deaths per thousand live births in 1992 to 25.2 in 1993.
The City put two health experts on a conference call to discuss the figures.
One is Dr.
Irwin Redlener, the director of community pediatrics for Montefiore Medical Center, in the Bronx, which delivers primary care throughout the city.
The other is Dr.
Mary Ann Chiasson, the Health Department's Assistant Commissioner for Disease and Prevention Research.
Melinda Henneberger, a New York Times reporter who covers health issues, moderated the discussion.
Below are excerpts.
Q.
How we can explain this and how do we tell if it's a blip or not?
CHIASSON What happens is that because health center districts are fairly small and the number of infant deaths is quite small in each of the districts, the rates are very unstable.
And if you look at, for instance, just a simple graph of the infant mortality rate in Central Harlem over time, you'll see that the actual line bounces up and down all over the place. . . .
In fact the overall trend in Central Harlem, like the rest of the city, is going down. . . .


On Tap: Platform Tennis
THIS week professional paddle players from all over the country are heading to the Field Club of Greenwich for the first leg of the Lineal Group Grand Prix platform tennis series.
"Last year we turned down 29 men's teams," said Brian Zevnik, of the American Platform Tennis Association.
This year, by using courts at clubs in New Canaan and Darien in addition to those in the Greenwich area, the tournament will be able to accommodate 80 men's teams, 32 women's teams and sixteen 45-and-over teams, Mr.
Zevnik said.


When Women Venture Forth
IT'S AN AVERAGE SATURDAY NIGHT in America, circa 1984.
A 15-year-old girl stands in the back of a rock club.
She's watching a local band -- four guys playing punk rock, screaming about how much they hate the Government and how much they love beer.
A knot of boys from the girl's high school tightens at the front of the stage.
Bored, she hums a Pretenders song, wishing she could sing as well as Chrissie Hynde or at least look as gorgeous as Blondie's Debbie Harry.
She hasn't heard of the Raincoats or the Slits, the bands that turned London's rock scene feminist for a moment in the late 1970's.
She admires Tina Weymouth, Talking Heads' bass player; still she can't imagine being the one female playing with three men, even if she could date one, like Tina did the drummer Chris Franz.
Besides, none of the guys in her local scene really even talk to her, much less ask if she'd like to join a band.


Vintage '94


Pulling the Plug On Excellence
To the Editor:  Edward Rothstein's comments motivated by the dilemma of the 92d Street Y  [ "Looking for Clones in All the Wrong Places," Sept. 25 ]  were right on the mark.
The Y's new administrative moguls come from the same mold as the power wizards of conglomerates where the tail invariably wags the dog.
There is a significant difference between social work and sociological phenomena.
When the Y fails to sell out the house or a classical concert loses money, we must conclude that there are no longer enough people to replace the passionately involved, teeming audiences enjoyed by Andres Segovia, Artur Schnabel, Wanda Landowska and the Budapest String Quartet.
This shortage is a question of literacy, or rather of diminished literacy.


Back From the Mommy Track
JACQUELINE ENGEL IRWIN quit her job as a marketing director at Citibank in 1980 to raise her two daughters.
Eight years later, after running her own consulting firm and starting an after-school center, she returned to corporate life in a position for which she felt overqualified.
Ms.
Irwin, now 52, has spent the last six years at the Nynex Corporation in New York, retracing her steps up the corporate ladder.
In terms of salary and responsibilities, she figures she is no further along than when she stepped off the fast track 14 years ago.
Kitty Knecht began paving the road back to the fast track on the day that she announced her second pregnancy.
A market researcher at the Quaker Oats Company in Chicago, she received a commitment from management to let her come back part time -- three days a week -- after her maternity leave.
When she was ready for a full-time schedule two years later in 1991, she negotiated a promotion as a condition for the increased work load.
But Ms.
Knecht, who has a Ph.D. in psychology, still landed in what looked like a dead-end job.
She said she sensed a need "to prove that I would travel, that I could stand the pace, that I could be productive and that I wasn't going to get pregnant again." Ms.
Knecht, now 41, has since earned another promotion.


Colorado Vote Will Test Law On Obscenity
Asserting that Colorado has become a haven for sexually explicit books, magazines and videos, a conservative group here is promoting an initiative on the November ballot that would give towns and cities more power to outlaw such materials.
The measure, which won a place on the ballot after a petition drive gathered more than 80,000 signatures, has alarmed civil libertarians in Colorado, who say its passage would mean widespread censorship of books and movies.


'I Feel His Lack of Love for Me'
WHO WILL RUN THE FROG HOSPITAL?
By Lorrie Moore. 148 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $20.


Scotland by the Yard


Managers Are Due Millions in Overtime, a Federal Judge Says
A Federal judge has ruled that 435 managers employed by New York City are entitled to millions in unpaid overtime for a four-year period.
Lawyers for the managers calculated that the bill for the unpaid overtime, doubled by damages ordered by the court, could reach as much as $15 million.


BEST SELLERS: October 9, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
6
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
2
1
TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching Hour" and "Lasher."
3
2
3
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
4
3
4
THE BODY FARM, by Patricia Cornwell. (Scribners, $23.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates the kidnapping and murder of a small North Carolina girl.
5
4
32
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
6
5
16
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
7
6
11
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's casual visit to a small town changes the lives of many of its inhabitants, as well as her own.
8
7
113
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
9
9
18
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
10*
14
2
HOLLYWOOD KIDS, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) The tribulations of the privileged adult children of legendary movie stars.
11
8
6
A SON OF THE CIRCUS, by John Irving. (Random House, $25.) Returning to his native India, a Canadian physician encounters a murderer he once knew.
12
1
WILD HORSES, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) A film maker pursues the secret confided to him by a dying racing expert.
13
12
3
BROTHERS AND SISTERS, by Bebe Moore Campbell. (Putnam, $22.95.) The loyalties of a black woman are tested by colleagues' behavior in a Los Angeles bank.
14
10
10
DISNEY'S THE LION KING,adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The coming of age of animal royalty, told in words and pictures.
15
15
2
ONE TRUE THING, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) A woman who cared for her fatally ill mother is charged with killing her.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
4
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the present.
2
2
5
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
3
6
3
BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An illustrated history of the game.
4
9
2
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.
5
5
31
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
6
4
42
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
7
8
2
ALL'S FAIR, by Mary Matalin and James Carville with Peter Knobler. (Random House/Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The 1992 Presidential campaign through the eyes of a pair of romantically involved consultants.
8
3
74
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
9
7
11
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Addison-Wesley, $23.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
10
10
8
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Villard, $27.50.) Five generations of an American family.
11
1
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
12
13
3
BETTER THAN SEX, by Hunter S. Thompson. (Random House, $23.) The 1992 Presidential campaign as seen by the gonzo journalist.
13
14
2
THE LAST BUS TO ALBUQUERQUE, by Lewis Grizzard.
Edited by Gerrie Ferris. (Longstreet, $20.) A collection of essays by the late syndicated humorist.
14
11
4
TRUE NORTH, by Jill Ker Conway. (Knopf, $23.) The memoir of an Australian woman: from graduate student at Harvard to president of Smith College.
15*
12
3
BRANDO: Songs My Mother Taught Me, by Marlon Brando with Robert Lindsey. (Random House, $25.) The memoirs of the actor.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
72
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
2
24
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
4
24
MAGIC EYE II, by N. E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of oscillating designs.
4
3
2
MAGIC EYE III, by N. E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 24, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest) AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A FACE, by Lucy Grealy. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A poet's memoir of a truly harrowing childhood: attacked at 9 by a bone cancer that consumed her face, she spent 18 years in surgical reconstruction; her moral and psychic survival is miraculous.
CHRISTINA STEAD: A Biography, by Hazel Rowley. (Holt, $37.50.) The difficult life of a fine and strangely mimetic novelist; Australian born, she had no real home but her writing captured whatever environment she occupied.
CITY ON A HILL: Testing the American Dream at City College, by James Traub. (William Patrick/ Addison-Wesley, $25.) The transformative mission of a public institution that tried to do its duty first by elitism, later by inclusion.
CODA, by Thea Astley. (Putnam, $19.95.) In a shopping mall in northern Australia, the spirited, eccentric heroine of Ms.
Astley's 13th novel, a kind of female Lear, contemplates her past and articulates her wrath at age and abandonment.
DEAD RIGHT, by David Frum. (New Republic/ Basic Books, $23.) A fierce conservative chides his fellows, including the Reaganites, for abandoning the true economic doctrine in favor of rhetoric about social values and concessions to the recipients of Government entitlements.
FIFTY DAYS OF SOLITUDE, by Doris Grumbach. (Beacon, $15.) The record of a self-inflicted isolation in a Maine winter, taken by a distinguished writer as a test of character and a quest for "that mysterious inner place."  IMPERIUM, by Ryszard Kapuscinski. (Knopf, $24.) Poland's pre-eminent foreign correspondent looks close to home and loses his detachment, rendering Russia and its inhabitants as ignorant, joyless, servile and unlikely to come to any good.
THE MORAL ANIMAL: The New Science of Evolutionary Psychology, by Robert Wright. (Pantheon, $27.50.) A journalist's engrossing exploration of scientists' current understanding of the evolution of human moral feelings, driven by a genetic self-interest that is entirely hidden from the conscious mind.
NONE TO ACCOMPANY ME, by Nadine Gordimer. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) Ms.
Gordimer's 11th novel, whose central figure is a progressive white woman in the new South Africa, shows again that the true focus of social concern is on the particular lives of individuals.
STALIN AND THE BOMB: The Soviet Union and Atomic Energy, 1939-1956, by David Holloway. (Yale University, $30.) A superb history, showing how Stalin both helped and hindered his nuclear scientists, and telling more about the Soviet H-bomb project than is known about our own.
THE VIRGINIA ADVENTURE.
Roanoke to James Towne: An Archaeological and Historical Odyssey, by Ivor Noel Hume. (Knopf, $35.) With careful handling, the frail remains of the earliest colonial past yield to archeologists truths not recoverable from written sources (including a few unsuspected crimes and blunders).


Gridlock on Crossover Bridge
STEVE MARTLAND IS a tough-looking English musician in a T-shirt.
He doesn't like being called a crossover composer but his various audiences don't give him much choice.
The word "crossover" implies "bridge." Different communities live on different sides of the bridge, and the bridge puts them in touch.
If Mr.
Martland isn't writing crossover music, what he does write is being aimed at crossover audiences whether he wants it or not.
Indeed, as music pure and simple, crossover may not exist at all.
Perhaps it lives only in people's attitudes, the reaction more real than the act itself.


INSIDE
Where They Stand on Crime
Clamor over the death penalty tends to drown out debate between New York's candidates for governor over what to do about crime.
Page 45.
A Heritage Is Reclaimed
At a Manhattan museum, Indians themselves are making the decisions about what will be displayed and what will go back to tribes.
Page 45.
A Santa Fe Fantasy
The generally faded colors considered the hallmark of Southwestern furniture were the work of the sun, not artists, a study says.
Page 32.


Marcia T. James, Martin Feinstein
Marcia Teller James, a financial consultant in Vienna, Va., for Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, and Martin Feinstein, the general director of the Washington Opera, are to be married today in McLean, Va.
Justice Antonin Scalia of the Supreme Court is to perform the ceremony at the home of Robert Feinstein, the bridegroom's son.
The bride graduated from Vassar College.
She is a daughter of the late Dr. and Mrs.
D.
Woolsey Teller.
The bride's previous marriage, to Arthur L. James, now deceased, ended in divorce.


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on Sept. 25 about the weather in Sydney in November, December and January misstated average temperatures and precipitation levels.
The figures were for Bourke, New South Wales.
The average high in Sydney in November is 74 degrees, the low 60 and the precipitation 2.9 inches.
The corresponding figures for December are 77, 63 and 2.9; for January they are 78, 65 and 3.5.


Hillary B. Koota, Glenn J. Krevlin
Hillary Beth Koota, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gordon Koota of New York, is to be married today to Glenn Jeffrey Krevlin, a son of Nina Krevlin of Rye Brook, N.Y., and the late Seymour Krevlin.
Rabbi David Posner is to officiate at the St.
Regis in New York.
The bride is the corporate promotion director for Conde Nast Publications in New York.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father is a general surgeon and the medical director of the Kingsboro Medical Group of HIP, the health maintenance organization, in Brooklyn.
Her mother, Audrey Koota, is the executive director of marketing at WNET-TV, Channel 13, in New York.


Uses of Theory
To the Editor:  Surely Richard Taruskin does not mean to propose that "music is the universal language" just because there are ancient diatonic melodies  [ "Does Nature Call the Tune?," Sept. 19 ] .
Traditional Japanese or Arabic music can sound as odd to the American on the street as Milton Babbitt, and diatonic scales, however apparently natural to us Westerners, have never been the sine qua non of music making in the world.
Let's face it: music is universal the way food is universal.
One culture's symbol of home and hearth is another's rotten cabbage.
Does Mr.
Taruskin really have scientific proof that atonality stinks?
Of course not.
He glibly invokes the recent work of cognitive psychologists, but that work is more concerned with how we recognize our mothers than how we recognize art.
It will be a long time, if ever, before scientists claim authority on such issues as esthetic judgment.
When he misappropriates their research to declare certain cultural artifacts unnatural, Mr.
Taruskin, far from announcing to us the latest musical discoveries, is in fact reviving the most notorious attacks on modernism of the past.


Community Boards: Coming Meetings
BROOKLYN  DISTRICT 1 Greenpoint, Williamsburg; second Tuesday of month; next Oct. 11, 7 P.M.,; 211 Ainslie Street; (718) 388-4440.
Chairman: Vincent V. Abate; District Manager: Gerald A. Esposito.
DISTRICT 2 Fort Greene, Brooklyn Heights; second Wednesday of month; next Oct. 12, 6 P.M.; Brooklyn Borough Hall, 209 Joralemon Street; (718) 596-5410.
Chairwoman: Libbie Wills; District Manager: Evelyn Williams.
DISTRICT 3 Bedford-Stuyvesant; first Monday of month; November 7; 7 P.M., 1368 Fulton Street; (718) 622-6601.
Chairwoman: Marjorie Matthews; District Manager: Lewis Watkins.
DISTRICT 4 Bushwick; third Wednesday of month; next Oct. 19, 7 P.M., 195 Linden Street; (718) 628-8400.
Chairwoman: Anna Gonzalez; District Manager: Nadine Whitted.
DISTRICT 5 East New York; fourth Wednesday of month; next Oct. 26; 7:30 P.M.; location t.b.a.; (718) 498-5711.
Chairman: Earl Williams; District Manager: Walter Campbell.
DISTRICT 6 Park Slope; second Wednesday of month; next Oct. 12, 6:30 P.M., Old First Reformed Church, Carroll Street at Seventh Avenue; (718) 643-3027.
Chairwoman: Stephanie Twin; District Manager; Craig Hammerman.
DISTRICT 7 Sunset Park; third Wednesday of month; next Oct. 19, 6 P.M., Marien Heim Residence, 4250 Fourth Avenue; (718) 854-0003.
Chairwoman: Beatrice DeSapio; District Manager: Maureen Pender.
DISTRICT 8 Crown Heights; second Thursday of month; next Oct. 13, 7:30 P.M., First Church of God and Christ, 221 Kingston Avenue and Park Place; (718) 467-5574.
Chairman: Robert Matthews; District Manager: Al Wright.
DISTRICT 9 Crown Heights, Prospect-Lefferts Gardens, Wingate; fourth Tuesday of month; next Oct. 25, 7 P.M., Atwell J.H.S., 400 Empire Boulevard; (718) 778-9279.
Chairman: Anthony Clouden; District Manager: Pearl Miles.
DISTRICT 10 Bay Ridge, Dyker Heights; third Monday of month; next Oct. 17, 7:30 P.M., Shore Hill Community Room, 9000 Shore Road at 91st Street; (718) 745-6827.
Chairman: Basil Capetanakis; District Manager: Mary Sempepos.
DISTRICT 11 Bensonhurst; second Thursday of month; next Oct. 13, 7:15 P.M., 2300 Cropsey Avenue; (718) 266-8800.
Chairman: William Guarinello; District Manager: Howard Feuer.
DISTRICT 12 Borough Park; last Tuesday of month; next Oct. 25, 7:45 P.M., P.S. 192, 4715 18th Avenue; (718) 851-0800.
Chairman: Alan J. Duprow; District Manager: Priscilla Celano.
DISTRICT 13 Coney Island, Brighton Beach; last Wednesday of month; next meeting Oct. 26, 7:30 P.M., Coney Island Hospital, 2601 Ocean Parkway; (718) 266-3001.
Chairwoman: Betty Balsam; District Manager: Chuck Reichenthal.
DISTRICT 14 Flatbush, Midwood; second Monday of month; next meeting Oct. 17, 7:15 P.M., Edward R. Murrow High School, 1600 Avenue L; (718) 859-6357.
Chairman: Alvin Berk; District Manager: Terry Rodie.
DISTRICT 15 Manhattan Beach, Sheepshead Bay, Gravesend; last Tuesday of month; next Oct. 26, 7 P.M., Kingsborough Community College, at Oriental Boulevard; (718) 332-3008.
Chairman: John Nikas; District Manager: Barbara Simmons.
DISTRICT 16 Brownsville, Ocean Hill; last Tuesday of month; next Oct. 25, 7 P.M., 216 Rockaway Avenue; (718) 385-0323.
Chairman: Charles T. Hamilton; District Manager: David Greene.
DISTRICT 17 East Flatbush; third Wednesday of month; next meeting Oct. 19, 7 P.M., P.S. 208, at Avenue D, between East 48th and 49th Streets; (718) 467-3536.
Chairman: Louis Burgess; District Manager: Rochelle Tenner.
DISTRICT 18 Canarsie, Mill Basin, Marine Park, Bergen Beach; second Wednesday of month; next Oct. 19, 8 P.M., Kings Plaza Community Room, Flatbush Avenue and Avenue V; (718) 241-0422.
Chairman: Salvatore Zunno; District Manager: Dorothy Turano.
BRONX  DISTRICT 1 Port Morris, Melrose, Mott Haven; last Thursday of the month; next Oct. 27, 6:30 P.M., Lincoln Hospital, 234 East 149th Street; (718) 585-7117.
Chairman: George Rodriguez; District Manager: Robert Crespo.
DISTRICT 2 Hunts Point, Longwood; last Wednesday of the month; next Oct. 26; location t.b.a.; (718) 328-9125.
Chairman Roland Lopez; District Manager: John Roberts.
DISTRICT 3 Morrisania; second Tuesday of the month; next Oct. 11, 6:30 P.M., Junior High School 98, 1619 Boston Road; (718) 589-6300.
Chairwoman: Marcella R. Brown; District Manager: John W. Dudley.
DISTRICT 4 East and West Concourse, Mount Eden, Highbridge, Concourse Village; fourth Tuesday of the month; next Oct. 25, 6 P.M., 1650 Selwyn Avenue, Community Room; (718) 299-0800.
Chairman: Robert Hannibal; District Manager: Herbert Samuels.
DISTRICT 5 Mount Hope, Morris Heights, Fordham University Heights; fourth Wednesday of the month; next Oct. 26, 6 P.M., East Concourse Hebrew Center, 236 East Tremont Avenue; (718) 364-2030.
Chairman: Kenneth Fogarty; District Manager: Adolfo Carion.
DISTRICT 6 Bathgate, Belmont, Bronx Park South, Crotona Park North, East Tremont and West Farms; first Wednesday of the month; next Oct. 12, 6:30 P.M., St.
Barnabas Hospital, East 183d Street and Third Avenue, auditorium; (718) 579-6990.
Chairman: Julio E. Munoz; District Manager: Bobbi Salters.
DISTRICT 7 University Heights, Norwood, Fordham, Bedford and Bedford Park; third Tuesday of month; next Oct. 18, 7 P.M., Cosmopolitan Church of the Lord Jesus Christ, 39 West 190th Street, between Davidson and Grant Avenues; (718) 933-5650.
Chairwoman: Nora Feury; District Manager: Rita Kessler.
DISTRICT 8 Kingsbridge, Marble Hill, North Riverdale, Spuyten Duyvil, Fieldston; second Tuesday of the month; next Oct. 11, 7:30 P.M., Conservative Synagogue, West 250th Street and Henry Hudson Parkway; (718) 884-3959.
Chairwoman: Joyce Pilsner; District Manager: Grace Belkin.
DISTRICT 9 Bronx River, Castle Hill, Clason Point, Harding Park, Parkchester, Bruckner, Soundview and Unionport; last Thursday of the month; next Oct. 27, 8 P.M., Community Board Office, 1967 Turnbull Avenue, off of Bruckner Boulevard; (718) 823-3034.
Chairwoman: Elizabeth Rodriguez; District Manager: Francisco Gonzalez.
DISTRICT 10 City Island, Throgs Neck, Pelham Bay, Country Club, Co-op City; third Thursday of month; next Oct. 20, 7:30 P.M.; First Presbyterian Church of Throgs Neck, 3051 East Tremont Avenue at Dudley Avenue; (718) 892-1161.
Chairman: Tony Cannata; District Manager: James Vacca.
DISTRICT 11 Allerton, Eastchester, Pelham Parkway, Morris Park; third Thursday of the month; next Oct. 20, 7:30 P.M., Knights of Columbus, Mary Queen of Peace Hall, 1919 Williamsbridge Road, between Rhinelander and Neill Avenues; (718) 892-6262.
Chairman: Frank Muccioli; District Manager: Thomas Lucania.
DISTRICT 12 Wakefield, Woodlawn, Williamsburg, Baychester, Eastchester; fourth Thursday of the month; next Oct. 27, 8 P.M., 4101 White Plains Road; (718) 881-4455.
Chairman: Father Richard Gorman; District Manager: Samuel Bea Jr.
Schedules for board meetings in other boroughs will appear in subsequent issues of The City.


PENTAGON MOVING A FORCE OF 4,000 TO GUARD KUWAIT
The United States ordered 4,000 Army troops to Kuwait today as Iraqi forces massed near the Kuwaiti border.
The Pentagon announced the move as intelligence reports indicated that Iraq's forces near Kuwait had grown to about 50,000 troops, some of whom have moved within 12 miles of the border.


Elaine Cheng, Allen B. J. Paik
Elaine Cheng, a daughter of Nina Cheng of Taipei, Taiwan, and the late Thomas Cheng, was married yesterday to Allen B. J. Paik, the son of Inja and Chei-Min Paik of Chevy Chase, Md.
The Rev.
Dr.
Melvin Hawthorne officiated at the ecumenical ceremony at the Estherwood mansion in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
The bride, 29, is a finance manager at the Colgate-Palmolive Company in New York.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.
She and the bridegroom received M.B.A.'s from Columbia University.
Her mother is the chairman of the Taipei operations of TCBY Enterprises Inc., the yogurt chain, and Mothercare UK, a retailer of infants' clothing and accessories.


Marian H. Feldman, James M. Berger
Marian Helen Feldman, a daughter of Joan and Dr.
Paul D. Feldman of Baltimore, is to be married today to James Michael Berger, the son of Pat Berger and Dr.
Michael Berger, both of Sante Fe, N.M.
The Rev.
Denise Jiacommozzi, a minister of the United Church of Christ, is to perform the ceremony at the Mount Clare Museum House in Baltimore, where the bride's mother is the director.
The bride, 25, and bridegroom, 26, are doctoral candidates at Harvard University, she in art history and he in biochemistry.
She graduated from Columbia University.
He graduated from the University of Utah.
Both were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


A HOPLOPHOBE AMONG THE GUNNIES
As off center as it may be, it is not the National Rifle Association that scares me ("A Hoplophobe Among the Gunnies," by Philip Weiss, Sept. 11).
This country has the strength, wisdom and self-confidence to withstand the ranting of a few gun nuts.


Plastics From the Ground Up -- Think Again
To the Editor:
Supercritical carbon dioxide holds the promise of creating new materials, ("Rethinking Plastics From the Ground Up," Technology, Sept. 11), but most of the environmental benefits claimed for this new technology have been with us for a while.
More than 20 years ago, Union Carbide developed a proprietary process for making polyethylene, the most widely used plastic, that uses no solvents and has very low emissions, much like the process using supercritical carbon dioxide.
The technology, which Union Carbide licenses, accounts for about 25 percent of all polyethylene production.
This technology is also used to manufacture other plastics, like polypropylene.
DAVE JAMES Bound Brook, N.J., Sept. 15 The writer is Union Carbide's vice president for technology.


Deborah S. Brause, Michael L. Bunder
Deborah Sue Brause, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Brause of Larchmont, N.Y., is to be married today to Michael Lawrence Bunder, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis Bunder of New York.
Rabbi Irving Koslowe is to perform the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
The bride, 27, graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University.
She is a commercial manager for Brause Realty in New York.
Her father is the president of the company.
Her mother, Ruth A. Brause, is a residential broker at Burbank/Whittemore, a real-estate company in Larchmont.


THE WHITE WIFE
I was fascinated by your Hers column on the white wife as a trophy for black men.


Oct. 2-8: Test for a Law; An Anti-Abortion Killer Is Convicted in Florida
A jury in Pensacola, Fla., sent the political signal that the Clinton Administration had sought when it made Paul J. Hill, an advocate of killing abortion providers, the first person indicted under the four-month-old law designed to curb violence against abortion clinics.
The 40-year-old Mr.
Hill was convicted in the shooting deaths on July 29 of Dr.
John B. Britton, 69, and his volunteer bodyguard, James H. Barrett, 74, at the Pensacola Ladies Center.
The conviction could mean a life sentence.


36 Hours in Nowhere
TRAVEL on the open ocean has always suggested a potent blend of romance, mystery and adventure, three words not automatically associated with New Jersey.
Yet that's the unseen land that beckons off the bow on the two-day "cruises to nowhere" that regularly depart New York.
Ships leave the Hudson River docks, float serenely southward, not much farther offshore than a crab pot.
A day later, their screws turning slowly, they turn right around and, with due deliberation, make their way back to New York.
As a test of man against the elements, the experience is slightly more adventurous than sitting on the couch and flipping the remote control.


RECORD BRIEFS
Stravinsky: 'The Firebird,' 'Symphonies of Wind Instruments'  London Symphony conducted by Kent Nagano.
Virgin Classics 7 2435 45032 2; CD.
The juxtaposition of "The Firebird" and "Symphonies of Wind Instruments" on Kent Nagano's new Stravinsky CD suggests a link between works that seem quite disparate.
"Firebird" is conventionally considered the height of Stravinsky's early Russian Romanticism, while "Symphonies" is an austere modernist utterance poised between the early "Rite of Spring" radicalism and the Neo-Classicism of the 1920's.


Can Olympic Torch Ignite Atlanta Reconstruction?
First a quixotic pipe dream, then an exhilarating but distant reality, the 1996 Summer Olympic Games have suddenly become a juggernaut transforming the look and feel of Atlanta.
But as the pieces come together for the $1.6 billion Olympiad, the largest extravaganza any American city has ever staged, it remains unclear whether the games will produce anything resembling the inner-city revitalization that many here envisioned when Atlanta was awarded the games four years ago.


CRIME
Everywhere you look, nobody's playing baseball.
Not even Harvey Blissberg, the Boston Red Sox outfielder who turned private detective when he got too old to play the game.
How old is that? you ask.
Well, in Richard Rosen's WORLD OF HURT (Walker, $20.95), a lippy cop describes Harvey's face as "too old for a baseball card but not old enough for plastic surgery." Which makes him nicely seasoned for the job he takes on for his brother, Norm: to find out who killed a real estate agent who played on Norm's pickup basketball team in an affluent Chicago suburb.
The sights that catch Harvey's eye are homely but unnerving, from the resident "suicidologist" installed at a local high school to the meticulously groomed split-level homes in which he glimpses "people growing older inside their houses." A thinking man like that -- no wonder Harvey was always so lonely in the outfield.


The World; Russia's Nationalists Love a Man In Uniform
ONE of Russia's strange new heroes, in this tortured period that has produced very few, is the commander of only 10,000 officers and men in one of the oddest corners of the former Soviet Union, not even bordering Russia.
But he is favored by two-thirds of the Russian army officer corps in opinion surveys to be the next Defense Minister, is pushed by many nationalists as a plausible presidential candidate and has recently survived an official attempt to oust him by appealing directly to President Boris N. Yeltsin, whom he had just insulted in a newspaper interview.


Ms. O'Connor and Mr. Thomsen
Mary-Christine O'Connor, the pastoral associate and cantor at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York, was married there yesterday to Stephen Sebastian Thomsen, the president of the Thomsen Construction Company in New York.
The Rev.
Walter F. Modrys performed the Roman Catholic ceremony, in which the Rev.
John T. O'Connor, the bride's uncle, took part.
Ms.
O'Connor, 41, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Denison University and received a Master of Divinity degree from Union Theological Seminary in New York.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. O'Connor of Port Washington, L.I.
Her father is a senior partner of O'Connor &amp; Bergmann, a New York law firm.
Her mother, Beatrice D. O'Connor, is an adjunct assistant professor of communications at Nassau Community College in Garden City, L.I.


Creating Fashion For a Good Cause
Last Saturday, Madison Avenue was swarming with Ralph Lauren employees wearing "Fashion Targets Breast Cancer" T-shirts with a bull's-eye design.
Though the shirts have a serious message, they also quickly became a 90's style statement: involvement plus flair.
Some wore them over shirts or turtlenecks; others under vests or suspenders.


Susan R. Rodis, David B. Plass
Dr.
Susan Rebecca Rodis, the daughter of Ellen and Gerald B. Rodis of Woodbury, L.I., is to be married today to David Brian Plass, a son of Mickey and Dr.
Richard M. Plass of College Point, Queens.
Rabbi Marc Gellman is to officiate at Temple Beth-El in Great Neck, L.I.
The bride, 31, is an orthodontist in West Islip, L.I., and Coram, L.I.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and received her dental degree and an orthodontic certificate from Tufts University.
Her father is a partner in Sosinsky, Rodis &amp; Stein, an accounting firm in Woodbury.


Republicans Delight In Frustrating Reform
To the Editor:
In ancient Rome, successive Caesars turned a thumb down, to signify the death of a hapless gladiator.
In today's Washington, eight United States senators, by their failure to vote effectively to end a Republican filibuster, glory in signifying the death of a bill that would have reformed the way election campaigns are financed (front page, Oct. 1).
It is not as dramatic a contest -- no lions, no muscular champion -- but of immense, and sad, importance to our tattered democratic system.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL
New Jersey
ORADELL, N.J., Oct. 8 -- The state's top-ranked team, Bergen Catholic (3-0), avenged last season's only loss by clobbering league rival Passaic (1-1-1), 33-7, today.
"We've been thinking of that loss to Passaic for 365 days," said North Carolina-bound Ryan Carfley, the Crusaders' 6-foot-3-inch, 296-pound offensive tackle.
"It really broke our whole season. It's nice to finally get revenge."
B.
C., which fell to Passaic, 34-20, in 1993, was led by quarterback Joe Piela, who threw a 17-yard touchdown to Mike Zampieri and ran for a 15-yard score.
Dom DeSteno and Jim Finn also ran for scores.
The Crusaders' kicking game was also instrumental in the victory.
Buck Elsey kicked two 30-yard field goals and three extra-points while Matt Feinstein drilled a 55-yard punt.
DASHING DOUG: Douglas McClain dashed for two touchdowns, on 3- and 5-yard carries, to lead ROSELLE (2-1) to a 12-7 defeat of GOVERNOR LIVINGSTON (1-2).
Both scores were off fumble recoveries.
CLOSE CALL: Ray Inverillo scored the winning touchdown on a 4-yard run in the fourth quarter as WAYNE VALLEY (3-0) edged MADISON (2-1) 12-10.
Steve Ludwig set up the game-deciding play with a 40-yard pass to Bryan Florio.
DOMINANT DELBARTON: Ryan Crane threw four touchdown passes as DELBARTON (4-0) crushed WEST ORANGE (1-3), 35-10.
Charlie Minervino caught three of the scoring passes and had 86 receiving yards.
Long Island
LIONS CONTINUE TO ROAR: Brian Murn returned an interception 37 yards for a touchdown and Chris Conza and Tim Starke each recovered a fumble to help WEST ISLIP (3-0) shut out WALT WHITMAN (1-2), 19-0.
The Lions' offensive touchdowns were scored by Matt Botz and Scott Coppo.
FALCONS SOAR: Matt Whelan booted a 27-yard field goal with 4 minutes remaining to lift DEER PARK (1-2) over MILLER PLACE (0-3), 10-7.
A BUNCH FOR BRADY: Ryan Brady rushed 21 times for 112 yards and scored 2 touchdowns while recording 15 tackles as a linebacker to power HARBORFIELDS (2-0-1) past PORT JEFFERSON (0-2-1), 33-0.
A.
J.
Schaeffer and his brother Eric both contributed touchdowns for the winners.
GOING THE DISTANCE: Mike Sheridan dashed 87 yards for a score and Ken Kramer returned a punt 70 yards as MASSAPEQUA (3-0) defeated BALDWIN (1-1-1), 21-8.
Tom Santoro (18 rushes for 156 yards) scored the Chiefs' first touchdown on a 5-yard blast.
Sal Alos (16 tackles), Ken Kramer (5 tackles and 2 sacks) and David Innis (12 tackles) were Massapequa's leaders on defense.
BIG D: Thomas Hourican pulled down two of LYNBROOK'S four interceptions as the Owls knocked off MINEOLA (0-3), 23-6.
Lynbrook upped its record to 2-1. . . .
Nick Silocamo scored on a 22-yard dash and a 1-yard scramble to catapult VALLEY STREAM CENTRAL (2-1) over BELLMORE KENNEDY (0-3), 12-0.
Central's defense forced four fumbles. . . .
Dominick Bracero (9 tackles, 1 sack) and Michael Kahnis (10 tackles, 1 sack) helped keep WESTHAMPTON (1-2) at bay, as COMSEWOGUE (3-0) put the hurt on Westhampton, 28-7. . . .
Rich Renny's stellar play on both sides of the ball fueled HERRICKS's (3-0) 14-0 shutout of GLEN COVE (1-2).
Renny (18 rushes for 104 yards) scored a running touchdown and had 11 tackles on defense. . . .
Linebacker Robby Coschia had 7 tackles and recovered 3 fumbles as BETHPAGE (3-0) destroyed WESTBURY (2-1), 44-0.
The Golden Eagles forced 4 turnovers and registered 5 sacks. . . .
Desmond Cabrera had eight tackles, blocked a punt and returned an interception 45 yards for a touchdown to help SEWANAKA (2-1) pound ROSLYN (0-3), 42-14.
Lloyd Harrison rumbled for 118 yards and three touchdowns (10, 13, 55 yards). . . .
Nick Martone (12 tackles), Mike Ayvazian (7 tackles), and Mins Chuu (8 tackles), were all over the field as LOCUST VALLEY (3-0) beat JERICHO (0-3), 15-8.
Valley's offense was ignited by Dennis McKeefery's 28-yard touchdown pass to Garrett Jankowski and a 3-yard scoring run by Tim Bellisari (8 rushes for 60 yards).
SUPER SOPHS: Sophomores Freddie Harris and Travis Curry led LONG BEACH past OCEANSIDE, 20-0.
Harris ran for 135 yards, with scoring sprints of 25, 5 and 45 yards.
Curry had 12 tackles and three sacks.
TWO FOR TWO: Larry Ford racked up 306 all-purpose yards, as HEMPSTEAD (2-1-0) rolled past PLAINVIEW (1-2-0), 28-7.
Ford found Omary Webb in the end zone for a 32-yard touchdown and hustled 4 yards for another.
NEVER SAY DIE: Patrick Murphy and James Brantuk scored 39 seconds apart late in the second quarter to help spark GARDEN CITY's (3-0) 28-14 come-from-behind victory over CAREY (0-3).
The Trojans rallied from a 14-point first-quarter deficit with 28 unanswered points, including two touchdown passes from Paul Gale.
Carey jumped to a 14-0 lead when Rich Haering raced 65 yards for a touchdown.
Carey scored again when Anthony Carnazza blocked a punt and recovered it in the end zone.
But the Trojans stormed back with 3 minutes left in the second quarter.
Gale hit Murphy with a 10-yard scoring strike and Brantuk scored 39 seconds later when he returned an interception 8 yards.
Laurence Galli then added a 43-yard touchdown scamper in the third quarter and Gale closed out the scoring with a 19-yard pass to Adam Cherney.
With the victory, the Trojans extended their consecutive regular-season winning streak to 49 games.
Preps
SETTING THE STAGE: Mike Amendola (35 carries for 191 yards) scored two touchdowns, both of which were set up by William Probst's interceptions as LONG ISLAND LUTHERAN (4-0) slipped past DAULTON (0-3), 12-6.
Dirk Pechstein's 19 tackles were instrumental in holding Daulton to 6 points.
RIVERDALE SEES ZEROES AGAIN: For the second consecutive week, RIVERDALE (2-0-2) and its opponent did not score a point.
Yesterday, Riverdale tied XAVIER (1-1-2), 0-0.
Last week, Riverdale and Poly Prep were deadlocked at 0-0.
HARD TIMES FOR HARTRIDGE: James Young broke loose for 2 touchdowns and 151 yards on 7 carries, as MORRISTOWN BEARD (4-0) thrashed WARDLAW-HARTRIDGE (0-4), 43-8.
Michael McCabe went 6 for 12, passing for 103 yards and a touchdown.
WINNING CONNECTION: Tom Mulvoy connected with Scott Pertel twice for touchdowns as Brunswick (4-0) blanked Rye (2-2), 28-0.
The scores came on 32- and 77-yard passes.
PETE THE PASSER: Pete Ragosa threw for 186 yards and two touchdowns as DEERFIELD (2-1) downed HOTCHKISS (1-2), 27-6.
Sean Furey caught a 54-yard scoring strike from Ragosa.
Brad Johnston pulled one in from 16 yards.
Jason Williams led the ground attack with 112 yards and a touchdown.
Westchester and Rockland
RUSHIN' RASHAAN: Rashaan Allen (20 carries for 133 yards, 1 touchdown) padded his Westchester County total yardage lead to 598 yards as ROOSEVELT (5-0) defeated WHITE PLAINS (1-4), 18-8.
Connecticut
CLASSIC CONFRONTATION: Tim Glisker came up with two game-saving tackles when he tripped up Ron Selig twice at the end of WESTMINSTER's 7-6 victory over POMFRET (1-2).
Early in the fourth quarter, Glisker stopped Selig on a 2-point conversion attempt.
The linebacker stopped Selig again, on a fourth-and-goal from the 2 with just 40 seconds left.
Westminster is 3-0.


Bodega as Bawdy House: Old Law for New Problem
For more than two years now, neighbors of the New Way, a bodega on the southeast corner of Amsterdam Avenue and 107th Street, have known that plantains and oranges were not the only things being sold from the wooden shelves in front.
"It was not like they were trying to hide it at all," said one woman, a 50-year-old artist who can see the bodega from her window.
"There were guys out there flaunting huge wads of cash, being really in-your-face about it." The woman, like others in the area who had joined forces to try to stop the flourishing drug trade, did not want her name used for fear of retribution.


On Language; Ragtag Modalities
Before President Clinton put military muscle behind his negotiations in Haiti, his attempted intimidations, exhortations and dire warnings aimed at the local junta were summed up as huffing and puffing.
"Heralded by the huffing and puffing of a spin doctorate gone wild" were the words of one hawkish polemicist in The New York Times, while The Washington Post headline over a Mary McGrory column was "Huffing and Puffing Over Haiti."


How Ocean Beach Views Rowdiness
On Sept. 11, "About Long Island" presented a profile of a middle-aged physician who becomes a full-fledged adolescent every weekend.
The article seemed, perhaps with intentional irony, to present this with a tone of admiration.
I am an official of the community in which the individual in question apparently spends his fun-filled weekends -- reportedly spraying a hose around the living room of his rented house (what a wild and crazy guy!), putting books in one of his housemates, beds (whoa, killer jest!) and generally cavorting with people half his age, vicariously arranging their relationships, while avoiding any of his own.
As a village official, however, I am not as concerned with the desperation inherent in this sad picture.
Rather, I am very much concerned with the possible implication in the article that there may be something wrong, not with this individual and his life style, but rather with the community in which this happens to be occurring.


Check It Out: Multiplication by Offshoot
A FRIEND is noted for her spectacular displays of clivia, grown in large clay pots around one side of a swimming pool.
The first time this scene was visited, the clivia was in full bloom with huge orange flowers.
There were probably a dozen or more pots.
The display was dramatic, but since clivia is not one of the cheaper pot plants, also suggestive of quite an expenditure.
When asked about the considerable outlay needed to achieve the effect, my friend smiled and said, "They all came from two plants I purchased when the children started high school." They have since graduated from college, and still the clivia thrives.
Her secret?
Clivia's natural multiplication by offsets.


THE NEW JERSEY GUIDE
CRANBERRY HARVEST
A harvest time tour of one of New Jersey's cranberry bogs will be conducted by its owner, Ned Lipman, during an outing Saturday sponsored by the Hackensack Meadowlands Development Commission Environment Center in Lyndhurst.
Besides learning about the history and process of cranberry growing, participants will be invited to pick their own cranberries to take home.
There will also be an exploration of the surrounding wetlands in their full fall splendor.


Debra Bowden, Alan Tantleff
Debra Ellen Bowden, a daughter of Florence Bowden of Woodbury, L.I., and the late Sheldon Bowden, was married last evening to Alan Neil Tantleff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ivan L. Tantleff of Roslyn, L.I.
Dr.
H.
Joseph Simckes, a rabbi, performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel in Kings Point, L.I.
The bride, who graduated from Clark University, is the executive vice president of the dress division of Bernard Chaus Inc., a clothing manufacturer in New York.


World Markets; Is Seoul Gouging Foreign Investors?
OVER the past year, South Korea has had one of the hottest stock markets in a hot region, and foreign investors have piled in.
The Korea Composite Stock Price Index has risen 25 percent since April alone, and most analysts expect the rally to continue.
The question is whether foreigners are paying too high a price for the right to buy into the action.
The root of the problem is that the Government limits access to the Seoul Stock Exchange.
The market was completely closed to foreign capital until early 1992, and even then strict caps were placed on the aggregate number of shares foreigners could buy.


Helping Drivers Sort Out Temporary Car Loss
THIS can't be happening to me," cried the woman, looking stricken. "It can't be true.
How do you expect me to go on?"
This was not the plaintive cry of someone who had just received a diagnosis of a fast advancing, fatal disease from her doctor.
The messenger of bad tidings was instead an auto mechanic at Pleasantville Ford; the news: he would need her car for at least two days to complete repairs.


Add Scouting to Alcorn's Homecoming Festivities
Homecoming is a time to strut your stuff, to show old and new that tradition continues, that hope lives, that the ideals and purposes of your university stand firm.
And if you are Steve McNair, you are the quarterback here on this homecoming day and all eyes are on you.
They have heard the stories about the rifle arm, the pro promise.
They have seen the TV sports clips that show the rainbow touchdown passes and the lightning-bolt touchdown runs.
Now the Alcorn State alums come to see, to feel, to touch, to see if this is really true, that a guy from their small Southwestern Athletic Conference school could really be the Heisman Trophy and Walter Payton Award front-runner.


The Nose Knows
Paranoids can now start to worry about the police smelling their breath.
Digital Products Corporation, one of the nation's largest makers of electronic monitoring bracelets for home detention, is offering a sniffer phone to keep tabs on wrongdoers who aren't supposed to be drinking alcohol.
A sensor built into the mouthpiece detects alcohol on the breath and transmits the results to a monitoring computer.
A couple of positive tests may bring a visit from the probation officer.
The system is in use in more than 20 local programs.
Why the interest?
One statistic suggests an answer.
Of 8,000 cases carried by the Westchester County, N.Y., Probation Department, 1,400 concern driving under the influence.


On Sunday; Remembering The Murderer Who Did Good
HAVING forfeited the heart of his life to prison as a convicted murderer, Ron Wikberg was dying the other day and hoping he might be remembered as "a bad guy who did good."
Fair enough: He shot down a grocery store clerk during a holdup 25 years ago and then, within what he called the "niche" of life left to him, he became a prison journalist.
He developed into a muckraker with enough creativity and compassion that some people on the outside actually considered him an exemplar of the now largely quaint, once seriously debated theory that a prison can be a place for rehabilitation, not just punishment.


The Anti-Mall
DEEP IN THE LAND OF "HAVE A NICE day," you arrive at the frontier of shopping.
The fragrance in the air is not Giorgio.
The salesman is focused on the middle distance, somewhere over your right shoulder.


Fall Flavors on the Upper East Side
Fall has arrived, and with it, new menus at many restaurants.
Below, The City presents information on the new menus, along with the restaurant's rating from its last New York Times review.
ARCADIA *** (212) 223-2900; 21 East 62d Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
Refined and alluring contemparary American cuisine is what you will find at Arcadia.
"Autumn brings a brand new farmer in Maine who, with the first cold snap, will produce the sweetest, juiciest beets, leeks and other root vegetables," says the chef and owner, Anne Rosenzweig.
Among her fall creations are grilled rabbit with roasted figs and foie gras bruschetta, and a salad of seared skate, roasted beets and beet greens dressed with a horseradish vinaigrette.
Entrees include roasted codfish with a shrimp, leeks and sweet potato chowder. (Review: 4/22/94) AUREOLE *** (212) 319-1660; 34 East 61st Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
From the elegance of its setting to its alluring fare, this sophisticated restaurant reflects its chef and owner, Charles Palmer.
Of autumn Mr.
Palmer says: "Much more than the other seasons, the wealth of the fall harvest rejuvenates my hunger and propels me to the stove." New dishes include starters like green onion and chanterelle risotto with garlic-chive essence and shaved pecorino.
Among entrees are roasted guinea fowl with a ragout of morel mushrooms, and seared peppered squab with Zinfandel and Champagne grapes.
For dessert, try the warm apple pudding with sour cream ice cream, or pear and pecan crisp. (Review: 5/10/91; article: 4/18/93) FELIDIA *** (212) 758-1479; 243 East 58th Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
This elegant two-story restaurant with a rustic flavor offers an extensive menu that focuses on northern Italian cooking with some specialties from Istria, the birthplace of the chef-owner, Lidia Bastianich.
"Fall is the most sensual time of the year in the Italian kitchen," she says.
"The ethereal aroma of the white Alba truffle, the muskiness of the porcini and mellowness of the wild game 'brasati' reaffirm my commitment to the preparation, serving and sharing of the Italian cuisine." New selections include porcini and truffle risotto; braised boar in Barolo wine with polenta and braised cabbage, and a whole pheasant roasted and served with a natural sauce. (Review: 11/20/92) JO JO *** (212) 223-5656; 160 East 64th Street; $$; all major credit cards
Jean-Georges Vongerichten's restaurant has the feeling of a Parisian bistro, with its polished dark wood wainscotting and beveled mirrors.
His cooking is based on his brilliant use of fresh vegetable juices and flavored oils for his sauces rather than butter or cream.
Fall, he says, is most distinctive for the richness of its smells and tastes, from boar and venison to truffles, wild mushrooms, root vegetables and dried berries.
His fall menu includes starters like seared scallops with a tartare of beets and parsley juice, and sauteed sweetbreads with chestnuts and a drizzle of truffle vinaigrette.
Among entrees are roasted venison with braised pears and bacon, and broiled squab with pomegranate juice. (Review: 7/12/91) LE CIRQUE *** (212) 794-9292; 58 East 65th Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
With its high level of professionalism and scintillating food, Le Cirque is an exhilarating place to dine.
Says the chef, Sylvain Portay: "Autumn signifies the awakening of the kitchen, a time when salads give way to terrines, and simple jus turn into more intricate sauces." Fall starters include a compelling ballantine of duck with foie gras and truffles, and purple artichokes with a fragrant melange of roasted lamb, vegetables, fine herbs and mesclun.
Entrees include pan-roasted red snapper with salsifis, spinach and a black truffle sauce; braised veal with Swiss chard au jus, and roasted breast of duck and confit with a sour cherry sauce. (Review: 10/29/93) MAD 61 ** (212) 833-2200; 10 East 61st Street; $$; all major credit cards
A stylish crowd pours in from all three entrances at this spirited restaurant located in midtown Barneys New York.
The menu is devised by the executive chef, Marta Pulini, whose theme for this season "centers around the complex flavors of stewing fall's richly colored and flavored vegetables and fruits like squash, root vegetables, quince, cranberries, figs and nuts." Among the appetizers are duck prosciutto topped with chanterelle and celery root salad, and spaghetti squash combined with asparagus, toasted walnuts and pecorino cheese.
Main courses include lamb shank with natural juices, served with couscous, and veal chop with a vegetable stew redolent of aromatic spices. (Review: 11/5/93) THE SIGN OF THE DOVE *** (212) 861-8080; 110 Third Avenue, at 65th Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
The cooking is as beguiling as the setting at Sign of the Dove with its brick arches, bursts of colorful flowers and soft lighting.
David Shack, chef de cuisine, calls fall "an exciting time" because, as the weather gets colder, "people want dishes that are mellow, full-flavored and warming, the kind of food chefs love to prepare." Among starters are pumpkin ravioli in a capon broth sprinkled with Parmesan and fresh parsley, and a streudel of wild mushrooms and caramelized onions with a Port-and-sage reduction.
For main courses there is baked snapper with garlic crumbs and served with cranberry beans and pancetta, and venison medallions with a parsnip puree, celery root and quince. (Review: 3/ 1/91; article 1/17/92) Summaries of reviews use the star system; others are culled from articles (indicated by +), the $25 and Under column (++) and Diner's Journal (


It's Lunchtime. Do You Know Where Your Children Are?
Recent school budget cuts mean something very special to students at a high school in SoHo: for the foreseeable future, lunch will be out.
Outside, that is.
The school, the Chelsea Vocational High School, is bulging with an enrollment of 1,173, but its cafeteria seats only 139.
Even multiplied by the three lunch periods, it can serve only 417.


Oct. 2-8: Confronting Failure; Hartford Turns Its Schools Over to Private Business
Nothing the Board of Education did in Hartford, Conn., had stemmed the decline of the city's public schools, so last week it became the first school board in the nation to hire a for-profit company to manage all of its schools.
The company, Education Alternatives Inc. of Minneapolis, says it can greatly improve academic achievement and still find enough savings in the district's $200-million budget to earn a profit.


Company Chef Turns Cafeterias Into Cafes
FRESH mozzarella, plum tomato and basil vinaigrette on a baguette; seared mahi-mahi with garlic sesame crust, and grilled leg of lamb with five-spice sauce are typical of the menu items these days at Allied Signal'scorporate headquarters here.
It wasn't always like this.
The food evolution at Allied Signal began at the top five years ago, initially directed by Alan Belzer, then president.
The culinary upgrade continued under Lawrence A. Bossidy, Allied Signal's chairman and chief executive.


One Who Left and Doesn't Look Back
WHEN Mary Ellen McCormick stepped off the fast track at her advertising agency to stay at home with her young child, she did not realize she was leaving it behind forever.
For a long time, she said, she told herself her plan was to take off a few years and then return to the job she loved and the career as an international marketer for which she had prepared herself since college.
But now, 10 years later, she has no regrets.
She no longer wants the life she dreamed of then.


Comeback for Adjustable Mortgages
NEIL KLAR of Armonk, N.Y., had never gambled on interest rates before; he had always taken out fixed-rate 30-year mortgages, the safe, conservative, plain-vanilla loans that have been the financial foundation of the American housing industry for most of the last 50 years.
After studying some numbers crunched by a mortgage broker, however, Mr.
Klar recently decided to switch to a mortgage with a rate that adjusts every year --also known as an A.R.M. -- for the new home he is having built in nearby Katonah.


Commercial TV Starting on East End
A YEAR ago Gregory and Ernest Schimizzi purchased a low-power television station from the Channel America Network.
Yesterday the brothers from Brooklyn were scheduled to go on the air with TV-23 Southampton, the first commercial television station intended specifically for East End viewers.
A first for the Hamptons, the station, with a signal that will reach the five East End towns with 24-hour-a-day programming, is also a first for its owners.
TV-23 is the initial foray into the broadcast end of the business for the brothers, whose company, Video Voice, has been involved in television production and distribution in Manhattan since 1977.


Armenians And Identity
Andrey Arzumanov, 32, has lived in Rockaway, Queens, with his mother for a year and a half.
He speaks some English and a little Armenian, but like most of the hundreds of Armenian refugees who have arrived in the New York area over the last two years, his first language is Russian.
Now, with the help of the Diocese of the Armenian Church of America, the gold-domed St.
Vartan Cathedral at the northeast corner of 34th Street and Second Avenue, he is looking for a job.
And, what's more, he's building a sense of his Armenian identity, something previous waves of Armenian immigrants have not had to do.


Paying for Keeps
One of New York's great success stories, the rescue of Central Park, is almost complete.
Since 1980, much of the park has been rebuilt and replanted, and two and a half weeks ago civic leaders proudly began the final phase of the restoration project.
But now that the park is in such fine shape, it's time to take one more step to protect future generations.
It's time to privatize Central Park.
I realize this is not yet a wildly popular idea.
Turnstiles at the gates will take some getting used to.
Even people who support the Mayor's attempts to sell public hospitals and privatize garbage collection aren't willing to give up public parks.
They argue that nothing is more important to urban life than a common space like Central Park -- and they're right.
But that's precisely why it should be privatized.
It's too important to be entrusted to politicians anymore.


If the Owners Impose the 'Imps,' Are They Facing an Implosion?
So baseball won't fill October with playoff and World Series games.
But it will fill the legal calendar with more cases than a legal groupie can keep up with.
The members of the Montreal Expos won't receive post-season shares, but the lawyers from the owners' law firm, Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius, will share in whatever wealth baseball has left.
Having hung together through nearly two months of a players strike, the club owners face a legal wilderness of decisions that history says they will mess up:


Mary Neven, John Reynders 3d
Mary Frances Neven, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis D. Neven of Roswell, Ga., was married yesterday to John Van Wicheren Reynders 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charlton Reynders Jr. of Bedford Hills, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dave Hartenberger officiated at the Holy Cross Lutheran Church in Albuquerque, N.M.
Mrs.
Reynders is a cellist with the New Mexico Symphony Orchestra in Albuquerque and with the Santa Fe Symphony in Santa Fe, N.M.
She graduated from Morehead State University and received a master's degree in music performance in cello from the University of Texas at Austin.


The Crashing of Pay-per-View
Move over, Hulk Hogan and Evander Holyfield.
The Ford Supermodel of the World is coming.
Anyone who has channel-surfed this week probably knows that fashion models have finally infiltrated the male bastion of pay-per-view.
The Ford modeling agency has moved its annual talent search contest from network television to the potentially lucrative pay-per-view market.
On Oct. 14 or 15, depending on the market, for $14.95, viewers can see contestants from 35 countries vie for the ponderous title Ford Supermodel of the World.
The show, filmed on Maui and with Christie Brinkley as host, is equal parts Hawaiian travelogue, Sports Illustrated swimsuit video and MTV "House of Style."


Pamela Frederick, Douglas T. Evans
Pamela Marie Frederick, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thermon Frederick of Inkster, Mich., was married yesterday to Douglas Tyrone Evans, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond Evans of Browns Mills, N.J.
The Rev.
Donald Polk, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at the Castle mansion in Detroit.
The bride is an investment officer with the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, a Federal agency in Washington.
She graduated from the Ecole des Hautes Etudes Commerciales in Jouy-en-Josas, France, and from the University of Michigan, from which she also received an M.B.A.


When Housing Comes, Can Stores Be Far Behind?
ONE day last year Charles J. Diven Jr. was operating a backhoe at Park Avenue and 179th Street in the Bronx.
He was approached by a stranger.
"I've got to get a hole dug over on Third Avenue," the stranger said.
"How much would you charge me?"


On Equality In School Financing
Regarding the recent article "Opinions Vary on School Ruling," may I comment on the remarks made by a lawyer who is quoted as saying that she found the recent Supreme Court decision on equality spending on N.J. school districts "extremely frustrating."
I note with chagrin her expression of this in that she would have to fund not only her own children's education, but also ". . . everyone's education. That's an unfair burden." I guess that view is typical of the widespread selfishness and privatism that infect so many of our more affluent New Jersey citizens these days.


Repatriating Haitians
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 2 news article about Haitians at Guantanamo Bay Naval Station who have indicated intentions to return to Haiti is disturbing.


P.&amp; G. Meets the Derivatives Monster: Chapter 2
WHEN Procter &amp; Gamble announced a $157 million loss from "speculative and leveraged" investments, known as derivatives, earlier this year, top executives pleaded ignorance and threatened to sue Bankers Trust for not disclosing the risks.
But the consumer products giant had far more experience in derivatives -- those custom-blended financial arrangements that can attack risk as well as court it -- than it had let on, reports Swaps Monitor, a New York newsletter.
In its latest annual report, for the year ended June 30, 1994, P.&amp; G. acknowledges that its 1993 financial statements had a few holes.
Back then, the company reported a $17 million gain from derivatives used to control foreign exchange risks, but neglected to mention a $122 million deficit on derivatives used to control interest payments.


Mara L. Yoelson, Robert W. Trenchard
Mara Lynn Yoelson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry Yoelson of Marlboro, N.J., is to be married today to Robert Walter Trenchard, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Trenchard of Larchmont, N.Y.
Rabbi Ronald B. B. Symons is to perform the ceremony at the Larchmont Temple.
The bride, 25, is an associate, in Princeton, N.J., of Drinker Biddle &amp; Reath, a Philadelphia law firm.
She graduated summa cum laude from Emory University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and from which she also received a master's degree in English.
She and the bridegroom received law degrees from Harvard University.
Her father is a drug prevention counselor in Brooklyn for the New York City school system.


Costa Rican Jungle Gets Tram Service
Travelers to Costa Rica can now explore the canopy of a rain forest from the treetop perspective.
The Rain Forest Aerial Tram, which consists of open-air steel cars suspended from cables in a manner similar to a ski lift, takes visitors through an 1,085-acre jungle reserve.
Put into operation Oct. 1, the tramway runs through a privately owned reserve that borders the Government-run Braulio Carrillo National Park.
The reserve is about a 50-minute drive north from San Jose, Costa Rica's capital.


Mary C. Chen and Darin R. Ernst
Mary Cassandra Chen, a daughter of Ching Chen and Dr.
Tio Chen of Metuchen, N.J., was married yesterday to Darin Richard Ernst, a son of Phyllis and Richard Ernst of LaCrosse, Wis.
The Rev.
James Wentz, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Yale Club in New York.
Ms.
Chen, 26, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Yale University and received a law degree from Cornell University.
Later this month she is to become an associate at Krugman, Chapnick &amp; Grimshaw, a law firm in Saddlebrook, N.J.
Her father is the owner and president of Sogo Technology, an engineering consulting company in Metuchen.


the Nation; So, Now We Know What Americans Do in Bed. So?
WHILE fantasies about sex are as old as mankind, the facts about what Americans do in bed, with whom and how often, have been reduced to statistics only in the last half-century.
In that time, information -- and all too often, misinformation -- about sexual practices has fed into political skirmishes over homosexuality, abortion, sexual abuse, date rape, welfare reform and, yes, "family values."
Researchers from Alfred Kinsey to Redbook magazine have asked Americans about their sex lives, but those who answered were the self-selected few who tend to be more sexually interested and interesting than a randomly selected group.
The Federal Government has been squeamish about this kind of survey, first inviting researchers to design a national sex survey -- somewhat euphemistically titled "Social and Behavioral Aspects of Fertility-Related Behavior" -- and then refusing to finance such a study.


Teresa A. Pesce, Andrew D. Kaizer
Teresa Anne Pesce, an assistant United States attorney, is to be married today in New York to Andrew David Kaizer, a partner in Stillman, Friedman &amp; Shaw, a law firm.
Both work in New York.
Judge Robert W. Sweet of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York in Manhattan is to officiate at the Rainbow Suites in New York.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from Columbia University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and from which she also received her law degree.
She is a daughter of the late William and Lucia Pesce.
Her father was a lawyer in New York, and her mother was an assistant director of nurses at Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park.


Booklet for Travelers Taking Cars to Mexico
The Mexican Tourism Ministry has published a new booklet to help travelers wanting to drive into the country's interior.
Called "Traveling to Mexico by Car," the brochure, in Spanish and English, explains how drivers can obtain a permit allowing them to take their cars beyond the border area.
Motorists staying within 15 miles of the border or in Baja California and parts of the state of Sonora do not need special permits.
Two years ago, the Mexican Government put into effect new requirements for drivers from the United States in an attempt to prevent them from leaving their cars in Mexico.
The rules are aimed at keeping Mexicans from obtaining vehicles driven in from the United States without paying steep import taxes and registration fees to the Mexican Government.
Since the regulations went into effect, tourists have complained of increased paperwork and delays of up to several hours in getting the permit.


Porn, Part 2: Maybe Mild Side Isn't So Mild
TWO weeks ago, aroused by the Mayor's proposal to exile porn shops to the fringes of the city, I visited the Triple X rated video stores in my neighborhood.
I had never paid them much attention before.
For reasons of righteousness or repression or both, I had little experience with pornography, so going into the shops (at night, of course), getting stacks of quarters from amiably bored young attendants, closing myself into private viewing booths and surfing through channels of men and women in various combos acting out sexual fantasies was perhaps a bigger deal for me than for most.
And that may well have contributed to my post-game, first-draft opinion -- no big deal.
Because I had seen no violence and no children in the pictures, I wondered if porn wasn't less of a clear and present danger than football.
In this column's spirit of interactivity (more and more topics are suggested by readers, some of whom stop me on the street), I asked for second opinions.
I was surprised by their number and intensity and range.
There was much rage expressed at my "insensitivity to the degradation of women" in this current backlash rash of strip joints, Calvin Klein ads, and movie mayhem.
There was a faint round of applause for my not falling into the "current panic over porn." And a Brooklyn businesswoman, for sophisticated urban reasons, said she would welcome a porn shop in the heart of her neighborhood.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/1995 Blazer; New Chevy: A Bag Short
MORE than a decade ago, I bought into Detroit's argument against air bags, thinking them to be only iffy adjuncts to seat belts.
After all, the bags were of no use in side or rear impacts.
They were unproved, and no one was sure that they would not blast off unexpectedly.


Pioneers Face Good, Bad and Ugly
They gather nearly every week now in a basement storage room with a utility lamp strung overhead and a pit bull barking incessantly in a nearby yard.
Their problems are as complex as those of any cooperative board of directors in any building in the city: What do we do about our neighbors who don't pay?
Do our accounts balance?
Should we ask the superintendent to buy his own power tools?


An Effort to Become a Classic Spot
OVER the last few years trend spotters have noted the many casual family-style eating places that have replaced more traditional Italian restaurants on the Island.
But it is turnabout time in St.
James.
La Pentola, a family style spot, was recently transformed into Andiamo, a classic northern Italian restaurant.
The owner, Filip Costa, remains, joined by Giovanni and Alessandro Cocciante, brothers whose family has a restaurant in Rome.


For Peace: Golan Out?
Despite rocky opinion polls and rebellion in his Labor Party ranks, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has embarked on a campaign to persuade Israelis that peace with Syria is worth giving up the Golan Heights.
The road he has taken may be steeper than the Golan itself.


Clinton and Allies Rediscover Their Voice in Writing Epitaph for Congress
With Republicans unabashedly claiming credit for tying Congress up in knots, Democrats acted almost like mute bystanders -- until now.
For months, Democrats seemed to have lost their voice as Republicans rolled over them in Congress.
As long as Democrats, who control both chambers, were trying to reach legislative accommodation with the Republicans, they could not afford to trash them.
Moreover, the party seemed stunned into silence by predictions of big Republican gains in November and of a Democratic President who seemed to be a political untouchable.


As the Limelight Fades, a Star Lowers His Sights
Early next month, the baritone Sherrill Milnes will take over the role of Tonio in the Metropolitan Opera's production of Leoncavallo's "Pagliacci." What is unusual, and somewhat poignant, about this is that "I Pagliacci" was part of the Met's opening night two weeks ago without him.
For the second year in a row, the company began its season with a dual showcase for its long-serving, superstar tenors: Placido Domingo in Puccini's "Tabarro" and Luciano Pavarotti in "I Pagliacci." Not long ago, it would have been inconceivable for the Met to present such a glittery opening without including its glamour baritone, Mr.
Milnes, an old friend of both tenors.
But this year, the baritone on opening night was Juan Pons.
The Illinois-born Mr.
Milnes has enjoyed one of the great careers in the company's history, having sung more than 630 performances of 34 roles over 28 seasons.
"He has had one of the most beautiful, God-given voices," said Mr.
Domingo recently during a rehearsal break at the Met.
"The timbre is superb; the easiness, the legato -- absolutely beautiful."


No Amateur
To the Editor:  My brother, Lyle Ashton Harris, is quoted as saying that his brother, stepfather and grandfather are "fanatically devoted amateur" photographers  [ "From Preppie to Orange Hair in an Amsterdam Minute," Sept. 25 ] .


It's the Disney Limbo: How Low Can You Go?
Here in the land of the theme park, the $1.1 million Walt Disney World Oldsmobile Classic can't seem to decide what it wants its theme to be.
Is this the Magic Kingdom, where golfers without any measurable pulse can pull a Snow White and suddenly resuscitate for a 62 as John Flannery did today?
Is it Pleasure Island, where a fellow like Rick Fehr can float around in 15 under par when he's not even playing his best golf?


New York Special
The New York Special is a knife with a 3 3/8-inch blade that fits into a shoulder harness for rapid access.
"It'll do anything you want a knife to do," says A. G. Russell, owner of the mail order company A. G. Russell Fine Knives in Springdale, Ark.
Why 3 3/8 inches?
Perhaps because New York City has a four-inch limit.
The Council Speaker, Peter Vallone, who pushed through the law in 1983 when he was a councilman from Queens, says: "There were a lot of problems on the trains. They were using these World War II bayonets."


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 No one has ever dared to compile an encyclopedia of New York -- until now.
The tally: 1.4 million words. 678 pictures.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Suddenly, New York has a genuine film district.
A look at Robert De Niro and his growing empire in TriBeCa.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 14 A hawkwatch in Wave Hill.
And a salute to the great trans-Atlantic ocean liners.
MOVIE CLOCK 15 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 16 East Side eateries: Refined American cuisine at Arcadia, a touch of the Southwest at Arizona, and more.
SOAPBOX 17 Making the case for housing the homeless in Euclid Hall.
Plus, a contrarian's view of Mayor La Guardia.


Kenya's Press Is Resisting The Censors
In his first two weeks in prison, David Makali was in solitary confinement and had to break stones for five and a half hours every day.
Conditions for him eventually eased, but the 26-year-old journalist, who was serving a four-month term in a maximum security prison for contempt of court, was badly beaten, he said, and suffered from dysentery.
Mr.
Makali's crime?
As a writer for the weekly newspaper The People he had written an article critical of a Kenyan court ruling, indicating that the court was subject to interference from President Daniel arap Moi and his Government.
He refused to sign an apology drafted by the court or pay a $5,000 fine.
The editor-in-chief of The People, Bedan Mbugua, was jailed for five months.


The New World Disorder
CIVIL WARS  From L.A. to Bosnia.
By Hans Magnus Enzensberger. 144 pp.
New York: The New Press. $18.


THE WHITE WIFE
I have always enjoyed Jacqueline Adams's reporting, but I am afraid that her essay "The White Wife" (Hers, Sept. 18) shows the limitations of a career spent thinking in sound bites.
Sure, the O. J. Simpson case is about the politics of race, gender and materialism, but I would remind Adams that this is not the exclusive territory of modern-day African-Americans.
In 1604, William Shakespeare wrote about the Moor prince, Othello, who murdered his fair-haired Venetian wife.
Was it about racism?
Perhaps, in the most superficial sense.
But it also explores the dark side of the human condition -- passion, jealousy, envy and, most important, missed communication.
Both are the kind of stories that make good theater, whether the audience is Elizabethan spectators or TV news junkies.


Mason Wiley; Writer, 39
Mason Wiley, 39, an author and freelance writer, died on Friday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
The cause was complications of AIDS, said his companion, Gilbert Cole.


Some Surprises Meet Nation of Islam Visitors on Ghana Tour
For the Nation of Islam, holding its first convention outside of the United States, this week has been billed as a return to the motherland.
So the choice of Ghana, a cradle of pan-Africanism, seemed obvious.
But if their greetings were often warmly laced with the words "brother" and "sister," and the souvenir sales of this country's golden-threaded Kente cloth were brisk, many Ghanaians viewed the conventioneers with a mixture of puzzlement, humor and even offense.


The Keeper of the Past
"PHILIP JOHNSON," Dr.
Kenneth T. Jackson suddenly exclaimed.
"We left out Philip Johnson."
Fred Kameny hastily flipped through the 86-page typed index from the manuscript for the Encyclopedia of New York City.
With visible relief, on page 41 he found the name of the Manhattan architect who has left his distinctive mark on his hometown's skyline.
Johnson, Philip, was sandwiched between two other Johnsons, James Weldon and Samuel.


Shannon Penick, Daniel A. Pryor
Dr.
Shannon Penick, a daughter of Kathleen R. Ellis and Rawley M. Penick 3d, both of New Orleans, was married there yesterday to Daniel Alexis Pryor, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederic L. Pryor of Swarthmore, Pa.
The Rev.
Mary Hardy performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church.
Dr.
Pryor, 27, is a resident in otolaryngology and head and neck surgery at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.
She graduated from Williams College and received her M.D. degree from Tulane University.
Her father is the chairman of the Penta Corporation and the Chemlog Corporation, manufacturing concerns in New Orleans.
Her mother is a pre-school teacher at the Little School in Metairie, La.


New Valley, Old Management
SHAREHOLDERS of the New Valley Corporation, nee Western Union, have every reason to be tickled pink.
Instead, they are seeing red.
The company is on the verge of emerging from three years in bankruptcy, and many of those who stood to be stiffed now stand to do rather well.
Shareholders rank at the bottom of the pecking order in bankruptcies.
But in this case, the reorganization plan that has the endorsement of the company and, for now, of the bankruptcy judge, would reinstate them as the proud owners of a now debt-free company with roughly $380 million in cash and a messaging service worth some $20 million.


Gators Refusing To Gloat
Terry Dean stood in front of his stall in the University of Florida locker room today, and talked as if presiding over a wake, not a victory.
This is what happens when you have the No. 1 team in the country according to the polls and you can find holes in your team's 42-18 victory over Louisiana State, played before 85,385 at Ben Hill Griffin Stadium.
"Really, it's my fault," said the senior quarterback solemnly, not looking at his questioners.
"I didn't put the ball in the places I normally do. I was throwing a couple of feet behind my receivers. And I was hesitant in some of my throws."


Courtney Huffard, William S. Platt
Courtney Montagu Huffard, a daughter of Susan H. Ball of Stamford, Conn., and P. Phillippi Huffard 3d of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to William Scranton Platt, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard S. Platt Jr. of Hobe Sound, Fla.
The Rev.
Richard F. Van Wely performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Platt, 26, is an assistant product manger for the Ralph Lauren Home Collection in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is a vice president in New York at Legg Mason Wood Walker Inc., the Baltimore securities brokerage.
Her mother is an interior designer in Stamford.
The bride's stepfather, George L. Ball, who was the chairman of Prudential-Bache Securities, is now the chairman in New York of Sanders Morris Mundy, the Houston-based investment bank.


SHANNON FAULKNER
Some bastion -- more like an ostrich hole.
That the Citadel is located at the birthplace of the war that ended slavery in the United States speaks volumes.
That its admissions officers throw women's applications into the trash only confirms that they're living in a different century.
CHARLES SKOWRONEK Santa Fe, N.M.


Sally Marburg, Andrew Pessin
Sharon Elizabeth Marburg, a daughter of Mrs.
Laurence L. Williams of Stamford, Conn., and Stephen Marburg of Metuchen, N.J., is to be married today to Andrew Stuart Pessin, the son of Marilyn Pessin of Bethesda, Md., and the late Leo Pessin.
Rabbi Jonathan Maltzman is to perform the ceremony at the Hyatt Regency in Bethesda.
Ms.
Marburg, 34, is known as Sally.
She is a lawyer in Rockville, Md.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin and received her law degree from American University.
Her father is a distinguished senior investigator at Merck &amp; Company, the pharmaceutical concern, in Rahway, N.J.


The World; A Passion to Know The End Is Nigh
THERE is something in the human psyche that simply wants to know about the end.
When will it come?
What will it be like?
And, paradoxically, what comes afterwards?
These questions -- of a particularly cosmic significance -- figured in the news last week, in the strange deaths more than 50 people in Switzerland and Canada who were members of religious sects that engaged in apocalyptic prophecy.


Teach Backpacks Some Manners
Many fashionable New Yorkers have discovered the virtues of carrying a status backpack instead of a status handbag.
Unfortunately, few are also aware of the dangers.
Many women don't check their Prada and Gucci backpacks when they attend art openings or cocktail parties.
They seem oblivious to the fact that their carryalls are knocking into people as they maneuver through a crowded room, which has led to a rash of spilled drinks and squashed cigarettes at social gatherings this fall.


There's Something About a Woman in Uniform
HOLLYWOOD KIDS  By Jackie Collins. 525 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.50.


The Other Culture Weighs In
To the Editor:
In "Teaching Scientists to Talk Business" (Viewpoints, Sept. 18), Harry Gaines continues the misleading and debilitating stereotype that portrays anyone with a scientific background as an inarticulate nerd.
Mr.
Gaines is quite correct that technical people must understand the commercial side of their businesses; I contend that it is equally essential, however, for nontechnical people to have some basic understanding of the technology involved in their businesses.
Selling short the commercial capabilities of technical people is a serious failing of American business.
STANLEY R. TROUT Glen Rock, N.J., Sept. 19 The writer, a doctor of metallurgy, is with the sales and marketing department of Molycorp, a speciality chemicals manufacturer.


From the Streets and the Gyms To the Courtroom and Beyond
ALMOST EIGHT YEARS AGO,three Chicago film makers Steve James, Frederick Marx and Peter Gilbert -- conceived of a half-hour film they hoped to finish in six months.
The subject was to be Chicago's playground basketball culture.
They would examine the margins between success and failure by following three people: a professional ballplayer (they had Isiah Thomas in mind); a washed-up player whose dreams never materialize, and a high school basketball star.
Instead, they met two students, William Gates and Arthur Agee.
The result was "Hoop Dreams," a nearly three-hour documentary about high school basketball that opens on Friday.


ABC Puts the G Rating Back in Saturday Night
IF TELEVISION NETWORKS HAD personalities, ABC would be a real homebody.
The mainstay of its lineup is the family sitcom, with adorably wisecracking tots written into nearly every scene.
On the theory that viewers like to watch people like themselves, ABC hopefully names its shows "Full House" or "Family Matters," and sure enough, much of America takes the hint and tunes in.
So it's easy to understand why, on Saturday nights this fall, ABC has assembled a gallimaufry of old and new movies -- most of them featuring children -- under the banner "The ABC Family Movie." On the night when viewership is at its weekly low, the network's modest hope is "to get a family to watch once or twice a month, instead of watching a rented tape or cable," says Ted Harbert, president of ABC Entertainment.


No Headline
"Fast start, slow finish, too much rancor." PAT WILLIAMS, Democratic Representative from Montana, describing the 103d Congress.  [ 28:1. ]


Which Will Be the Faustest With the Mostest?
IS FAUST A GOOD SECOND ACT FOR Hamlet?
Aaron Beall, the executive director of the Nada Theater in Manhattan, thinks so.
At last year's Hamlet Festival, he presented 31 productions involving the melancholy Dane.
What, Mr.
Beall wondered, about a pact with the Devil?
The Faust Festival was born.
Here is an annotated selection of the more than 50 productions scheduled between now and May.
Information is available through the Faust Festival hot line, (212) 545-3771.


2 Disputes: Separate But Oh-So Similar
National Hockey League owners are convinced that Donald Fehr, the baseball union chief, tells Bob Goodenow, the head of the hockey union, what to do.
Baseball owners are convinced that Fehr takes his orders from his predecessor, Marvin Miller.
Does this mean that Miller is responsible for the delay in the start of the hockey season?
N.H.L. officials don't like to have their labor dispute compared to baseball's; they feel they have gone much farther than their baseball counterparts in an effort to resolve the dispute.
But comments like the alleged Fehr-Goodenow link from management people themselves enhance the comparison.


Why Small Owners Need Help With Their Legal Fees
To the Editor:
Regarding the Sept. 25 Soapbox, "In Housing Court; Not a Clue," most housing court judges come from tenant advocacy backgrounds and are loathe to order evictions.
This judicial philosophy is particularly onerous to small owners of low-income housing, who often have lower incomes than the total welfare package of many of their tenants.
The small owners must struggle in housing court with either extremely poor legal representation or with none.
They usually do better with none.
Lawyers don't make enough money from these clients to motivate them to do a decent job.
To be able to keep their buildings, small owners need free or affordable legal assistance.
A fair way to provide it, without burdening taxpayers, would be to set up a small owners' legal defense fund financed by an annual surcharge on those large owners who have benefited from the deregulation of luxury apartments.


POSTINGS: Historic Documents on View; When Chelsea Was Farmland
As New Yorkers grew more agitated in the 1980's about unwanted buildings in their neighborhoods, the term Nimby was coined to describe the sentiment: "Not in my back yard."
New research has uncovered what might be called the Nimfy syndrome -- "Not in my farm yard" -- in the 1840's.


Indy-Car Salute: One Last Lap for Andretti
MARIO ANDRETTI will complete his seasonlong "Arrivederci, Mario" tour today in the Bank of America 300 at Laguna Seca Raceway in Monterey, Calif., where he will race in his 407th and last Indy-car event.
"About 10 years ago, the question began popping up: 'When are you retiring?' " the 54-year-old Andretti said.
"Many of my contemporaries were retiring and it was a natural question. "But I wasn't ready."


The Nation; Loving and Leaving Mario and Ted
GOV.
MARIO M. CUOMO, a man who rarely acknowledges his own uncertainty, said last week that he was positively befuddled.
A New York Times / WCBS-TV poll had revealed that voters admired his integrity, his leadership and his compassion far more than they admired those qualities in his Republican opponent, State Senator George E. Pataki.
"Then how come I don't have all the votes?" Mr.
Cuomo asked, referring to the same poll's findings that 61 percent believe he has been Governor for too long and that he is neck-and-neck with Mr.
Pataki.
"You mean," he asked, "the poll says that I have integrity and intelligence and honesty, I work hard and I'm a good leader, but they don't want me?"


School's Out: A Crunch at Lunch


The Ears Have It
To the Editor:  If I understand Richard Taruskin's argument, and I'm not certain I do, he would have me believe that the only good music around is composed in the pre-20th-century European tradition, and that its structure is a natural extension of the human ear.
The proof of this is that music from ancient Sumer is supposed to sound somehow familiar; thus all that has followed must also sound familiar to be valid.
Serial music, having broken some traditional commandments, isn't real music at all.
My own experience makes me claim otherwise.


Judith A. Stein, Christopher Kohn
Judith Ann Stein, a daughter of Drs.
Otto and Diana Stein of Amherst, Mass., was married yesterday to Christopher Philip Kohn, the son of Gerald Kohn of Corralitos, Calif., and Kathleen O'Keefe Kohn of New York.
Town Justice Martha Faison of Amherst performed the ceremony at Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Mass.
Ms.
Stein, 33, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in education from Smith College.
She is a kindergarten teacher at the Fieldston Lower School in Riverdale, the Bronx.
Her father is professor emeritus of botany at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
Her mother is a professor of biological sciences at Mount Holyoke.


What Does Russia Want?
An increasingly disquieting feature of Russian politics is President Boris Yeltsin's ambiguous attitude toward integration with the former Soviet republics.
Big unanswered questions hover in the air.
With which members of the Commonwealth of Independent States -- if any -- should Russia integrate?
How?
On what basis?
With what goals?
And with what consequences for Russia, those republics and the rest of the world?


A Vermont Hospital Turns Its Garbage Into Gold
AS a gardener, I often wonder how many tons of carrot tops, potato skins and unserved meals from my office cafeteria are thrown into the garbage every day.
I think of them as the Lost Mountain of Compost.
Then I look at the cardboard tray I'm holding -- the paper plate with its plastic cover, the plastic knife and fork -- and think of the landfills filling up.
What happened to the good old dishwasher?


Meat and Potatoes and Men's Club Decor
WHAT a difference a change in a local ordinance can make.
Wilton, long a dry town, now permits restaurants to serve liquor, resulting in an upsurge in dining establishments.
Among the new ones is Eric and Michael's Steak House, in a caramel-painted frame building called the Town Green Shopping Plaza.
In keeping with classic steak house concepts, Eric and Michael's has the look of an old-fashioned men's club, with dark green chair and banquette covers, a complementary carpet, stained mahogany and birch paneling and brass sconces.
The lighting is subdued but not dim.
A bank of windows in front overlooks a pretty terrace, where, on warm days, one might still be able to eat under the sheltering oak trees.


Young Fiddler Has the Feel For Irish Reels
His friends prefer Aerosmith, but still found it cool when Patrick Mangan, a 10-year-old fiddle champion from Carroll Gardens, cleaned up recently at an Irish music festival.
Patrick qualified to compete in the Fleadh Cheoil Na Heireann, an annual Irish music festival that attracts about 5,000 musicians each year, after he scooped up first place for his age category at a New York City contest earlier this year.
He went to Clonmel, Ireland, in August with small hopes of high placement, knowing that the Irish, who make up most of the contestants, dominate the art of fiddling.


Rafting Expeditions In Remote Himalayas
Mountain Travel-Sobek, the California-based adventure travel company, is planning a series of rafting trips on the Brahmaputra River in a restricted area of India.
The Brahmaputra originates in Tibet, enters India in Arunachal Pradesh, flows through the Assam Valley, joins up with the Ganges in Bangladesh, and finally empties into the Bay of Bengal.
The remote state of Arunachal, at the Indian border with Tibet, Burma and Bangladesh, may be visited only with permission of the Indian Government, according to a spokeswoman for the United States State Department.
The border has been disputed by China, and there is civil unrest in the region, particularly in the neighboring state of Assam.


Streetscapes/Astor Row on West 130th; In Harlem, Restoration of Rowhouses at Mid-Stage
THE New York Landmarks Conservancy's restoration of Astor Row, the little brick houses at 8 to 62 West 130th Street, is now at a middle stage, with some houses still almost derelict, some in mid-restoration and some completed.
But this half-done phase helps make it interesting, and a trip to one of the most memorable blocks in the city will repay anyone who makes the journey.


German Election Is a Big Test for Former Communist Party
When a voter asked Stefan Heym recently to describe his political program, the candidate for Parliament looked a bit surprised and finally replied, "I have goals, but I left them at home."
Asked which committee he would like to join if he is elected on Oct. 16, Mr.
Heym answered, "I don't even know what committees they have."


Suffolk Water Eyes Private Suppliers
COMMUNITIES trying to make a strong stand for home rule are having trouble keeping their private water utilities alive.
New Federal standards have opened the way for acquisitions by the Suffolk County Water Authority, which supplies 80 percent of the water in the county.


'Beau Jest': A Comedy With Romance
BY now, "Beau Jest" must be used to compliments of the kind that are bestowed by the left hand.
The play at the Forum Theater is critic-proof, which means it is unaffected by the unkindness of reviewers who cannot get over the habit of differentiating between meticulous and mushy comic writing.
It also means that some audiences take to it; more aptly put, kvell over it.
If you don't know what kvell means, it isn't likely that you'll take to "Beau Jest." Not that a knowledge of Yiddish guarantees that you will.
The play's setup suggests another take on the 1922 hit "Abie's Irish Rose," regenerated to, say, 1946.
Sarah Goldman, a Jewish kindergarten teacher, hires Bob Schroeder, an actor employed by the state-licensed Heaven Sent Escort Agency, to be a pretend boyfriend when her presumably Orthodox parents are coming to dinner.
They disapprove of her real beau (Chris -- believe it -- Kringle), who is not Jewish.
To go all out at dinner, Bob not only plays a doctor but a surgeon, Dr.
David Steinberg.
"What kind of surgeon?" he is asked.
"Whatever comes up," he answers.
"Hearts. Brains."


Nazi Art Loot Found Its Way to New York's Modern Museum
To the Editor:
Not only "light-fingered American soldiers have grabbed their share" of German art, as "Russia's Mute and Hidden Loot" (editorial, Oct. 5) states.
After the Nazis cleansed German museums of "degenerate art" in 1938, they sent some 700 of the choicest works to be auctioned for foreign exchange in Switzerland.


Station Bids Adieu To 'The Swing Years'
FOR listeners of "The Swing Years," a weekly program on WRHU-FM at Hofstra University, July 17 seemed like any other Sunday night.
Promptly at 7 o'clock, the host, Lloyd Rauch, began spinning a three-hour selection of jazz classics from the 1930's and 40's.
As always, the music was peppered with commentary and anecdotes from a man who, though 37 years old, knew the era and its performers well.
Mr.
Rauch had been host of the program for 14 years.
When that show drew to a close, he bade his listeners an unexpected farewell, gathered his record collection and left the station for good.


The Other Culture Weighs In
To the Editor:
The primary example Harry Gains cited was a new product -- hair mousse -- that was not brought to market first by the company that had developed it.
One executive said scientists were unable to present the concept effectively to the rest of the company: communication is the culprit.
Nonsense.
Although poor communication can cause problems, that company did not know how to use technology successfully.
Start with the financing.
The technologist was financed to do this work; if no executive or manager appreciated its impact, why was it financed?


Touring the Cyberhood
MURRAY PFEFFER, a retired Pan Am maintenance worker, knows about the global connections he could make on far-reaching computer networks.
But he spends much of his cybertime with a friendly little bulletin-board system called Jim's PC Paradise, now just two and a half years old and run out of an apartment in Elmhurst, Queens.
When he first joined the board, Mr.
Pfeffer recalls, he had "a lovely conversation" in electronic chat mode with Jim Symbouras, the system's creator and operator.
He heard all about Jim's wife and children and made modem-to-modem contact with other people he liked.
And this summer, when the system suffered a serious crash over the Fourth of July weekend, Mr.
Pfeffer experienced a real sense of loss.


Oct. 2-8: Threat to Kuwait; Iraq Moves Its Troops Toward the Brink Again; Clinton Responds Quickly
More than three years after the United States and its allies tried to deliver a knockout blow to Iraq, Saddam Hussein's armored legions re-emerged last week as a threat to Kuwait.
The crisis developed when Iraq sent forces toward Kuwait's border, including units from an elite Republican Guard division that escaped destruction during the Persian Gulf war.
Madeleine K. Albright, the United States delegate to the United Nations, told the Security Council that if the buildup continued, Iraq might soon have some 60,000 troops and 1,000 tanks poised to attack Kuwait.


Where to Get Information
Abercrombie &amp; Kent International, 1520 Kensington Road, Suite 212, Oak Brook, Ill. 60521; (708) 954-2944 or (800) 323-7308 outside Illinois.
American Canadian Caribbean Line, Post Office Box 368, Warren, R.I. 02885; (401) 247-0955 or (800) 556-7450.
American Hawaii Cruises, 2 North Riverside Plaza, Chicago, Ill. 60606; (312) 466-6000 or (800) 765-7000.
Baltic Line (see Euro Cruises).
Bergen Line, 405 Park Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022; (212) 319-1300 or (800) 323-7436.
Captain Cook Cruises, c/o International Cruise Connections, 30423 Canwood Street, Suite 214, Agoura Hills, Calif. 91301; (805) 496-0548 or (800) 433-8747.
Carnival Cruise Lines, 3655 N.W. 87th Avenue, Miami, Fla. 33178; (305) 599-2600 for brochures; contact travel agent for reservations.
Celebrity Cruises, 5200 Blue Lagoon Drive, Miami, Fla. 33126; (305) 262-6677 or (800) 437-3111.
Classical Cruises, 132 East 70th Street, New York, N.Y. 10021; (212) 794-3200 or (800) 367-6766.
Clipper Cruise Line and Clipper Adventure Cruises, 7711 Bonhomme Avenue, St.
Louis, Mo. 63105; (314) 727-2929 or (800) 325-0010 outside Missouri.
Club Med Cruises, 7975 North Hayden Road, Scottsdale, Ariz. 85258; (602) 948-9190 or (800) 258-2633.
Commodore Cruise Line, 800 Douglas Road, Suite 700, Coral Gables, Fla. 33134; (305) 444-4600.
Costa Cruise Lines, World Trade Center, 80 S.W.
Eighth Street, Miami, Fla. 33130; (305) 358-7325 or (800) 462-6782.
Cruise Company of Greenwich, 31 Brookside Drive, Greenwich, Conn. 06830; (203) 622-0203 or (800) 825-0826 outside Connecticut.
Crystal Cruises, 2121 Avenue of the Stars, Suite 200, Los Angeles, Calif. 90067; (310) 785-9300 or (800) 446-6620.
Cunard Line, 555 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10017; (800) 221-4770 or for Cunard Royal Viking Sun, Sagafjord, Vistafjord and Sea Goddess I and II: (800) 458-9000.
Delta Queen Steamboat Company, 30 Robin Street Wharf, New Orleans, La. 70130; (504) 586-0631 or (800) 543-1949.
Diamond Cruise, 600 Corporate Drive, Suite 410, Fort Lauderdale, Fla. 33334; (305) 776-6123 or (800) 333-3333.
Dolphin Cruise Line, 901 South America Way, Miami, Fla. 33132; (305) 358-2111; (800) 222-1003.
Epirotiki Cruises, 551 Fifth Avenue, Suite 605, New York, N.Y. 10176; (212) 949-7273 or (800) 221-2470 outside New York State.
Euro Cruises, 303 West 13th Street, New York, N.Y. 10014; (212) 691-2099 or (800) 688-3876.
Europe Cruise Line (see Euro Cruises).
European Waterways, 140 East 56th Street, Suite 4C, New York, N.Y. 10022; (212) 688-9489 or (800) 217-4447.
Fantasy Cruises, 5200 Blue Lagoon Drive, Miami, Fla. 33126; (305) 262-6677 or (800) 423-2100.
Fred Olsen Lines (see Euro Cruises).
Galapagos Cruises, c/o Adventure Associates, 13150 Coit Road, Suite 110, Dallas, Tex. 75240; (214) 907-0414 or (800) 527-2500.
Hapag Lloyd, c/o Golden Bear Travel, 16 Digital Drive, Suite 100, Novato, Calif. 94948; (415) 382-8900 or (800) 551-1000.
Holland America Line, 300 Elliott Avenue West, Seattle, Wash. 98119; (206) 281-3535.
KD River Cruises of Europe, 2500 Westchester Avenue, Purchase, N.Y. 10577; (914) 696-3600 or (800) 346-6525 in the East; (800) 858-8587 in the West, including Alaska and Hawaii.
Kangaroo Explorer Cruises, c/o International Cruise Connection, 30423 Canwood Street, Suite 214, Agoura Hills, Calif. 91303; (805) 496-0548 or (800) 433-8747.
Majesty Cruise Line, 901 South America Way, Miami, Fla. 33132; (305) 536-0000 or (800) 532-7788.
Margas, c/o Travel Plans International, 1200 Harger Road, Oak Brook, Ill. 60521; (708) 573-1400 or (800) 323-7600.
Melanesian Tourist Services, 302 West Grand Avenue, Suite 10B, El Segundo, Calif. 90245; (310) 785-0370.
Montasser Nile Cruises, Post Office Box 40, Andreas, Pa. 18211; (717) 386-3220.
Nabila Nile Cruises, c/o Naggar Tours and Cruises, 605 Market Street, San Francisco, Calif. 94105; (415) 979-0160 or (800) 443-6453.
Nile Cruises Hilton, c/o Misr Travel, 630 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10111; (212) 582-9210 or (800) 223-4978.
Nina Cruise Lines (see Sea Connections Center).
Norwegian Cruise Line, 95 Merrick Way, Coral Gables, Fla. 33134; (305) 447-9660; for reservations (800) 327-7030.
Oceanic Cruises, 5757 West Century Boulevard, Suite 390, Los Angeles, Calif. 90045; (310) 215-0191 or (800) 545-5778.
OdessAmerica Cruise Company, 170 Old Country Road, Suite 608, Mineola, N.Y. 11501; (516) 747-8880 or (800) 221-3254.
Orient Lines, 1510 S.E. 17th Street, Suite 400, Fort Lauderdale, Fla. 33316; (305) 527-6660 or (800) 333-7300.
P &amp; O Cruises, c/o Golden Bear Travel, 16 Digital Drive, Suite 100, Novato, Calif. 94948; (415) 382-8900 or (800) 551-1000.
P &amp; O Fairstar Cruises, c/o International Cruise Connections, 30423 Canwood Street, Suite 214, Agoura Hills, Calif. 91301; (805) 496-0548 or (800) 433-8747.
P &amp; O Spice Island Cruises, c/o Esplanade Tours, 581 Boylston Street, Boston, Mass. 02116; (617) 266-7465 or (800) 426-5492.
Pearl Cruises, 6301 N.W.
Fifth Way, Suite 4000, Fort Lauderdale, Fla. 33309; (305) 772-8600 or (800) 556-8850.
Premier Cruise Lines, 400 Challenger Road, Cape Canaveral, Fla. 32920; (800) 473-3262.
Princess Cruises, 10100 Santa Monica Boulevard, Los Angeles, Calif. 90067; (310) 553-1770 or (800) 568-3262.
Quark Expeditions, 980 Post Road, Darien, Conn. 06820; (203) 656-0499 or (800) 356-5699.
Regal China Cruises, 57 West 38th Street, New York, N.Y. 10018; (212) 768-3388 or (800) 808-3388.
Regal Cruise Lines, 69 Spring Street, Ramsey, N.J. 07446; (201) 934-3753 or, in Florida, (813) 867-1300.
Regency Cruises, 260 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016; (212) 972-4499.
Renaissance Cruises, 1800 Eller Drive, Suite 300, Post Office Box 350307, Fort Lauderdale, Fla. 33335; (305) 463-0982 or (800) 525-5350.
Royal Caribbean Cruise Line, 1050 Caribbean Way, Miami, Fla. 33132; (305) 539-6000.
Royal Cruise Line, 1 Maritime Plaza, Suite 1400, San Francisco, Calif. 94111; (415) 956-7200.
Royal Viking Line (see Norwegian Cruise Line).
Sea Air Holidays, 733 Summer Street, Stamford, Conn. 06901; (203) 356-9033 or (800) 732-6247 outside Connecticut.
Sea Connections Center, 757 Deep Valley Drive, Rolling Hills Estates, Calif. 90274; (310) 544-3551 or (800) 367-1789.
Seabourn Cruise Line, 55 Francisco Street, Suite 710, San Francisco, Calif. 94133; (415) 391-7444.
Sea Spirit Cruise Lines, 2800 University Avenue S.E., Minneapolis, Minn. 55414; (612) 379-4697 or (800) 328-7787.
Seawind Cruise Line, 1750 Coral Way, Miami, Fla. 33145; (305) 854-7800 or (800) 258-8006.
Seven Seas Cruise Line, 333 Market Street, Suite 2600, San Francisco, Calif. 94105; (415) 905-6000 or (800) 285-1835.
Silversea Cruises, 110 East Broward Boulevard, Fort Lauderdale, Fla. 33301; (305) 522-4477.
Special Expeditions, 720 Fifth Avenue, Sixth Floor, New York, N.Y. 10019; (212) 765-7740 or (800) 762-0003 outside New York State.
Star Clippers, 4101 Salzedo Avenue, Coral Gables, Fla. 33146; (305) 442-0550 or (800) 442-0551.
Sun Line Cruises, 1 Rockefeller Plaza, Suite 315, New York, N.Y. 10020; (212) 397-6400 or (800) 872-6400 outside New York City.
Swan Hellenic, c/o Esplanade Tours, 581 Boylston Street, Boston, Mass. 02116; (617) 266-7465 or (800) 426-5492.
Tall Ship Adventures, 1389 South Havana Street, Aurora, Colo. 80012; (303) 755-7983 or (800) 662-0090.
Victoria Cruises, 57-08 39th Avenue, Woodside, N.Y. 11377; (212) 818-1680 or (800) 348-8084..
Windjammer Barefoot Cruises, Post Office Box 120, Miami Beach, Fla. 33119; (305) 534-7447 or (800) 327-2601.
Windstar Cruises, 300 Elliott Avenue West, Seattle, Wash. 98119; (206) 281-3535 or (800) 626-9900.


Jail Guards Cash Checks, Rile Residents
Some arrived at the check-cashing store with their paychecks folded between their fingers.
Others held them by the edge of the envelopes or clenched between their teeth.
It was 3:30 P.M., 30 minutes after the correction officers on Rikers Island received their twice-monthly pay.
And over the next 75 minutes, some 500 officers would join the mad scramble to Uniform Check Cashing on the corner of Hazen and 76th Streets.


Elizabeth Hoyt, Roger Stephens
Elizabeth Dow Hoyt, the daughter of Judith M. Hoyt of Corona del Mar, Calif., and Anthony S. Hoyt of New York, was married yesterday to Roger Wicks Stephens, the son of Virginia H. Breeden of Sierra Madre, Calif., and the Rev.
Jefferson C. Stephens Jr. of Pasadena, Calif.
The bridegroom's father, an Episcopal priest, took part in the ceremony, which was performed by the Rev.
Clarke K. Oler at All Saints Episcopal Church in Pasadena.
The bride, 28, is the promotion manager at Sassy magazine in Los Angeles.
Her father is a vice president and the publisher of Cosmopolitan magazine in New York.
Her mother owns JAM Productions, advertising consultants in Corona del Mar.
The bride is the granddaughter of the late Everett Hoyt, who was a founder of Rumrill-Hoyt Advertising Inc. in New York.


Sorry, It's an Eco-Thing, Show Thing, Hunk Thing
UPTOWN -- There weren't any deer or antelope playing, but on Oct. 5, in tents on the Great Lawn of Central Park, herds of the well-to-do were roaming from one eco-system display to another.
They were there, in everything from black tie and blue jeans to evening gowns and cowboy boots, for a Nature Conservancy benefit, "The First Great Party to Save the Last Great Places."
"Every summer, since my sons were less than a year old, I've taken them to the Wind River Range in Wyoming," Andrew Stein said in a tent for the Tallgrass Prairie of Oklahoma.
"We sleep out under the stars. The only time my Jewish mother has ever gotten really mad at me was when I told her I was doing that."


Kristen Vinyon, Matthew Stein
Kristen Anne Vinyon, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Vinyon of North Oaks, Minn., was married yesterday to Matthew Richard Stein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven J. Stein of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Gary Anderson performed the ceremony at the Incarnation Lutheran Church in Shoreview, Minn.


Pamela J. Weber, Lawrence R. Leaf
Pamela Judith Weber, the daughter of Naomi and Gerald Weber of Alexandria, Va., is to be married today to Lawrence Richard Leaf, a son of Susan and Emanuel Leaf of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
Rabbi Ellen Lewis is to officiate at the Highlawn Pavilion in West Orange, N.J.
The bride, 27, will be known as Pamela J. Weber-Leaf.
She is studying for a master's degree in environmental law at the Vermont Law School, from which she received a law degree.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father is an office automation consultant at the Mobil Corporation in Fairfax, Va.
Her mother is a substitute high school teacher in the Alexandria public school system.


A Sampling of the Mediterranean World
COOKING from the Mediterranean has never been more popular than it is now.
The food of that region is showing up with increasing frequency on menus across the country, where restaurants with Mediterranean themes have been opening, and a plethora of cookbooks has appeared on the subject.
It all started two years ago when a group of scientists, doctors and nutritionists got together at Harvard and cited the countries of the Mediterranean for their low incidence of heart disease and cancer.
Vegetables play an enormous part in this cooking, as do grains, nuts and parsley.
Meat has a secondary role and is not served in large quantities.
And, of course, olive oil is used much more than butter.


Coleman Goes 1-on-1 With an Image Problem
He is referred to as "controversial" and "moody," yet Derrick Coleman is not sure where the labels came from.
His off-court problems, he knows, have fostered the labels.
His abrasive post-game comments have been responsible, too.
"Derrick's a great player," begins any conversation regarding the Nets forward, "but. . . . "
A negative public perception clouds Coleman's All-Star existence like an asterisk hanging over any great accomplishment.
He does not understand, and he is even less willing to accept.


On Passion and Love
To the Sports Editor:
In response to George Vecsey's column, "Sports Void Will Help Us Get a Life," (The Times, Oct. 2), all I can say is what is life if it is not filled with passion and love?
To go through life without those two cousins, one may as well be dead.
I'm still looking for someone to share my passions and love, one of which is hockey.
Believe it or not, some nights I like to be by myself and watch a well-played hockey game.
Other nights I want to have a tender moment with the woman I love.
Still others, I want to spend with my family and friends, often talking about the stupidity of the times.


BUDDY'S BOYS AND THEIR $100 MILLION TOYS
What a thoroughly delightful skewering of the Lords of Baseball ("Buddy's Boys and Their $100 Million Toys," Sept. 18).
Bud Selig is everything I thought him to be, and less, in Pat Jordan's portrait.
Baltimore's Peter Angelos seems to be one of the few owners to have a handle on reality.
Being a "rookie" helps, I suppose.
His common sense has yet to be tainted by his colleagues.


Village Weeps for a Little Victim
Nicholas Green, who became a celebrity and a symbol in a foreign land after his death in an awful crime, was remembered today in the kind of personal detail that is known only to a child's hometown.
Last year he was St.
George in the first-grade play, while his mother, in a costume that scared many of the other children, played the dragon.
All this summer he took out library books on mythology to prepare for his family's vacation in Italy.
And on his seventh birthday, two weeks before departure, one of his favorite gifts was a box of beach shells.


Hispanic Population Outnumbers Blacks in Four Major Cities as Demographics Shift
The Hispanic population now outnumbers blacks in four of the nation's 10 largest cities and is poised to overtake blacks in the biggest, New York, as immigration has surged, Hispanic birth rates have outpaced those of other groups, and non-Hispanic whites and middle-class blacks move to the suburbs.
The four cities -- Los Angeles, Houston, Phoenix and San Antonio -- are all in the Southwest or West.
But Census Bureau figures show that the shift has been moving farther and farther beyond that region and could be reflected in the nation as a whole within 15 years -- earlier than some previous projections.
The 1990 Census found that nationally, there were 22.3 million Hispanic people, a 53 percent increase since 1980.
There were 29.9 million blacks, a 13 percent increase from 1980.


Oct. 2-8; Unexpected Gift in a Land of Vendettas
Italians are not easily jolted out of their constant introspection over where, exactly, their country is going.
But the the brutal murder of a 7-year-old American boy, Nicholas Green, on a nighttime highway in southern Italy dissolved, however briefly, the obsession with politics.
Nicholas, who was to be buried this weekend near the family home in Bodega Bay, Calif., was sleeping on the backseat of a rental car alongside his 4-year-old sister Eleanor when masked killers attacked the vacationing family, opening fire on the car as part of what seems a bungled highway robbery.


SHANNON FAULKNER
The issue is not the rights of women; rather, it is the equal right of men and women to pursue a single-sex education, if they so desire.
Faulkner has thousands of schools to choose from, including the Federal military academies.
She has chosen to attack the Citadel at a cost of millions. (Of course, she pays almost nothing.) Her motives are very, very clear.
JULIE GLAS Madison, Wis.


Alix H. Hoyt, Brian J. Ward
Alix Hamill Hoyt, a daughter of Suzanne D. Hoyt of Stonington, Conn., and Seth E. Hoyt of Riverside, Conn., was married yesterday to Brian James Ward, a son of Colette and Dr.
John Ward of Vero Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Mark Robinson performed the ceremony at Calvary Episcopal Church in Stonington.
Mrs.
Ward, 27, is a sales assistant at Dillon, Read &amp; Company, the investment bank in New York.
She graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder.
Her father was until recently a vice president and the publisher of Cosmopolitan magazine in New York.
Her mother is an interior decorator in Stonington.


THIS WEEK'S NUMBERS
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
317
315
Producer prices, Sept., percent change
0.6
0.2
Friday
Consumer prices, Sept., percent change
0.3
0.2
Retail sales, September, percent change
0.8
0.3
Industrial production, Sept., pct. change
0.7
0.4
Capacity utilization, September, percent
84.7
84.8
Monday
Think kind thoughts about Mr. Columbus
Wednesday
Atlanta Fed survey of manufacturing conditions
Thursday
Bundesbank Council meeting


Derek M. Medina, Rhonda J. Adams
Rhonda Jean Adams, a daughter of Geraldine A. and John A. Adams of Hamilton Square, N.J., was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to Derek Martyn Medina, the son of the late Earleen Edwards.
The Rev.
Dr.
S.
Howard Woodson, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel.
Mrs.
Medina, 29, is an associate in the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.
She graduated from Princeton and received her law degree from Harvard University.
Her father is a human resources manager at the Trane Company, an appliance manufacturer in Trenton.


Oct. 2-8; No, Not That! Anything but the Bus!
ANOTHER segment of America is feeling slighted by Hollywood.
Not blacks, who complained for years that they were present only in menial roles.
Not Hispanics, who the Center for Media and Public Affairs said in a recent report rarely turn up in the movies, and then mostly as drug dealers or bandits.
Not homosexuals, Indians or even women.
This time it's public transportation.


Why Small Owners Need Help With Their Legal Fees
To the Editor:
Tenant lawyers frequently help their clients without revealing themselves to the housing courts.
I remember one case during which the lawyer for one of my own tenants stood in the hallway outside the courtroom while my tenant was in court claiming that he was unrepresented.
My tenant repeatedly left the courtroom to confer with his lawyer.
When I objected, the judge said that didn't count as legal representation.


How to Register to Vote
New York
The deadline for registering to vote in New York State for the Nov. 8 general election is midnight on Friday.
Information about registration in New York City can be obtained at (212) VOTE-NYC, or (212) 868-3692.
Voters elsewhere may call (800) FOR-VOTE, or (800) 367-8683, or county election boards.


Dreaming Hoop Dreams
ON THE WEST SIDE OF CHICAGO QUITE A number of years ago, there was a boy who loved basketball, who, even to this day, can feel the snowflakes falling on his face on a winter's evening as he shot alone on a schoolyard hoop, under yellow street lamps, in his gloves and coat.
He loved the feel of the ball, the sense of its going through the netless hoop, and dreamed as he retrieved the wet ball in a snowbank that one day he might drive through whole teams and flip a pass behind his back to a cutting teammate -- in the fashion of Bob Cousy of the Celtics, whom he had seen on television -- or just pull up and drain a jumper from 20 feet out.
Swish!
Yeah!


The Other Culture Weighs In
To the Editor:
Scientists are trained to seek new ideas and improve what already exists.
Harry Gaines, however, would like them to learn how to communicate their accomplishments effectively to business people.
So, in addition to improving the product, scientists are also expected to justify their existence to the individuals in control of the money for continuing their research.
Might it not also be a responsibility of the business people to know something about the product they are making in addition to knowing how to shift money around in order to create a profit for the company?
PETER HOMEL Manhattan, Sept. 21 The writer is clinical assistant professor of statistics at the Health Science Center of Brooklyn-SUNY.


Interface; A Phone That Plays Secretary for Travelers
BARRY McCURDY, senior vice president of research for the investment banking firm First Albany, recently found an assistant who doesn't sleep, eat or take weekends off.
Mr.
McCurdy and his company have been testing a new telephone-based electronic assistant that not only answers and places calls, but schedules follow-up calls, offers reminders for appointments and tracks down an executive on the road to receive an important call.
And if the executive is already on the phone, the assistant will whisper in his or her ear the name of a waiting caller, so the executive can decide whether to take the call.


When Lullabies Aren't Enough: Richard Ferber
IT'S BEEN MORE THAN TWO YEARS SINCE THE young woman has really slept.
In his 800 nights of life, her son -- the reason the woman has come to Children's Hospital in Boston to see Dr.
Richard Ferber this morning -- has yet to spend one of them in his own room.
He lies directly between his parents, often perpendicular to them.
He most enjoys draping himself over both.
At the end of two hours of talk, Ferber gently asks the woman what her sex life has been like.
The answer is about what you would expect when your son sleeps between you and your husband every night.


H.I.V. Disclosure In Health Care Field
I read with interest the Sept. 18 article "New Policy on AIDS for Health Workers." The policy proposed by Health Commissioner Leonard Fishman holds that health care workers (doctors, nurses, aides, etc.) do not have to disclose the fact that they are H.I.V.-positive or actually have AIDS.
I submit that health professionals who conduct surgery and other procedures that bring them in contact with patients' blood should be required to disclose if they are H.I.V.  positive.
Patients should do the same.


Thud! B.C. Brings Down Mighty Irish Once Again
The big banner on the upper deck of the south stands read, "Once is Not Enough B. C." This pronouncement became an epitaph for Notre Dame at Alumni Stadium today.
B.
C.'s second straight victory over the Irish was unlike last season's 2-point, last-second thriller.
This one was more decisive, more convincing, by a 30-11 score.
"I believe Notre Dame thinks it's a rivalry now," said Dan Henning, the Boston College coach, with regard to the status of the series, which has 12 more games to go under the current contract.


Jennifer L. Jones, Andrew T. Ladda
Jennifer Lynne Jones, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Jones of Montclair, N.J., was married yesterday in Sanibel, Fla., to Andrew Todd Ladda, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Roger Ladda of Hershey, Pa.
The Rev.
Dr.
William Lutz performed the ceremony at the Sanibel Congregational United Church of Christ.
Ms.
Jones, 28, is keeping her name.
She is an associate at the New York law firm of Dewey Ballantine.
She graduated from Bucknell University and received her law degree from the University of Pittsburgh.
Her father is the executive vice president and chief economist at Aubrey G. Lanston Company, a government securities firm in New York.


Susanna Aaron, Gary Ginsberg
Susanna Beth Aaron, a television producer in New York, and Gary Lee Ginsberg, a counsel at the Justice Department in Washington, were married last evening.
Rabbi Donna Berman performed the ceremony at the Harbor Club in New York.
Ms.
Aaron, 34, is keeping her name.
She is a producer for "NBC Nightly News" and its "America Close Up" segment and has twice won Emmy Awards for work on other programs.
She graduated from Wesleyan University.
The bride is the daughter of Minella Sgrelli of Milan and Howard Aaron of New York.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Ezio Sgrelli and Carol Goodheart.


This Is Your Life
Buried in the credits for "Quiz Show," this season's highly intelligent and entertaining movie, you can find the comforting assurance that "no animal was harmed in the making of this film." That warrant -- for the portrayal of an incidental chimp -- is offered by the American Humane Association, "with on-the-set supervision" by the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.
Plainly, the guarantee does not cover human animals.
So who will monitor the damage that art -- or mere entertainment -- can do to people?


The Odds on God
THE PHYSICS OF IMMORTALITY  Modern Cosmology, God and the Resurrection of the Dead.
By Frank J. Tipler. 528 pp.
New York: Doubleday. $24.95.


Mom Always Said, Don't Take the First $2 Million Offer
Her dark feathery eyebrows moving rapidly up and down, wand-slim arms beating the air around her, Darnell Martin, the writer and director of "I Like It Like That," is trying hard to give a coherent version of a South Bronx childhood that seems anything but.
Some years, the family got by on public assistance.
A welfare check fed her, her mother, her older sister Lowry, and, once in a while, a second estranged sister.
Plus the occasional pregnant teen-ager her mother invited in.
Plus her sister's husband.
Then, the sister's daughter.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Will Javits Take The Car Pound?
The city's charmless pound for towed cars on Pier 76 is emerging as the pivotal element of new plans to expand the Javits Convention Center, revive a proposal for an adjacent hotel and open the waterfront to public use, government officials say.
Under the plan, the car pound would move to the nearby rail and truck yard along 12th Avenue and 34th Street.
That would also become the site for a Javits annex and a major hotel that was originally planned for the pier, which would become part of the planned Hudson River Park.


Wanla Cheng and Peter G. Mott
Wanla Cheng, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Tin An Cheng of New York, was married yesterday to Peter George Mott, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George H. Mott of Ware, Hertfordshire, England.
The Rev.
Randolph L. C. Weber performed the ceremony at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
Ms.
Cheng is a marketing consultant in New York.
She graduated from the University of San Francisco and received a master's degree in French literature from the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her father, a former Nationalist Chinese diplomat, is a painter and calligrapher.


New Addition


In Panama, A New Day Arouses Old Soldiers
The former colonel, who had the sharp military bearing honed during his rise to the upper ranks of the Panamanian Army, disbanded after the United States invasion in 1989, was explaining why it was time for Panama to forgive the officer corps for having kept a dictatorship in power.
"We top officers have changed," he said.
"As individuals we can help our Government run more efficiently."


Works Both Familiar and New Share Grounds in Ridgefield
THE first impression of this year's anthology at the Kouros Sculpture Center here is of art mustering near the entrance as if on its way out.
In reality, the reverse is true: several sculptures remain from last year and about 15 new ones have been added.
But as with a stone tossed into a pool, the effect is more noticeable on the perimeter.


Party Lines Flow From The Mouths Of Mayors
Lest anyone be concerned that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has completely bolted his party by endorsing President Clinton's crime bill and declining, so far, to endorse State Senator George E. Pataki for governor, rest assured.
The Mayor remains very much a Republican.
In the last week alone, Mr.
Giuliani has gone out of his way to help or to endorse three G.O.P. politicians who are up for election next month.


An Angst Even Shopping Cannot Cure
JUST WHO THE HELL IS SHE, ANYWAY?
By Marisa Acocella.
Illustrated.
Unpaged.
New York: Harmony Books.
Paper, $20.


Norman Rockwell Would Have Loved It. Columbia Surely Does, 24-13.
Three hours before yesterday's kickoff between Columbia and Fordham, there was scant evidence that a football game would be played.
There were no pep rallies, no tailgate parties and no traffic troubles near Fordham's Rose Hill Campus in the Bronx.
This is Division I-AA so the place was serene and the pace was leisurely.
The manicured grass that stretches far beyond the 100 yards of the football field and the shockingly sunny skies created a perfect autumn setting for two schools that should be fiercer rivals.
It was a picture Norman Rockwell could have painted.
But, sometimes, the football picture for small, academically stringent colleges like Fordham and Columbia seems to be etched in crayon.


Journal; Trashing for Dollars
"There's no such thing as bad publicity," a show-business press agent tells a client whose name has just been dragged through the tabloids.
Maybe not, but who would have imagined that bad publicity would become a goal in itself -- a sneaky new way to sell an expensive product to skeptical consumers increasingly resistant to old-fashioned ballyhoo?
The effectiveness of this new technique will be put to its supreme test next month when two costly productions, the $50 million Hollywood film adaptation of "Interview With the Vampire" and the $12 million Broadway musical adaptation of "Sunset Boulevard," are unveiled.
With or without vampires, both are already more celebrated for spilling bad blood than for any value they may actually possess as entertainment.


DEAF IS BEAUTIFUL
So Deaf is beautiful, huh ("Defiantly Deaf," by Andrew Solomon, Aug. 28)?
After the Miss America Pageant, I guess you would have to concede that deaf is beautiful, also.
Another article called for?
CORNELIA KELLER BIDDLE Washington


A Town Where Baseball Knows No Season
THE lights may be out at Shea and Wrigley, Fenway and Candlestick.
But there is one place, an idyllic village on the south shore of Otsego Lake, where baseball never dies.
The cancellation of baseball's league championships, which would have been played this week, leaves a void in every major league town, and every hamlet within reach of ESPN, except one: Cooperstown, N.Y., home of the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum.
Here it is still possible to remember that the real history of the game was made by men named Stengel, Robinson and Feller, not Selig, Ravitch and Fehr.


The Other Culture Weighs In
To the Editor:
Harry Gaines suggests a damaging solution to a real problem.
Rather than risk compromising the objective evaluations that should characterize a scientist's discourse, we would do far better to teach management to listen.
It is a reasonable bet that managers in the unnamed company were told about the mousse; they just didn't listen.
We don't need another Challenger disaster to be reminded that it is more likely the arrogance of management than the communication skills of scientists that is the problem.
J.
P.
E.
HODGSON Swarthmore, Pa., Sept. 18 The writer is a professor of mathematics and computer science at St.
Joseph's University in Philadelphia.


Revival Stirs in Hunts Point
Two weeks ago, Duane Reade, the drugstore chain based in New York City, opened its second outlet in the Bronx, on Southern Boulevard in Hunts Point.
The opening would have drawn little attention in Manhattan, where the chain operates all but 6 of its 50 stores.
But to many in Hunts Point, one of the city's poorest neighborhoods, the occasion signaled renewed confidence in the blocklong commercial strip between East 163d Street and Westchester Avenue.


Giuliani's Plan For Welfare Stresses Work, Not Training
Under Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposal to require able-bodied, childless welfare recipients to work for their benefits, job training would no longer be a priority and would be offered only to the most industrious and dependable recipients, the official designing the program said yesterday.
The official, Richard Schwartz, a senior adviser to the Mayor, said the administration believed that work, even in menial jobs, would ultimately be more effective than training in reducing the number of people dependent on welfare.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
50-Foot Puzzle
CONDOMINIUM bylaws are quite clear about what occupants can or can't have on the property.
Dogs can be excluded.
So can owners younger than 55.
But at the Mews, a condominium complex in Albertson, no one thought to add a 50-foot effigy.
It's possible, therefore, that Varinder Bhalla was breaking no rules last weekend as he and some helpers constructed in his driveway a giant model of the 10-headed evil Indian king, Ravana.


Only Series Is Over
To the Sports Editor:
Viewing the bottom of the "ninth inning" of Ken Burns's recent television documentary, a particular irony struck me: the very players and owners who took baseball away from us had all the time in the world to watch.
Were they?
One can only hope they tuned in to Buck O'Neil's version of "Take Me Out to the Ball Game." Boyish and wise.


BUDDY'S BOYS AND THEIR $100 MILLION TOYS
In a country where gun ownership is a right and health care a privilege, it is not surprising that financially privileged owners and players bicker over a contract that permits them to profit from a game in which grown men try to hit a little white ball in order to run around in a circle so they can end up where they started.
Meanwhile, local economies that depend on baseball are left in a lurch.
I'd like to offer a possible solution to the contract deadlock.
Fire all the players and start over -- a baseball tabula rasa.
Then hire only people who find no shame in earning less than a million dollars a year to do something they love and whose employers give them more than two weeks' vacation.


A Sampling of the Mediterranean World
COOKING from the Mediterranean has never been more popular than it is now.
The food of that region is showing up with increasing frequency on menus across the country, where restaurants with Mediterranean themes have been opening, and a plethora of cookbooks has appeared on the subject.
It all started two years ago when a group of scientists, doctors and nutritionists got together at Harvard and cited the countries of the Mediterranean for their low incidence of heart disease and cancer.
Vegetables play an enormous part in this cooking, as do grains, nuts and parsley.
Meat has a secondary role and is not served in large quantities.
And, of course, olive oil is used much more than butter.


Colette O. Bryce, David C. Miller
Colette Olivia Bryce, the daughter of Gloria E. Bryce of New York and the late Vasel A. Bryce, was married on Thursday to Dr.
David Carl Miller, a son of Dr.
Barry Miller of Ann Arbor, Mich., and the late Helen S. Miller.
The Rev.
Dr.
Herbert B. Anderson performed the ceremony at Brick Presbyterian Church in New York.
Ms.
Bryce, who is keeping her name, is an actress in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Columbia University.
Her father was a real-estate agent in Kingston, Jamaica, and New York.
Her mother is a retired accountant.


Lisa M. Rabin, Lewis Grossman
Lisa Marie Rabin, an assistant professor of Spanish and Latin American literature at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va., was married yesterday to Lewis Adam Grossman, an associate at Covington &amp; Burling, the Washington law firm.
Abner J. Mikva, the White House counsel and a former Chief Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, officiated at the Ritz-Carlton in Washington.
The bride, 30, graduated cum laude from Pomona College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a doctorate in Spanish from Yale University.
She is the daughter of Nancy and Allan Rabin of San Diego.
Her father, a child psychiatrist, is an associate clinical professor of psychiatry at the University of California at San Diego.


IN SHORT: FICTION
ITALIAN STORIES  A MUSIC BEHIND THE WALL  Selected Stories, Volume 1.
By Anna Maria Ortese.
McPherson, $20.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19  U.S.
TROOPS GOING TO KUWAIT  The United States said it would send troops to Kuwait and the United Nations Security Council warned Iraq not to attack as Iraqi troops moved toward the border.  1  Iraq seems headed for a repeat confrontation with the West.  10


A. M. Grimaldi, Mark S. Eskenazi
Anna Marie Grimaldi, the daughter of Joseph A. Grimaldi of Roslyn, L.I., and Camille C. Grimaldi of Commack, L.I., was married last evening in New York to Dr.
Mark Steven Eskenazi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Eskenazi, also of Roslyn.
Rabbi Harvey Tattlebaum performed the ceremony at the Pierre.
Mrs.
Eskenazi graduated from the State University at Albany and received a master's degree in elementary education from New York University in May.
Her father is a senior executive vice president of the Bank of New York and the president of its corporate-finance subsidiary, the BNY Financial Corporation.


Daring Research or 'Social Science Pornography'?: Charles Murray
THE MAN WHO WOULD ABOLISH welfare was flying to Aspen, Colo., sipping Champagne in the first-class cabin and spinning theories about the society unraveling 30,000 feet below.
In the past, he says, people were poor because of bad luck or social barriers.
"Now," he says, "what's holding them back is that they're not bright enough to be a physician."
It is precisely the kind of statement that makes Charles Murray so infuriating to so many people: sweeping, callous, seemingly smug.
The words are harsh, but the voice is genial and oddly reassuring, suffused with regret.
He switches to a Bordeaux and recalls his last approach to Aspen, on a private jet sent by Rupert Murdoch.


Miami Gains Redemption
When Miami and Florida State conduct their heated annual collision, the emotional pain lingers long after the physical damage is repaired.
After 12 months of suffering, criticism and suspicion that its era had come to an end, Miami's Hurricanes earned their redemption tonight while Florida State quarterback Danny Kanell inherited a year's worth of regrets.
With his team forced to rely on the pass because of an unproductive rushing game, Kanell's three interceptions led to Miami touchdowns.
The third, on a 16-yard scoring return by Hurricane cornerback Carlos Jones, secured a 34-20 Miami victory before a boisterous crowd of 77,010 in the Orange Bowl.


Bold Book In China Faults Deng On Policies
The Communist Party theology here these days is that the economic reforms begun by Deng Xiaoping should prepare China for the next hundred years and that any Chinese leader who tries to reverse them will be overthrown.
But a new and ominous portrait of Mr.
Deng's economic program has begun to appear here, suggesting that latent political opposition to the 90-year-old paramount leader is beginning to emerge.
A book that was circulated during the summer suggested that Mr.
Deng had led the country into a "trap" of rapid economic growth, where socialist values were eroding and the control systems that used to keep peasants productively engaged on the land were being destroyed.


Cubs Set to Reveal Ed Lynch as Their Man
While the Texas Rangers and the St.
Louis Cardinals continue interviewing for their general manager vacancies, ANDY MacPHAIL of the Chicago Cubs has landed his only candidate: ED LYNCH.
Lynch, who has been special assistant to JOE MCILVAINE with the Mets the last 13 months, will be introduced as the Cubs' general manager at a news conference tomorrow, a person familiar with the Cubs' plans said yesterday.
MacPhail, who was named the Cubs' president and chief executive officer a month ago, relieved LARRY HIMES of the general manager's post last week.
He already had Lynch in mind for the job and met with him twice last week, apparently clinching the deal Thursday.


In 25-Year Fight, the Hudson Starts to Mend
WHEN evaluating a 198-mile stretch of the Hudson River from Manhattan north to Hudson Falls, environmentalists like John Cronin take pride in gains that have been made over a quarter of a century.
As the head of the Garrison-based Hudson Riverkeeper Fund, he cites reduced pollution and generally healthier fish populations as proof that the river has begun to mend.


Saying Farewell To Snores
To the Editor:  Thank you, Richard Taruskin.
You have set me free.
After almost half a century of trying in vain to appreciate Serialist and atonal music, I can finally relax.
I really tried.
I attended concert after concert, not unaware of the half-filled halls, the winces and snores of the audience, the feeling of relief when the lukewarm applause indicated to me that the "music" was finally over.
But I persisted.
I am aware of the importance of learning for human beings and their incredible adaptability.
I thought that if only I could endure the pain and the boredom long enough, I would someday come to understand, appreciate and maybe even enjoy the stuff.
It didn't happen.


Hannah's Neurotic Sister? That Was Ages Ago
WHEN FIRST GLIMPSED IN "Bullets Over Broadway," the new Woody Allen comedy, Dianne Wiest is hurling a script down the magnificent staircase of her sumptuous New York apartment.
"Don't you remember who I am?" she thunders as she sweeps into view, her imposing form dripping with the furbelows of high 1920's fashion, her face a seven-layer cake of makeup.
She asks the question in a voice an octave lower than the sweet, girlish one film audiences may recall from Ms.
Wiest's portrayal of Holly, Mia Farrow's floundering, desperately insecure sibling in Mr.
Allen's 1986 "Hannah and Her Sisters." Then she answers herself in a roar: "I'm Helen Sinclair!" She might as well be saying "I'm Zeus!"


For London, a Soul Food Feast and Unexpected Endorsement
There's nothing unusual about a political rally at Sylvia's, the soul-food institution of Harlem, but it's not every day that the president of Sylvia's culinary empire decides to take the microphone himself and make an announcement.
Yesterday morning, Van Deward Woods, Sylvia's son, stood up and declared that he was not only giving $2,000 to Herbert London, the Republican candidate for state comptroller, but that he was also becoming a Republican himself after years of family loyalty to the Democratic Party.


At the Keyboard, Alicia de Larrocha
A VERITABLE pride of pianists enlivens the music scene this week, with recitals, chamber music and concerto performances.
This afternoon at 3, Christopher O'Riley gives an all-Beethoven recital to open the Danbury Concert Association's season at Western Connecticut State University (call 748-0522 for more details).


Honors for Chairwoman Of Lincoln Center
Beverly Sills at a dinner-dance to benefit the Hebrew Home for the Aged, at the Waldorf-Astoria, Oct. 2.


Sports of The Times; L.T.'s Greatest Sack
YOU probably think you know just about everything about Lawrence Taylor, whose "56" jersey will be retired tomorrow night during a halftime ceremony at the Giants-Vikings game at Giants Stadium.
About his Hall of Fame career, about his two Super Bowl rings, about how he defined the position of outside linebacker, about his drug-rehab problems, about his 132 1/2 quarterback sacks.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
STEVENSON CENTENARY
Robert Louis Stevenson died 100 years ago at the age of 44, leaving behind a legacy of novels and other writings that are beloved around the world.
In celebration of the centenary, the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Yale, which contains a prodigious collection of the Scottish author's manuscripts, letters, first editions and books, will put them on display from Friday through Dec. 22.
In addition, a symposium will be held at Yale's Whitney Humanities Center, 53 Wall Street, on Friday from 2 to 4:30 and Saturday from 10 to 12:30 and 2:30 to 5, open to the public free of charge.


The Executive Computer; At Last! Software That Can Translate This Into This
AS conceived, the ability to use a pen instead of a keyboard was to be the reason business executives would rush out to buy the new class of computing equipment known as personal digital assistants, or P.D.A.'s.
As practiced, handwriting recognition became the reason not to buy one.
After all, who could afford to use a device that might interpret "Back at 11" as "Racket H"?
Gibberish like this was a reason that Apple Computer's Newton Message Pad sold a scant 100,000 units in its first year.


Q and A; The Fee For Broker In a Sale
Q: If a home is seen with a real-estate salesperson, and six months later the same home is listed privately through a newspaper advertisement, and if you then buy the house, are the real-estate office and salesperson entitled to a commission? . . .
Sherrill Robinson, Bayside, Queens.


Toddi L. Gutner, Neil D. Block
Toddi Louise Gutner, a daughter of Kenneth and Lynette Gutner of Aspen, Colo., was married last evening to Neil Douglas Block, a son of Alfred and Nancy Block of Livingston, N.J.
Rabbi Daniel Alder performed the ceremony at the Waldorf-Astoria in New York.
The bride, 34, is a business reporter at Forbes magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.
Her father is the owner of Kenlin Enterprises, a manufacturer of furniture hardware in Highland Park, Ill.
Her mother retired as a clinical social worker in Arlington Heights, Ill.





An Extraordinary Alien
There are no welcoming decorations on the walls at the Immigration and Naturalization Service in Manhattan.
Nor do the people who work there seem happy to see any of us who have come that morning for our green-card interviews.
After the metal detectors and bag check, we are thumbprinted (the woman administering the procedure is suspicious and exasperated by some "highly abnormal striations in the pads of my digits").
A Chinese couple is greeted by their young, eager counsel.
He shakes the husband's hand and then exuberantly kisses the wife on the cheek.
She looks horrified.


Barchester's Daughter
THE RECTOR'S WIFE  By Joanna Trollope. 287 pp. New York: Random House. $21.


Tina M. Allan, Daniel McNally
Tina Marie Allan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George R. Allan of Wilmington, Mass., was married there yesterday to Daniel Joseph Thomas McNally, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward R. McNally of Malverne, L.I.
The Rev.
Charles Hughes performed the ceremony at St.
Dorothy Roman Catholic Church.


Freddy Krueger's Creator Breaks Out of His Genre
THE TWO COFFEE-TABLE books on display at Wes Craven's house in the Hollywood Hills are "The Film Encyclopedia" and "The History of God." Few moviegoers would think of the director of the first "Nightmare on Elm Street" and "The Serpent and the Rainbow" as either a serious film maker or a man with a spiritual bent.
But with the arrival of his latest work, "Wes Craven's New Nightmare," which opens on Friday, and with production about to begin on "Vampire in Brooklyn," starring Eddie Murphy, Mr.
Craven's fonts of spraying blood, oozing liquids and spinning bodies are starting to look, well, surprisingly substantial.
"Wes is at the same stage in his career that David Cronenberg was 10 years ago, bashing away at the barriers of the genre," says Piers Handling, director of the Toronto International Film Festival, where "Wes Craven's New Nightmare" had its world premiere last month.
Greeted enthusiastically by reviewers, industry executives and an unsuspecting public, "New Nightmare" emerged from a field of hundreds of new releases as a surprise hit.
"The new film is going to reorient critics and force them to re-examine Craven's work," predicts Mr.
Handling.


Jill A. Bayer, Daniel T. Ciporin
Jill Allison Bayer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert T. Bayer of Asheville, N.C., was married there last evening to Daniel Theo Ciporin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leon Ciporin of Wilmington, Del.
Rabbi Robert Ratner officiated at Temple Beth ha-Tephila.
Mrs.
Ciporin, 32, is the vice president of marketing at Technimetrics Inc., a financial database company in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.


The Nation; Gridlock, the Way It Used to Be
AS one bill after another perished in the Senate last week, Democrats repeatedly accused Republican senators of obstructionism.
From the academies and think tanks came the inevitable cries of rage.
The Senate, they said, was betraying its historic mission.
Hogtied by its arcane rules and hostage to its regional power centers, it was imploding and needed to be reformed.
But there is another way to look at gridlock: the Senate was invented, in part, to slow things down and hold things back.
It was meant to be a check on the President, the House of Representatives and popular passions.


Amanda D. Moose, Edward P. Lazarus
Amanda Davis Moose, a development executive at Caravan Pictures in Los Angeles, and Edward Peter Lazarus, a lawyer and writer in Los Angeles, were married yesterday at Union Station in Washington.
Judge William A. Norris of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in Los Angeles officiated.
Ms.
Moose, 31, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Wesleyan University, and from 1989 to 1991 was an administrative assistant to Robert Redford.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Moose of Alexandria, Va.
Her father is the Under Secretary of State for Management.


I.B.M. Searches for Blue Skies in Consulting
LONG before Louis V. Gerstner Jr., a former consultant, took over last year as the chairman of I.B.M., the computer company took a big plunge into the consulting business.
In 1991, I.B.M. hired Robert M. Howe from Booz, Allen &amp; Hamilton and gave him a free hand and $100 million to invest.
His assignment: take the money and make the International Business Machines Corporation a force in the fast-growing market for information technology consulting.
So Mr.
Howe, a 49-year-old Harvard M.B.A., set about spending money, recruiting people from firms like McKinsey and Price Waterhouse, and retraining I.B.M. engineers, sales people and technicians as consultants.


Liza del Rio, Christopher Wade
Liza A. del Rio, the daughter of Katia A. Gutierrez of Miami and Jorge R. del Rio of Larchmont, N.Y., is to be married today to Lieut.
Christopher Scott Wade, the son of Dr.
Linda Wade and James O. Wade of Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert Verigni performed the ceremony at Saints John and Paul Roman Catholic Church in Larchmont.
The bride, 26, is a residential counselor at the Rappahannock Area Community Service Board in Fredericksburg, Va.
She graduated from the State University College at Purchase, N.Y.
Her father is an editing technician at Cine Magnetics Video and Film Laboratories in Mamaroneck, N.Y.


Women Candidates Across U.S. Set Records
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 3 front-page article suggesting problems for women candidates in 1994 omits that:


Problems Still Loom For Mentally Ill People
The excellent services available to mentally ill people in the community by formerly mentally ill people ("Mentally Ill, in Recovery, Help Peers," Aug. 28) are, in my opinion, eclipsed by the down side of mental health customers' problems today in New Jersey.
Many are still treated in overcrowded, substandard hospital settings, and in some community mental health centers that leave much to be desired, thanks to Governor Whitman's desire to cut, cut, cut.
Additionally, many manic-depressives and other mentally ill people must cope with scorn and derision by Americans and New Jerseyans who are ignorant of mental illness, since it is hardly taught about in schools, even some colleges.


At Antioch Baptist, a One-Way Door: In
STRADDLING a corner at the crest of one hill and the bottom of another, the Antioch Baptist Church here appears poised midway through a long journey.
The mostly black church, which recently celebrated its 100th anniversary, has come a long way since its founding shortly after the abolition of slavery.
Yet racism and poverty still afflict the black community, says the Rev.
Rufus A. Strother, Antioch's pastor, and he does not let the relatively affluent congregation forget.


Ilisa Joy Rossum, David Alan Ring
Ilisa Joy Rossum, a trial attorney in Boston for the criminal division of the Justice Department, was married last evening to David Alan Ring, an assistant United States attorney in Hartford.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Ring, 30, graduated cum laude from Hobart and William Smith Colleges and received her law degree from American University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Philip E. Rossum of Scarsdale, N.Y.


Federal Reserve Chief Warns Bankers on Risky Loan Practices
With banks suddenly flush with extra capital, Federal regulators warned yesterday that the days of easy money and risky loans may be returning, just a few short years after excessive real-estate lending brought the banking system to its knees.
Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, gave a stern lecture on prudent lending yesterday to members of the American Bankers Association, who had gathered for their annual convention in New York.


Changing Longwood to Save It
The last of 100 families recently moved into 50 new two-family houses on Longwood Avenue.
Unlike most new developments, these houses are an essential part of the survival of a historic district.
And with their green cornices and soft-toned brick, they blend in well with old brownstones in the turn-of-the-century enclave of Longwood.
Longwood's story is one of neighborhood preservation and grass-roots politics.
In the late 1970's, when Thomas Bess and Marilyn Smith, two longtime residents, founded the Longwood Historic District Community Association, the neighborhood was full of deserted lots whose buildings had long since burned.
Around that time this part of the South Bronx became saddled with a name that resounded as a symbol of urban terror: Fort Apache.


Painting by Numbers: How Bad Was It?
THE HISTORY OF POSTWAR ART in the United States has been told the same way again and again: Jackson Pollock, Willem de Kooning and their fellow Abstract Expressionists took charge, first of New York, then the world.
End of story.
But is it?
No, and the plot line has been unraveling for some time.
Now a new book, "As Seen on TV: The Visual Culture of Everyday Life in the 1950's," extends the revision.
It is by Karal Ann Marling, an art historian and a professor of American studies at the University of Minnesota.
Her account doesn't have much to do with Pollock or de Kooning.
But it has a great deal to do with Winston Churchill, Claudette Colbert and a forgotten businessman named Max Klein.
As Marling describes it, in a chapter titled "Hyphenated Culture," the 50's wasn't a decade defined by a small band of Greenwich Village abstractionists struggling to fame despite a hostile public.
It was a decade of unprecedented interest in painting.
Everyone was at it.
Ike was in the White House with the television on, painting copies of greeting cards (up to 7 in 10 days!).
Hollywood stars promoted themselves as weekend dabblers.
Sinatra painted clowns, Fonda plums, Colbert portraits.
A traveling show featured art by celebrities like Joe Louis and Clifton Webb.
Another exhibition that toured the country showcased art by businessmen.
One man whose work was in it, a New York City clothing manufacturer, said he had been inspired by Irving Stone's biography of van Gogh, "Lust for Life," a surprise best seller when reissued in 1946.
Specifically, he said, his painting "borrowed from the violent style of that tortured master." Van Gogh, that is, not Stone.
The rest of the country, it seemed, was painting by numbers.
I don't know about you, but the paint-by-numbers craze always seemed to me -- as it did to 50's social commentators, who heaped scorn on it -- somewhere between Hula-Hoops and Davy Crockett on the scale of cultural signifiers.
But maybe not.
It doesn't require a relativism that would equate Mighty Morphin Power Rangers with Valkyries to see how serious painting and painting by numbers spoke to the same moment in American cultural life.
At the least, Abstract Expressionists rose to postwar stardom partly on the tide of a popular mania for painting -- even if they had to be cast as charlatans to do so.
So great was the public's enthusiasm for painting by numbers that one entrepreneur told Business Week in 1953: "We pray a little, keep our fingers crossed, and hope that when the herd finally turns to glass blowing, enough will stay behind to keep us in business. In the meantime, we're cleaning up."
You may feel edified to learn that a great work like Leonardo's "Last Supper," at $11.50, was the all-time favorite among paint-by-numbers hobbyists.
Until you discover that "Three Kittens," produced by Picture Craft, a company headed by Max Klein, was a big hit, too.
Klein started a "Masterpiece" line that included nudes and celebrity portraits.
A Picture Craft ad said: "Decorate Your Home . . . or Sell Your Paintings for Profit." Sure enough, judges at a San Francisco art show were even fooled into awarding one a prize.
"Do-it-yourselfism," writes Marling, "was the last refuge for the exercise of control and competence in a world run by the bosses and the bureaucrats." She points to the influence of Churchill as amateur painter, and particularly to his popular book, published in America in 1948, "Painting as a Pastime." In it he extolled the therapeutic value of putting down "large fierce strokes."
"Churchill's insistence that art was cheap psychotherapy or a way of releasing pent-up feelings found some resonance in the 'splash and wallop' technique of the Abstract Expressionists," observes Marling.
Here you have it.
Paint-by-numbers enthusiasts and Abstract Expressionists alike were affected by the same 50's Zeitgeist: the tension between social strictures and personal freedom.
When the critic Harold Rosenberg famously described de Kooning and others as Action Painters, he was, on a highfalutin level, echoing the widespread belief that art was a form of release.
Of course, there was only so much releasing that most Americans could take -- hence the preference for painting that nonetheless stayed within the lines prescribed by Klein &amp; Co.
Abstraction was O.K. when it came to those asteroid shapes and squiggly forms on the new Formica kitchen counter tops.
But Grandma Moses' treacly pictures were what the average Joe wanted on his walls.
Moses, an autodidact, ideally suited a decade of do-it-yourselfers and paint-by-numbers hobbyists.
Moreover, she painted homespun fantasies of a bygone country.
If art was a means of escaping the new corporate grind, her paintings epitomized escapism.
Little wonder she was dubbed America's most beloved artist or that in 1950 the United States Information Agency, to hype American culture, sent her works to Europe -- where the French and others received them warmly, to the horror of America's art establishment.
We do well to remember that the art stars of the period, besides Moses, included Ben Shahn and John Marin.
In exalted circles, praised was lavished on them during the postwar years.
In 1950, Marin had a retrospective at the Venice Biennale; in 1954 Shahn had one (as did de Kooning).
The Museum of Modern Art put those Venice shows together.
But it wasn't until late 1956 that it presented a one-person show of an Abstract Expressionist in New York -- a posthumous tribute to Pollock.
A David Smith retrospective in 1957 and a survey called "The New American Painting," which toured Europe in '58 and came here the next year, were the only other shows exclusively dedicated to Abstract Expressionism that the museum mounted during the entire decade.
The point is that Abstract Expressionists didn't simply take charge during the postwar period.
For much of it, they weren't even the main event.
And their rise is better understood against the backdrop of Shahn and Marin, of Moses and the paint-by-numbers craze, than in a vacuum.
American art in the 50's turned out to be a tango of High and Low: Pollock, dancing around drip paintings in a studio at the end of Long Island, partnered with Gene Kelly, dancing around in his beret as the artist in "An American in Paris" (a 1951 film).
The history of postwar American art, far from a closed book, has only started to be written.


The Great Suit Quest: One Man's Agony
FEW things inspire as much dread.
A visit to the periodontist.
Thanksgiving with distant relatives.
The words "edited for in-flight viewing."
But for a man, none of these really equals the tortures of shopping for clothes, from the nattily dressed salesman who asks, with oleo in his voice, "Can I help you?" to the need to appraise oneself in a mirror while others look on.


F.Y.I.
Forgotten Kips
Q.
I recently moved to Kips Bay Towers and am eager to know whether there is or ever was a real Kips Bay.


Assaying the Implications of Women's Resistance to Equality
NO nation on earth treats its women as well as its men, according to a United Nations study last year that called women the "neglected majority." Why do women put up with that?
Here is a contradiction to add to your thus-far-unshakables collection: A proudly self-avowed feminist, Sherrye Henry, who has just written a book about why women resist equality -- and who once ran for the New York State Senate from Long Island -- still trips (inadvertently) over the meaning of the very equality she writes about.


Frances Fragos and John Townsend
Frances Mary Fragos, an official in the Justice Department, was married yesterday to John Michael Townsend, a lawyer.
The Rev.
J.
Douglas Ousley performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Incarnation in New York.
Mrs.
Townsend, 32, is the chief of staff for the Assistant Attorney General for the Criminal Division of the Justice Department.
She graduated from American University and received her law degree from the University of San Diego.
She is the daughter of John and Dorothy Fragos of Wantagh, L.I.
Her father, who is retired, owned Fragos Construction, formerly in Wantagh.
Her mother retired as the office manager of Ace Carpentry Contractors, formerly in Bay Shore, L.I.


The Executive Life; Shaping the Present With Bits of the Past
"COLLECTING," in the opinion of the literary agent Ron Bernstein, "is about being in the presence of beautiful things."
But for Mr.
Bernstein and several collector/colleagues in Hollywood, it is even more about "beautiful California things." For they are at the forefront of one of the latest trends to hit this trendy state: Art Deco and Santa Fe are out; Arts and Crafts -- epitomized here by California pottery, Mission furniture and Craftsman bungalows -- is in.


Swiss Say Some Sect Members Found in Fires Were Murdered
Swiss investigators today formally acknowledged for the first time that some members of a sect who died in fire-gutted villas and chalets in Switzerland and Canada this week had been murdered.
"We spoke at first of a collective suicide," Andre Piller, a magistrate investigating the deaths, told a news conference in Fribourg.
"We can today affirm that for certain cases it was not suicide, but murder."


Police Hit Streets In a New Precinct
At 12:01 A.M. last Tuesday, with little fanfare save for a few bouquets of flowers sent by well-wishing neighborhood groups, the 33d Precinct station house opened its doors and deployed its first squad of officers onto the streets of Washington Heights.
The precinct, headquartered in a temporary, two-story prefabricated building at Amsterdam Avenue and 165th Street, is the first precinct to be created in the city since the mid-1980's, with the 115th in Jackson Heights and the 49th in Morris Park.


A Wild Rushing River Awaiting the Unwary
IF you stand on top of the Metropolitan District Commission hydroelectric dam in Barkhamsted, it is not difficult to see how the West Branch of the Farmington River is going to be Connecticut's first federally designated Wild and Scenic River.
Hundreds of yards below, the river bursts out of a gate and carves its way through a gorge lined with fir and hardwoods.
The clean, cold water rushes down a riverbed that is a jumble of boulders and deadfall waiting to snag the unwary canoe.
No buildings are in sight as far as the eye can see, and you can see for miles downriver to the south and into Massachusetts to the north.


The World; As Britain's 'New Democrat,' Blair Makes His Charge
FOR many English people, this tacky seaside resort, with its arcades, tattoo parlors, polluted beaches and faded rooming houses with geraniums in the windows, evokes the quintessential working man's holiday.
So it has always seemed an appropriate setting for the annual conference of the Labor Party.
But this year, under the spell of Tony Blair, its new leader, Labor is straying from its roots.
It is weakening even further the ties with the once-powerful trade unions that founded the party 94 years ago.
It is wiping out the last vestiges of socialist ideology.
And it is moving into the suburban garden homes and well-heeled London apartments of the middle class.


Bookshelf
THE MENNYMS.
By Sylvia Waugh.
Greenwillow. $14. (Ages 10 and up) The inhabitants of 5 Brocklehurst Grove, the Mennyms, are not invisible, but since they're life-size rag dolls, they would prefer not to be noticed.
They have been alone in the house for 40 years, but now a visitor is coming from Australia.
This first novel from Britain is in the great tradition of believable domestic fantasy.
COURTNEY.
Written and illustrated by John Burningham.
Crown. $16. (Ages 4 to 7) The children manage to adopt a mongrel instead of a pedigreed dog as their parents had advised, but Courtney turns out to have many surprising talents.
He's a fine cook, baby sitter and violinist, and even rescues the baby.
COME GO WITH ME: Old-Timer Stories From the Southern Mountains.
Collected by Roy Edwin Thomas.
Illustrated by Laszlo Kubinyi.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $16. (All ages) In 1970 the author started recording interviews with "old-timers" whose memories went back into the 19th century, and he has transcribed several of them that are modest and revealing.
A QUIET NIGHT IN.
Written and illustrated by Jill Murphy.
Candlewick. $12.95. (Ages 3 to 7) In the fourth story about the Large family, it is Mr.
Large's birthday, and the plan is for the children to go to bed early so the parents can have a quiet adult celebration.
Ha!
TEN SLY PIRANHAS: A Counting Story in Reverse (A Tale of Wickedness -- and Worse!).
By William Wise.
Illustrated by Victoria Chess.
Dial. $13.50. (Ages 4 to 8) In the droll spirit of Edward Gorey and Hilaire Belloc, the backward-counting story tells how the sly piranhas swim in the river; with each verse another is eaten, until the last one encounters a creature with an even greater appetite and stronger jaws.
Rich, funny illustrations.
THE WORLD OF DAUGHTER MCGUIRE.
By Sharon Dennis Wyeth.
Delacorte. $14.95. (Ages 10 to 14) The narrator, heroine and title character is having difficulties with the family heritage project at her school.
Her family tree is African-Italian-Irish-Jewish-Russian-American.


At Work; Now He's Stressed, She's Stressed
EVERYONE is driven nuts by work once in a while, but do men and women react differently to job stress?
If conventional wisdom, backed by conventional social science, is correct, work is more central to the lives of men, family to the lives of women.
Job stress then is likely to have a more adverse overall mental health impact on men than on women.
Any stressed-out working woman who regards that conclusion skeptically is probably reacting well within the bounds of good sense.
A researcher who has been studying sex, psychological stress and work finds little difference between men and women in the impact work has on their well-being.
To the extent that women are being driven crazy, they are being driven crazy on an equal footing with men.


Village Weeps for a Little Victim
Nicholas Green, who became a celebrity and a symbol in a foreign land after his death in an awful crime, was remembered today in the kind of personal detail that is known only to a child's hometown.
Last year he was St.
George in the first-grade play, while his mother, in a costume that scared many of the other children, played the dragon.
All this summer he took out library books on mythology to prepare for his family's vacation in Italy.
And on his seventh birthday, two weeks before departure, one of his favorite gifts was a box of beach shells.


Data Bank/October 9, 1994
Data Bank/October 9, 1994
Construction Spending
Aug.
July
June
Monthly percent change
-0.2
0.0
0.3
Index of Leading Indicators
Monthly percent change
0.6
0.0
0.2
Consumer Borrowing
Monthly percent change
15.7
10.9
16.0
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
4.4
-1.1
0.8
Employment
Sept.
Aug.
July
In thousands
123,600
123,200
123,500
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
7,715 (5.9)
8,000 (6.1)
8,000 (6.1)
Weekly Jobless Claims
Sept. 30
Sept. 23
Sept. 16
In thousands
317
310
321
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Oct. 7
Sept. 30
Sept. 23
Yield in percent
7.90
7.81
7.79


Corrections
An entry in the index last week about a house tour in Greenport was printed prematurely.
An article on the tour, which is to be held today, appears on page 17.


Anthropology for the Anthropologists
To the Editor:
It has become fashionable for the authors of popular books on social issues to claim the status of "amateur anthropologist." Upon reading your review of Julia Blackburn's "Daisy Bates in the Desert" (Aug. 14), in which Linda Simon called Bates "a self-taught anthropologist," my wife, a journalist, asked me, a professional anthropologist, just what an amateur anthropologist is.
I wasn't sure.
No one speaks of amateur doctors, amateur lawyers or amateur journalists, and to call someone an amateur psychologist is vaguely insulting, not book-jacket copy.
I do, however, know what a professional anthropologist is.
The 10,000 or so of us in the United States are professionals because our careers are focused on anthropological research, teaching and writing.
We share an understanding of the basic concepts and methods used in anthropology, we have conducted field research, we have credentials in the form of master's degrees and Ph.D.'s and we are participants in the profession.


HAIR


Q and A
A Month in Phoenix
Q.
I would like to spend a month in or near Phoenix next February or March and need to rent a one-bedroom apartment.
I can only afford $2,000 to $2,500 a month.
Can you help? -- Marion Kaye, Syosset, L.I.


Colonial Affair Seizes the Gold Cup, Doing Holy Bull a King-Sized Favor
Holy Bull, resting in his stall in Kentucky, probably scored the greatest victory of his career yesterday when Colonial Affair won the $750,000 Jockey Club Gold Cup at Belmont Park and knocked Tabasco Cat out of contention for Horse of the Year.
On a day billed as New York's preview of the Breeders' Cup series, Colonial Affair made a power drive from sixth place and outran Devil His Due to the wire by two and a half lengths, giving senior horses a sweep of the top spots.
Less than one length back came the European traveler Flag Down, and then it was half a length to Tabasco Cat, winner of the Preakness and Belmont Stakes.


Titicus Watershed Picked for Monitoring
IN a cooperative venture among the municipalities of Lewisboro, North Salem and Ridgefield, the Westchester Land Trust recently announced the formation of a volunteer program to monitor the water quality in the Titicus River watershed.
The Westchester Land Trust, a nonprofit environmental and educational organization based in Bedford Hills, is combining the monitoring aspect of the project with a public education program for the 5,000 households in the watershed area.


Howard J. Kushnick, Jodi L. Abramson
Dr.
Jodi Lynne Abramson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Abramson of Massapequa, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Howard Jay Kushnick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Kushnick of Merrick, L.I.
Cantor Robert Applestone officiated at Congregation Ohr Torah in North Woodmere, L.I.
The bride, 27, is a chief resident in ophthalmology at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
She graduated from Northwestern University, where she also received her medical degree.
The bridegroom, 29, is a resident in ophthalmology at the New York Eye and Ear Infirmary.
He graduated summa cum laude from Tulane University, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and where he also received his medical degree.


Rutgers Rallies in the 4th Quarter to Defeat Army
For a second week, Rutgers found itself trailing, 14-3, late in the first half.
But today, the Scarlet Knights rallied in the fourth quarter to win, 16-14, on a pass by the backup quarterback, Robert Higgins.
Last week, Rutgers faced 13th-ranked Miami.
Today, it was Army, which now is 1-4, its worst start since opening the 1974 season 1-5.


In Election Year, There Must Be Kennedys
American political dynasties are as old as the republic.
The Adamses of Massachusetts, the Roosevelts of New York, the Pinckneys of South Carolina, the Byrds of Virginia, the Tafts of Ohio, the Stevensons of Illinois, the Rockefellers and others have made their marks on the nation's history over the last two centuries.
But for sheer relentlessness, has there ever been anyone quite like the Kennedys?


Where There's War There's Amanpour
A DAY IN HELL CANNOT BE MUCH WORSE THAN a day this past July on the Rwandan border as hundreds of thousands of sick, wounded and terrified refugees streamed out of their shattered homeland.
Around makeshift camps near Goma, in Zaire, bodies littered the ground for as far as one could see in any direction.
The stench of rotting flesh and human waste was overpowering.
Thick volcanic dust carrying all manner of plagues hung in low clouds.
Soldiers from the French Foreign Legion, unable to dig graves in the rock, methodically bulldozed load after load of corpses into shallow ravines as blank-faced children watched silently.
To television viewers around the world with access to CNN, it was the kind of place where Christiane Amanpour would probably turn up.


An Aging Generation Looks for Answers
AS women seek to take more control of their health and their lives, conference organizers are finding that subjects like breast cancer, menopause and self-defense are drawing large audiences.
Many of the conferences are aimed at women over the age of 40, among them the baby boomers thought not to be content to go through the aging process without plenty of information.


Word for Word/The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet; Dialogue That Lingers: 'Hi, Mom.' 'Hi, Pop.' 'Hi, David.' 'Hi, Rick.'
WHAT is the original definition of an adventure in the world of television?
Being pushed out of a helicopter by an assassin, only to be saved by a sky-diving sidekick?
Nah.
Attempting vehicular homicide on your ex-husband, and framing his other ex-wife for it?
Nope.
An adventure, in the root television meaning of the word, is Harriet Nelson getting Ozzie to fix the broken kitchen door.
Or maybe it's Ozzie and Harriet deciding that David, their teen-age son, is old enough to have a key to the house.
Or refereeing when David complains that his kid brother Rick's rock music keeps him from studying symphony records.
That was how Ozzie and his co-writers, Don Nelson, Bill Davenport and Ben Gershman, defined adventure.


POSTINGS: A New Front Door for 'the Toaster'; Major Renovation At Columbia Law
The Columbia University Law School is more distinguished for its alumni -- Franklin A. Thomas, Harold M. Ickes, George E. Pataki and Ellen V. Futter among them -- than its architecture.
The 33-year-old modernist box, Jerome L. Greene Hall, is known on campus as "the toaster."
But logistics, not esthetics, dictated a $10 million renovation and expansion that is scheduled to begin next May.
"We find ourselves with 1,200 people working in a building every day without substantial public spaces," said Lance Liebman, dean of the school.
In addition, the building's ground-level entrance on 116th Street turned out to be much more heavily used than the entrance designed at the third floor, fronting on a plaza that spans Amsterdam Avenue on a deck.


From Backup to Best in Sacks, Conner Thrives With Saints
The Saints had only two sacks in their first two games.
The quick reasoning was that New Orleans's defense was missing the presence of outside linebacker Rickey Jackson, the pass-rushing specialist who signed with the 49ers as a free agent.
However, in the last three games the Saints have registered 17 sacks and now have 19 to lead the National Football League.
The main reason is Darion Conner, a free-agent insurance policy from Atlanta whom New Orleans signed as a hedge against the loss of Jackson.
Conner, playing in Jackson's old spot at left outside linebacker, leads the N.F.L. with eight sacks despite having started only the last three games.


They're Just Greedy
To the Sports Editor:
For those too busy arguing it to realize it, sports is a major part of the layman's life.
It not only provides excitement, it stimulates friendship, generates conversation and provides reasons for parties.
It helps us bond with our children.
And it feeds the economy.


Changes in Match Racing Challenge Dickson
Chris Dickson, the New Zealand sailor who was once the world's master of match racing, used to log his team's tactical moves in a personal playbook.
But that book is outdated now, as stale as yesterday's loaf of bread.
His tips have lost their freshness in the course of the last two years, the time it took the 32-year-old Dickson to compete in the 1993-94 Whitbread Round the World Race.
But now he's back to the aspect of the sport over which he once reigned supreme: one-on-one match racing.


Confronting a Classic, Head On
FROM THE OPENING-NIGHT PERformance of "Show Boat" on Dec. 27, 1927, the Jerome Kern-Oscar Hammerstein 2d musical play has been recognized as a classic.
The next morning, Brooks Atkinson, the New York Times drama critic, called it "the most beautifully blended musical show we have seen in this country." The first three songs in Act I -- "Make-Believe," "Ol' Man River" and "Can't Help Lovin' Dat Man," sung in quick, dazzling succession after the overture, knocked theatergoers for a loop.
"Show Boat," the smash hit, went on to become a revered institution, the much-analyzed, seminal work that forever changed the American musical theater.
That's a heavy load to bear.
Harold Prince faces the task head on in the pristine new production at the Gershwin Theater.
The astonishing thing about Mr.
Prince's "Show Boat" is not its opulence, its cast of 71, its determinedly correct social consciousness or its often striking use of cinematic techniques.
The show looks lavish, but looks count for little over the span of a performance that lasts nearly three hours.
Rather you'll be stunned and swept effortlessly along by the melodic variety and intensity of the score, which predates the gorgeous Richard Rodgers-Hammerstein "Carousel" score by 18 years, and can still upstage it.


Corrections
The Market Watch column on Sept. 25, about the slumping United States bond market, imprecisely summarized the views of Alan S. Blinder on German interest rate policy.
Mr.
Blinder, vice chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, has generally criticized European Governments for allowing unemployment to remain high; he has not specifically criticized Germany for maintaining high interest rates.


Cruise Lines Sail Through Choppy Seas
MOST ports of call this fall and winter will be familiar to seasoned travelers, but even they may have trouble keeping up with the industry's recent game of musical smokestacks.
In addition to changes in ownership, the industry was further unsettled this summer when two specialty operations, American Family Cruises and Carnival's Fiesta Marina, which was geared to Hispanic travelers, foundered less than a year after each was launched.
The industry must also worry about possible long-term fallout from two well-publicized health crises.
The outbreak of Legionnaires' disease aboard the Celebrity Horizon three months ago resulted in 16 confirmed cases of the illness among passengers as of late September, including one death, according to the Centers for Disease Control; another 34 suspected cases were still being investigated.
An intestinal bacterium last month on Royal Caribbean's Viking Serenade sickened almost 650 passengers and crew, and possibly contributed to the death of another passenger.


Michael Smuin Mixes Whimsy And Populism
MICHAEL SMUIN HOLDS UP the preview flyer for his new company, Smuin Ballets/SF.
It features a discreetly positioned nude couple, their embrace an idealized study in kitsch.
"Isn't it beautiful?" he asks.
"And look at the logo. It's the exact kind of lettering they used to use in comic-book titles."
But what Mr.
Smuin displays so proudly does not entirely depict "Dances With Songs," the single program that his 12-member San Francisco troupe will offer at the Joyce Theater, in New York, from Tuesday through next Sunday.
The show has no nudity.


SHANNON FAULKNER
Shannon Faulkner is giving the Citadel more lessons in leadership than all of its military drills combined ("Shannon Faulkner, One of the Boys," by Catherine S. Manegold, Sept. 11).


Gridlock's Political Price
Polls and pundits alike predict a mid-term Democratic defeat so catastrophic that the Republicans could end up controlling not only the Senate but also (for the first time since 1954) the House of Representatives.
The polls are preliminary and the pundits fallible, and when we all wake up on Nov. 9 the Democrats, though shaken, may still have slim majorities.
But if things do turn out badly, it will be partly because Bill Clinton and the Democrats have failed to persuade the American people that they can govern as a party.
This failure of governance is rarely mentioned in the litany of causes for the Democrats' discontent.
The most common suspects are: a nagging, nationwide sense of economic discomfort.
The elusive but present ghost known as the "character issue," raised anew by Whitewater.
Doubts about the President's managerial skills and his bumbling White House staff.
A generally sour national mood and the growing rebellion against incumbency, more damaging to Democrats simply because there are more of them than there are Republicans.


Fate of a List
To the Editor:  Herbert Muschamp's article "They Got a Blast From Architecture's Past"  [ Sept. 25 ]  could not fail to please all of us associated with the Architectural History Foundation.


Managed Care Changing Practice of Psychotherapy
Managed-care companies have several names for what's ailing people who spend years in psychotherapy that the companies consider unproductive: They call it the New Yorker syndrome or the Woody Allen syndrome.
And they intend to eradicate it.
But who determines whether psychiatric treatment is productive or merely high-cost self-improvement?
This question has led to pitched battles between the companies and psychotherapists, particularly in the New York region, where more than 20 percent of the nation's therapists work.
The battle is seen as a testing ground for the efforts of managed-care companies to scrutinize more closely medical spending in New York, where managed care has been slow to take hold.


Alicia K. Glen, Daniel Rayner
Alicia Kenyon Glen, the daughter of Jeffrey Glen and Judge Kristin Booth Glen, both of New York, is to be married today to Daniel Rayner, the son of Stephen and Hana Rayner of London.
Rabbi Emily Korzenik is to perform the ceremony at the Terrace, a restaurant in New York.
The bride, 28, is a lawyer at South Brooklyn Legal Services.
She graduated magna cum laude from Amherst College and received her law degree from Columbia University.
Her father is a partner in Berwin Leighton, a law firm in New York.
Her mother is an associate justice of the Appellate Term of the New York State Supreme Court in New York.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Rosina Abramson. .


Two Sides Meet for Talks on East Timor
An intiative by Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali for talks on East Timor resulted in meetings this week between Indonesia's Foreign Minister and members of the Timorese independence movement in New York and between Portugal's Foreign Minister and pro-Indonesian Timorese in Luxembourg.
On Thursday, Foreign Minister Ali Alatas of Indonesia held talks for the first time with exiled leaders of Fretilin, the leading armed rebel movement in East Timor, a former Portuguese colony that Indonesia invaded and annexed in 1975.
The Fretilin delegation was headed by Abilio Araujo, who is in exile in Europe.


Giuliani Weighs Sharp Cutbacks, Including a New Severance Offer
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has completed the broad outline of a plan to close a $1 billion gap in New York City's budget, officials say.
The plan calls for making sharp cuts in programs and services for New Yorkers and offering new severance packages to entice 8,500 more workers off the payroll.
The Mayor is still ironing out the details of the spending cuts, but in the week ahead he plans to seek approval from the municipal unions for some of the plan's largest savings, the officials said.
Those provisions include the severance program, which will offer workers considerably less than similar packages that removed 6,139 workers last spring.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
TIN PAN ALLEY  LORENZ HART  A Poet on Broadway.
By Frederick Nolan.
Oxford University, $25.


Melissa L. Strock, John C. Canoni
Melissa Lynne Strock, a manager of development at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx, was married yesterday to John Charles Canoni, an associate at the New York law firm of Whitman Breed Abbott &amp; Morgan.
The Rev.
Dr.
Douglas W. Caldwell, a Moravian pastor, performed the ceremony at the Old Moravian Chapel in Bethlehem, Pa.
Mrs.
Canoni graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Strock of Hellertown, Pa.


BUDDY'S BOYS AND THEIR $100 MILLION TOYS
Your cover photograph really shows what the man who murdered the 1994 season is all about.
With that baseball bat and dour look, Bud Selig, the acting commissioner of baseball, seems more like a modern-day management goon than a man who loves the game.
F.
L.
COCOZZELLI Staten Island


When Police Go Too Far: Verdict Helps Draw a Line
On the morning of Sept. 26, 1990, three police officers led by a lieutenant entered two separate apartments in East Harlem, looking for a missing police radio.
What happened next has left their careers in ruins and three of them facing prison terms.
And it has again raised the troubling question of exactly where the line is between aggressive police work and abuse of power.


U.S. May Take Steps to Protect Israel From Iraq
Arriving here today to begin a six-day trip to promote peace beween Syria and Israel, Secretary of State Warren Christopher found his mission distracted by the movement of Iraqi troops toward the Kuwaiti border.
He said the United States would consider new steps to protect Israel if it was threatened by Baghdad.
He said the Clinton Administration was sending Patriot antiaircraft missiles to defend Kuwait, and added, "Certainly if it turned out to be necessary, we would consider any additional steps that seem to be prudent for Israel."


Change of Pianists In Brooklyn Concertw
Margaret Leng Tan is to replace Gwendolyn Mok as the piano soloist in Chen Yi's Piano Concerto at the opening concerts of the Brooklyn Philharmonic Orchestra's season on Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Ms.
Mok is recovering from a back injury.
Philip Glass's Second Symphony and John Zorn's "For Your Eyes Only" make up the balance of the program.


Editorial Notebook; Polio, Remembered The Decline Of a Disease
One morning a long time ago, I wakened to a fierce headache, the first the 5-year-old I was then had ever experienced.
My neck was stiff, too, so stiff that it was pinioned to the pillow.
I don't recall being frightened, however, until I saw my parents' faces.
They were terrified.
At this point memory shuts down -- perhaps I drifted into sleep -- and doesn't return until it is 12 hours later.
Now I am lying in a corridor on what seems to be a cot, next to a young man who appears to be sleeping.
My fright is succeeded by astonishment.
Where am I?
Who is this stranger whose sealed and silent face is only a few inches from mine?


Changing the Ways of Albany
Mr.
Pataki said he wanted to "change the whole budget process" in Albany, saying, "Right now, the process stinks." Here is how he said he would change it.
The Governor, the two leaders and maybe occasionally key staff people meet behind closed doors and negotiate what is this year a $63-plus-billion budget. . . .
What we are going to do is to open up that process.
We are going to submit our budget in January.
Then what I am going to do is call on the Senate and the Assembly to pass their versions of the budget in the open, in the light of day.


THEATER
In a Los Angeles Sweatshop, Five Women Find Themselves  Gramercy Arts Theater
In "Real Women Have Curves" ("Las Mujeres de Verdad Tienen Curvas"), written by Josefina Lopez a few years ago when she was 19, the youngest of five Mexican immigrant women working in a Los Angeles dressmaking sweatshop dreams of becoming a writer and tries to impress the others, including her mother and sister, that they are backward in the age of feminism.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Folk-Music Elements Transformed but Not Lost  New School
It is a fanciful thought, but what if folk song, "used" by classical composers for centuries, was itself the user?
As the ethnic cultures that produced them die and fade, could it be that folk songs seek extended life by attaching themselves to music that promises survival?
One is reminded of the Chinese proverb about cats: Originally cats ruled the world, it says, but, tiring of the strain, turned over their hegemony in exchange for protection.


Bosnians Fear a Rising Islamic Authoritarianism
A few weeks ago, the popular host of a radio show here received a letter from the Bosnian Culture Minister ordering him to stop playing "aggressor music" -- songs performed by Serbs.
"I was outraged," Mimo Sahinpasic, the radio host, said.
"There are Serbian singers -- like Djordje Balasevic -- whose antiwar songs have done more for Bosnia than 80 percent of our leaders. So I ignored the letter. I'm in Bosnia to fight for what's left of the Yugoslav idea, not to live in a one-party state."


Apple and I.B.M. Are Seen Close to PC Accord
Executives of Apple Computer and I.B.M. are close to agreeing on a common standard that would make the computers each company produces compatible with one another, industry executives familiar with the discussions said yesterday.
For consumers, such a standard would mean they could buy a single machine that, without any modifications, would run software using several different operating systems: OS/2, which is the operating system that I.B.M. promotes; Apple's Macintosh and the Windows NT program made by the Microsoft Corporation.


World Economies


Pataki Takes His Campaign Message to Harlem Church
For State Senator George E. Pataki, the campaign trail led yesterday to Harlem, where he addressed a Baptist congregation and spoke of the need for jobs, health care and economic revitalization in the community beyond the church's doors.
Members of the Abyssinian Baptist Church said they were not surprised that the visit of a gubernatorial candidate coincided with the approach of Election Day.


An Evening of Arias From Opera Manhattan
Opera Manhattan, which presents fully staged performances of rarely heard operas and gives half of its profits to AIDS-research organizations, is to open its fall season at 8 P.M. on Oct. 19 with a gala Massenet concert at Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan.
The soprano Andrea Gruber is to head the cast in performances of arias from "Le Cid," "Thais," "Cleopatre," "Therese" and "Cendrillon."
Tickets to the concert are $30; a $65 ticket includes a reception at the French Embassy, 972 Fifth Avenue, at 79th Street.
Tickets may be bought at the Gould Hall box office or by mail from Opera Manhattan, 211 West 56th Street, New York, N.Y. 10019.


Commerce Bancorp Inc.(COBA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


We Need Nevada Site To Store Spent Fuel
To the Editor:
Kosta Tsipis's assessment of the issues surrounding the Yucca Mountain spent-fuel repository are on the mark (Op-Ed, Oct. 3).
Officials in Nevada are trying to block the facility, which would store nuclear wastes from the country's reactors, because they fear accidents or leaks.
But there is no way that the facility would ever approach the potential effect on the environment of decades of underground weapons testing.


British Lens Distorts the Irish Political Picture
To the Editor:
Re William Safire's "No Yanks Need Apply" (column, Oct. 3):


Lost and Found in Tokyo and New York
To the Editor:
Last June I forgot my jacket in the Tokyo subway.
It contained several business cards, a fountain pen and some small change.
I was not worried.
A few calls to the lost and found office, and I would be certain to have my jacket delivered.
But this piece of clothing, oversized for most Japanese, was never returned.
It is lost.


Memphis Has a Tribute to Elvis For a New World of Consumers
Few cities have been as transformed by the presence of a pop music personality as Memphis, home of Elvis Presley from the time he was 13 until his death in 1977.
When asked about Elvis's importance to the city, Memphians like to respond, with a mixture of embarrassment and pride, that Elvis is Memphis.
This weekend, the routine of paying homage to the King with visits to Graceland and small celebrations on the anniversaries of his birth and death was shaken up slightly.
Elvis Presley's estate, Graceland, sponsored its first tribute to the King, flying in a small army of pop musicians for a concert and holding the first party at Graceland since Elvis's death.
The tribute did not mark any particular event in Presley's life.
It didn't have to.
When Elvis calls, his fans respond.
Some 17,000 people paid $40 to $550 a seat for the concert at the new Pyramid arena, making Memphis seem like the site of a World's Fair.
Five Danish au pairs drove in from Washington, two Japanese students with Elvis-style sideburns flew in from Japan, an Illinois woman made her 27th pilgrimage to Memphis and two Elvis fans from Canada arranged to meet here after 30 years apart.


THREATS IN THE GULF: THE BUSH LEGACY Clinton's Line in the Sand; The President Seeks to Avoid Bush's Error Of Not Clearly Warning the Iraqis in 1990
With bellicose threats and a rapid mustering of military might, President Clinton and his advisers are intent on sending Saddam Hussein the clear warning that President Bush did not: that an Iraqi invasion of Kuwait would prompt an overwhelming American response.
When Iraqi troops last massed on the Kuwaiti border four years ago, the signals sent by Mr.
Bush and his Ambassador, April Glaspie, were irresolute.
The only show of American force was two KC-135 refueling planes that were sent to the United Arab Emirates.
The Iraqis poured into Kuwait all but unopposed, and it was seven months before they were dislodged in the Persian Gulf war.


Bridge
Some of the world's trouble spots have had an impact on international bridge competition, although those problems are diminishing.
There has never, however, been such a problem in Ireland, which has always had a team representing both sides of the border.
At the NEC World Championships in Albuquerque, N.M., last month, Ireland was represented by a talented foursome: Paddy Walsh, a 46-year-old bridge-school teacher and magazine editor from Galway; Rory Timlin, a 42-year-old civil engineer, also from Galway; Tom Hanlon, a 27-year-old insurance broker from Dublin, and Hugh McGann, a 27-year-old physician from Cork.
They finished first in a strong qualifying section in the Rosenblum Open Teams, and in so doing had a major impact on the final outcome.
With three matches remaining, they were leading comfortably and had beaten the favored Seymon Deutsch team, which included three former world champions.
That squad was in deep trouble, and virtually certain to be eliminated: They were ninth in a field of 12, and 28 victory points short of a qualifying position.


McCall Greets Voters in Forest Hills


CHRONICLE
And just who might Felipa Moniz e Perestrello Columbus be?
As today is Columbus Day, perhaps the answer is obvious.
She was the wife of the man who sailed the ocean blue in 1492 and, according to PAULA DiPERNA, she was the woman who probably made the epic trip possible.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about the effect of managed care on psychotherapy described one company in the field incorrectly.
The company, Value Behavioral Health, is the largest managed-care company for mental health; it is not the country's largest managed-care company.


A Lone Doctor Adapts Drugs For Abortions
The so-called abortion pill from France, RU-486, is still illegal in this country, but an alternative drug treatment has become available for $500 in New York.
Richard Haus knecht, a gynecologist and longtime abortion-rights crusader, says he has used two drugs already on the market -- but approved for other purposes -- to perform more than 100 abortions without surgery.
Dr.
Hausknecht has been criticized by medical researchers for using the method in his private practice before its safety and efficacy are determined in clinical trials, which are under way in three American cities.
But he insists -- and authorities seem inclined to agree -- that he is doing nothing illegal.
He argues that the method should be available immediately to give women an alternative to surgical abortions and acknowledges a political motive.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  A SHOW OF U.S.
FORCE  The United States is sending more troops and some of its most potent warplanes to the Persian Gulf, making a pointed display of its military power, as Iraqi forces gathered at the border with Kuwait.
A1


Crime and Echoes of 'Willie Horton' in Campaign
Lieut. Gov. Mark S. Singel always figured that the numbers would defend him.
With his Republican opponent, Representative Tom Ridge, painting him as soft on crime throughout their race for governor, Mr.
Singel has cited records showing how few state prisoners serving life terms ever gain freedom.
From 1991 to 1993, state records show, only 55 of 2,614 prisoners won recommendations from the State Board of Pardons, on which Mr.
Singel serves as chairman, and only 8 of those were approved by Gov.
Robert P. Casey.


Brown Is in Need of a Giant Shield
If anyone has any doubts about how tough Dave Brown is, they shouldn't, considering the number of hits he has got up from this season.
Take last week against the New Orleans Saints, a game in which Brown was sacked seven times.


Southland Adds Temerlin McClain
The Southland Corporation in Dallas has added Temerlin McClain in Irving, Tex., to its agency roster by naming Temerlin to handle the new duties of developing corporate image advertising for 7-Eleven convenience stores.
The billings have not been determined.
Temerlin, which has handled public relations for Southland since 1992, joins four other agencies on Southland's roster, including J. Walter Thompson Chicago, which has handled the 7-Eleven account, with billings of $30 million to $40 million, for six years.


Murell Doesn't Want to Be the Jets' Meggett
ON the third-and-10 play that turned the Jets' 16-6 victory, Adrian Murrell moved out to the right, caught a screen pass from Boomer Esiason and wiggled 12 yards for a first down at the Colts' 38-yard line.
Three plays later, he dashed around left end to the 25 but now, seeing Johnny Johnson hurrying toward the huddle, he trotted to the sideline for a breather.
Cheers burst from the assembly of 66,244 that understood that Adrian Murrell had arrived.
He also understood.
He waved.


BanPonce Corp.(BPOP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Paterno a Worrier Among Warriors
Joe Paterno is still screaming after all these years.
His high-pitched constructive criticism, imported from Brooklyn more than four decades ago, continues even as his Penn State Nittany Lions score at a rate that has occasionally even surprised themselves.


Driver Held After Spree
A Brooklyn man whose license has been suspended 43 times left a trail of destruction on a drive through mid-Manhattan yesterday, the police said.
Simon Tobok, 30, of 80 Brighton Court in Brooklyn, was jailed last night, facing several charges, including attempted murder.


Bettman On Move, But Are The Talks?
Toronto is not No. 1 on Gary Bettman's itinerary of favorite spots to visit right now.
But with little time left to reach an agreement before Saturday, the National Hockey League commissioner will be there today to receive a new proposal from union negotiators.
Bettman would have preferred the bargaining session to have taken place in New York for two reasons: One, Canadian fans seem to be angrier about the absence of hockey during what is supposed to be the hockey season than their counterparts south of the border; two, Bettman has a board of governors meeting scheduled for tomorrow, which means he would have to return to New York and have less time to negotiate if he finds something worth talking about.


Teaching Women to Survive in the City


Crime Bills


Circle Repertory Enters Upon Adulthood
In May, Tanya Berezin, the artistic director of Circle Repertory Company, and Abigail Evans, who was then the managing director, met with several members of the theater's board.
There was a sense of urgency to their discussions.
The theater's accumulated operating deficit, in six figures for more than a decade, had climbed to nearly $700,000.
And in the just-completed 1993-94 season, the company's 25th, it had delivered, by Ms.
Berezin's own admission, not a celebratory anniversary schedule of plays but one that had been necessarily watered down.
At issue at the May meeting was whether, after a quarter-century, the life of the city's only resident theater company, the creative home of playwrights like Lanford Wilson, Paula Vogel and Jon Robin Baitz, had come to an end.


For Brazil, New Praise and Potential
With Fernando Henrique Cardoso's decisive victory in Brazil's presidential elections, foreign diplomats and business leaders predict that Latin America's largest economy will become a powerful magnet for foreign investment and exports.
"You can't put a limit on the possibilities," the United States Ambassador, Melvyn Levitsky, said here, citing Mr.
Cardoso's pledges to allow foreign investment in oil, telecommunications, mining and public works.
"There are going to be many, many more opportunities for U.S. companies to invest in Brazil and to export to Brazil."


Dividend Meetings


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  None  Thursday  Producer Price Index . . .
Sept.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Consumer Price Index . . .
Sept.
Retail Sales . . .
Sept.
Industrial Production . . .
Sept.
Capacity Utilization . . .
Sept.


AT LEAST 36,000 U.S. TROOPS GOING TO GULF IN RESPONSE TO CONTINUED IRAQI BUILDUP
The Clinton Administration announced tonight that it is sending at least 36,000 troops and some of its most potent warplanes to the Persian Gulf to counter a large and continuing buildup of Iraqi troops near the Kuwaiti border.
But American officials said that if the Iraqis continue their military preparations at the current rate, they could be in a position to launch a major invasion of Kuwait in a matter of days, well before the vast majority of the ground troops could arrive.


Essay; To Counter Saddam's Ploy
The first foreign-policy blunder made by Bill Clinton, soon after his election, was about Saddam Hussein.
The President-elect told Tom Friedman of The New York Times that as a good Baptist he believed in conversion, and that perhaps the dictator could be dealt with if he acceded to U.N. arms-destruction and human-rights requirements.
Some of us turned purple.
That was contrary to the hard-line American position to use sanctions to force the tyrant from power.
President Bush had sent an unambiguous message to Baghdad: get rid of Saddam or forget about pumping oil.
Clinton's remark offered Saddam room to maneuver.


Germany Offers Fair Holocaust Reparations
To the Editor:
I take issue with statements in your Oct. 3 article about the 40-year battle of Hugo Princz, a Holocaust survivor, to receive reparations from the German Government.
I was the lawyer for the German Government in the case.


Geriatric &amp; Medical Cos.(GEMC,NNM) reports earnings for Year to May 31


British Lens Distorts the Irish Political Picture; A Cultural Scouring
To the Editor:
William Safire in "No Yanks Need Apply" (column, Oct. 3) contends that to pull British troops from Northern Ireland would turn the place into an orange and green Bosnia, and that the British subjects there do not want to be "nationally cleansed." If there was ever any ethnic cleansing in that island, surely it was at the hands of the British.


Framingham Journal; Backroom Where Talk Of Politics Is Relished
Barry Sokolov and his buddies were sitting on broken-down chairs in the cluttered back room of Mr.
Sokolov's variety store, eating donuts out of the box and kicking back, as they do every Sunday morning.
In unprintable words, Bob Moore, a local newspaper columnist, told Paul Downey he was dead wrong about John Stefanini, a town selectman and Democratic state representative from Framingham.


CHRONICLE
DAVID ZUCKER, executive producer of the "Naked Gun" and "Airplane" movies, and MARSHALL HERSKOVITZ, executive producer of "thirtysomething" and "My So Called Life," have teamed up to write, produce and direct a film for TreePeople, a Los Angeles-based environmental education and training organization, to celebrate its 21st anniversary.
A premiere screening of the film, "TreePeople: A Short Course in Changing the World," was held Saturday at the organization's annual fund-raiser, held on the grounds of its Coldwater Canyon Park headquarters.


Sungai Penchala Journal; A Malay Plot? Or Just a Well-Meaning Commune?
This, the Malaysian Government insists, is the lair of the devil.
With his mascara-lined eyes and flowing green robes, the spiritual leader of this tiny village near the capital is committing blasphemy after blasphemy against Islam as he procures Malaysian women as sex slaves and trains suicide commandos in the jungle, or so Malaysian officials have asserted.


Sports of The Times; Lebow Won His Personal Marathon
THE best way to remember Fred Lebow is smack in the middle of his own race.
I could tell you about the fraternal warmth I always felt whenever Fred Lebow would sidle up to me at somebody else's party, probably wearing a jogging suit and running shoes, witty and perceptive in his lush Transylvanian accent, even when he wasn't pushing his own event or explaining away some problem, which was always, you understand, extremely minor.
Fred died yesterday, exactly four weeks before his event, the New York City Marathon, which has become the most delightful sporting day in New York, every year.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
From Comedy to Cuteness In a Storybook Setting  New York State Theater
The New York City Opera has an economical property in Lotfi Mansouri's production of "Il Barbiere di Siviglia." The single set, by Desmond Heeley, uses reversible elements so that outdoor scenes give way to indoor ones with quick efficiency.
But it has its troublesome aspects.
The costumes, blindingly bright and occasionally garish, contribute to the storybook quality that Mr.
Mansouri seems to have been after, and Christian Smith's stage direction pushes beyond the bounds of comic opera and well into the territory of late-19th-century operetta.
Comedy defers to cuteness, and cuteness quickly grows cloying.


Press Notes
THE electronic newspaper is still in its infancy.
But it is getting to be an awfully fat baby.
Electronic experimentation by daily newspapers is now in full swing across the country, according to a report to be released by the Newspaper Association of America.


British Labor's New Look
Tony Blair's promising debut as leader of the Labor Party signals an important turn in British politics.
Since the rise of Margaret Thatcher 15 years ago, Labor, Britain's ruling party for most of the 1960's and 70's, has seemed fusty and often irrelevant.
Now a revitalized Labor is storming back, with updated policies, a strong lead in the polls and a telegenic young leader.
This sharpening of political competition is healthy for British democracy and, hence, welcome to Americans as well.
Mr.
Blair benefits from groundwork done by his recent predecessors.
Neil Kinnock began revising obsolete policies favoring unilateral disarmament and state ownership.
The late John Smith healed internal wounds and reconnected the party with followers who had been alienated by the cultural radicalism of recent decades.
But it falls to Mr.
Blair, who took over in July, to complete the process of generational and philosophical renewal.


Erosion Plan Would Allot $400 million
The final report on a $400 million plan to protect the vulnerable coastal areas of Long Island, New York City and Westchester County was released today by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, but the funding remained in doubt.
The plan stresses the need to protect the public in heavily populated shoreline areas and to retain major recreational areas.
It also urges the correction of coastal problems created by humans, like jetties and inlets that disrupt the natural flow and distribution of sand.


DANCE
A Swiss Troupe Emulates Medieval Fear of an Eclipse  St. Mark's Church
"Vacarme" means "hubbub" in French.
But hubbub was what was missing from the work of that title presented by Compagnie Philippe Saire on Thursday night.


Holding the Slowdown at Bay
Despite the drag from rising interest rates, pockets of strength are keeping the American economy buoyant, raising the possibility that a widely predicted slowdown might not occur until well into next year.
While most forecasters say that economic growth is slowing, a parade of bullish statistics suggests otherwise, the latest being last week's reports of a drop in the unemployment rate to its lowest level in four years and a sharp rise in industrial production.
Numerous stories from Corporate America reinforce the impression left by the data.


Montserrat Caballe Recital
Montserrat Caballe is to celebrate the 30th anniversary of her American debut with a recital at Carnegie Hall on Nov. 22 at 8 P.M.
She is to sing works by Haydn, Scarlatti, Paisiello, Turina, Rodrigo, Obradors and others, accompanied by Manuel Burgueras.
Tickets, at $10 to $50, are available at the box office or through Carnegie Charge, (212) 247-7800.


Jets Find Right Time to Awake From a Slumber
Remember that dreary mess of a game last year at Giants Stadium, when the Indianapolis Colts out-field-goaled the Jets, 9-6, a game that became a microcosm of their bad seasons?
Well, the same teams were playing in the same place today, and midway through the fourth quarter the Jets were leading, 9-6, in another field-goal battle.
Between occasional cheers, the crowd of 66,244, more than 10,000 below capacity, was squirming and booing.
The boos were frequent because Johnny Mitchell dropped two more passes and James Hasty missed a tackle on a receiver.


Patents; Fees Rise at the Patent Office, Stirring Complaints That Inventors are Subsidizing the Federal Budget
BUDGET deficits plague the Patent and Trademark Office no less than most Government agencies.
So the office has raised its patent application fees.
As of Oct. 1, the basic filing fee for a large company increased to $730 from $710.
A small company or individual will now pay $365 instead of $355.
The Patent Office is one agency that raises enough money through fees to support itself.
It used to get tax dollars, too, but in 1990 Congress imposed a surcharge on patent filing fees so the Patent Office could finance itself.
Then Congress turned around and declared that a portion of those surcharges should be withheld from the Patent Office, which left it with a deficit.


Fred Lebow Is Dead at 62; Founded New York Marathon
Fred Lebow, who created the New York City Marathon and developed it into not only the largest such race in the world but also a citywide celebration, died yesterday at his home on the Upper East Side.
He was 62.
The cause of death was brain cancer.
He was admitted to Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center on Feb. 17 after a magnetic resonance imaging revealed a recurrence of lymphoma of the brain, which was first diagnosed in 1990.
He also underwent surgery in 1991 to have a malignant tumor removed from his thyroid gland.


Body Found in Swiss Chalet Identified as No. 2 Cult Leader
The mystery surrounding the macabre deaths of 48 cult members in Switzerland deepened today with the assertion that a presumed ringleader of the Order of the Solar Temple, for whom a murder warrant had been issued, had been identified among the dead.
But there was still no clue as to the whereabouts of Luc Jouret, the 46-year-old Belgian founder and head of the sect, who is also wanted on murder charges.
It has not been established whether he was also among those who died in Switzerland in a deadly scenario that was apparently coordinated with five other grisly deaths on property owned by the cult leaders in Canada.


Corrections
A headline yesterday in some copies about passage of the California Desert Protection Act misstated the margin of the Senate vote that ended a filibuster of the bill.
The motion to end debate was backed by 68 Senators, eight more than needed, not one.


What, Starks Worry? Game 7 Is Buried
Some Knicks fans still shudder when they remember Game 7 of the 1994 National Basketball Association finals.
Fortunately for him, John Starks does not.
The dreadful experience of shooting 2 for 18 against the Houston Rockets in the championship game has made Starks more determined to end the coming season in celebration instead of sadness.
He wants to solidify his status as an All-Star shooting guard.
He wants another crack at the finals, just as all of the Knicks do.
Meanwhile, add Starks's name to the list of Knicks who are looking for a contract extension.


Kelly's Tough New Job: Reforming Haiti's Police
The Haitian police made an effort to clean up before Raymond W. Kelly arrived at the station house the other day.
The scores of keys, along with ripped-up wallets and pieces of shoes and belts that had littered the dirt in front of the tiny concrete holding cells were piled out of sight behind the roots of a tree.
Chickens and goats wandered about the carcasses of police cars resting on rusted wheel rims.
When a storeroom door was opened it revealed a huge heap of filthy rifles piled haphazardly and such unusual law-enforcement equipment as mortars and a heavy machine-gun mount.


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI STRESSES LEADERSHIP AND CHANGE
State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, contends that New York State has an anemic economy, crime-ridden streets, a meddlesome government and property taxes that are driving its residents away.
In making that bleak diagnosis during a two-hour interview with reporters and editors of The New York Times, Mr.
Pataki advocated sweeping away 12 years of Democratic policies under Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo that he said had engendered high taxes, crushing welfare costs and burdensome regulations.
A1.


The Devil Lives Again but Sin Faces Hard Times
"Mefistofele" is one of those 19th-century operatic beasts that longs for death but is destined to go on forever.
Sopranos have clutched "L'altra notte" permanently to their bosom.
Audiences will tolerate any clumsiness in order to thrill to the great choral climaxes Arrigo Boito pushes along by rising half steps and triumphant brass and timpani.
If all else failed, there would be ambitious operatic basses who, largely bereft of star-turn roles, are determined that this one will not escape them.
Norman Treigle and Samuel Ramey constructed a good part of their reputations on "Mefistofele" and, in particular, on the New York City Opera production of it that has creaked through the repertory for almost a generation and returned to the house on Saturday night.
Boito has written a part that sits beautifully for the lower voice; he also legitimizes every strut, leer, crawl and skulk that the singing actor cares to invent.


Fox Praise of N.A.A.C.P. Raises Eyebrows
At the same time that it announced a deal on Friday to help establish a minority-owned venture to acquire local television stations, the Fox Broadcasting Company tossed an apparently gratuitous bouquet at the N.A.A.C.P. and its communications counsel for their efforts to advance the cause of minority ownership opportunities.
The counsel, David Honig, is also leading an N.A.A.C.P. challenge to Fox's ownership of its flagship station in New York -- a challenge that if upheld by the Federal Communications Commission would threaten the foundation of the Fox network.


Bills, and the Wind, Blow Marino Asunder
Bills linebacker Darryl Talley has seen Miami quarterback Dan Marino up close twice a year for the last 12 seasons and there's one thing he has come to expect from the record-setting passer -- the unexpected.
"I didn't know what we were going to get," Talley said, regarding his thoughts entering this afternoon's game at Rich Stadium.
"I know what he's capable of and he's scary."


ARAB GUNMEN RAID JERUSALEM CAFES, KILLING 2 PATRONS
Palestinians armed with automatic rifles and grenades opened fire in a crowded nightlife section of central Jerusalem on Sunday night, killing an Israeli soldier and an Israeli Arab and wounding at least 13 others, several critically.
Two attackers were quickly killed by Israeli border policemen who had raced to the scene.


No Headline
"Elvis is history, and anytime anyone or anything becomes history, whether it be Pearl Harbor or Elvis, it will never go away." -- CARL PERKINS.  [ C11:6. ]


Market Place; A moment of truth today for Biogen and its beta interferon.
TODAY is reality-check time for Biogen.
Its shares jumped more than 50 percent on July 27 when the company diverted attention from disappointing financial results by saying that an early look at clinical trials data showed promising results in slowing the devastating effects of multiple sclerosis, a disease of the nervous system.
Today, Biogen will release the actual data, and while there is no reason to believe the results for Biogen's genetically engineered beta interferon, an immune system hormone, will not be as good as the company led people to believe, investors looking to take profits are likely to sell on the news anyway.
If the results are even slightly less than expected, the stock may plummet.


Pataki Offers a Vision for New York
Senator Pataki was asked to sum up what qualifies him to be governor.
Q.  You were the Mayor of a small town --
A.  City.


Teen-Age Magazines Are Facing a Shake-Out
Teen-age magazines, long considered one of the most stable categories in the industry, are suddenly involved in a game of musical chairs.
It is anyone's guess which publication will end up in which chair -- or out of the game entirely -- when the music stops.
On Sept. 27, after weeks of rumors that it was looking for a buyer, six-year-old Sassy, burdened by substantial bank debt, announced that it was up for auction.
On Friday, Sassy's publisher, Dale W. Lang, president of Lang Communications, said he was considering offers from three publishers, which he declined to name.
He said that he might have an announcement as early as today.


Clapton on Tour, Singing the Blues And Nothing But
Eric Clapton knows he's taking two kinds of risk with his current tour, which started a two-night stand at Madison Square Garden on Saturday night.
Instead of his own hits, he played two hours of vintage blues, including most of the material on his new album, "From the Cradle" (Reprise).
One hazard is that he'll displease fans who want to hear "Layla" or "Tears in Heaven"; he simply declared that if there were requests, "we will ignore them."


No Baseball. No Hockey. Lost Sales.
The players' strike could cost Major League Baseball up to $280 million in lost merchandise sales, and many retailers are postponing orders for goods because they are uncertain about whether play will resume in the spring.
Whether sales of hockey merchandise will also suffer -- National Hockey League players have been locked out by team owners while negotiations continue -- remains unclear.
N.H.L. merchandise has boomed in recent years, particularly in the Sun Belt.
If the labor dispute is not resolved, sales could be hurt badly, retailing experts say.


Bitter Strike in Indiana Echoes in Massachusetts
A dot in a sea of pancake-flat farmland, this northern Indiana factory town has handed Senator Edward M. Kennedy an unexpected opportunity to try to tip the balance in the tightest campaign of his 32-year Senate career.
Mr.
Kennedy's Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, is an entrepreneur who boasts of having created 10,000 jobs at 60 companies.
But here, workers at an Ampad stationery factory that Mr.
Romney and fellow investors bought in July went on strike in September.
Management has shed 41 of 265 blue-collar jobs, cut wages, tripled some workers' health insurance payments, abolished most of their seniority rights and junked the prior management's union contract, which had two years to run.


Unbeaten and Undeniably on Top of Their Game
The San Diego Chargers are not only the National Football League's lone unbeaten team, but if they continue to play this way, the string may last.
It may linger.
Putting all elements of the game firmly in place and putting Kansas City back with the rest of the pack in the A.F.C.
West, the Chargers pounded the Chiefs, 20-6, before 62,923 thrilled fans at Jack Murphy Stadium.


Army Investigates Guantanamo Melee
The Army is conducting a criminal investigation into accusations that an American soldier at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, threw rocks at Haitian refugees during a melee last month that left a 16-year-old Haitian boy hospitalized with a fractured skull.
The boy's father, Voidieu Jean-Louis, contends that a rock thrown by an American soldier struck his son, Pierreville, during a fracas on Sept. 4 at one of the refugee camps at the American naval base.
The American authorities say it is unclear who threw the rock that caused the injury.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies  Executives of Apple Computer and I.B.M. are close to agreeing on a common personal computer standard, industry executives familiar with the discussions said.
The intensified talks -- involving Apple's chairman, Michael H. Spindler, and an I.B.M. vice president, James A. Cannavino -- came after rumors that I.B.M. or Motorola might be considering an investment in, or outright purchase of Apple.  [ Page D1. ]


Hasty Responds With Key Play
James Hasty may not have read everything Langston Hughes ever wrote, but he can certainly identify with a Hughes poem that includes the line "Life for me ain't been no crystal stair."
Indeed, until this afternoon, life for the Jets' right cornerback had been pure misery this season.
This despite an impressive list of accomplishments in a seven-year career that included 87 consecutive starts going into this season and leading, or being tied for the team lead, in passes defended in five of his first six seasons.


Lukas Success Leaves His Critics Up the Track
On the day after Tabasco Cat lost the battle, Wayne Lukas stood in the sunshine at Belmont Park and figured that he and his herd actually may have won the war.
"I'm still soaking it up," he said. "Days like that don't always come around."


Perot Begins Radio Program, Attacking U.S. Foreign Policy
Ross Perot, one of America's best-known talkers, officially became a talk-radio host tonight with the exhortation, "Call in and get in line, because the phones are ringing tonight, and believe me, the roof is shaking in Washington!"
The Dallas billionaire certainly did his part to get things shaking on his new one-hour, nationally syndicated show, calling President Clinton a draft dodger and Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, a drug dealer.


New Hospital Giant Seeks Savings and Stream of Cases
The vision behind the merger agreed to last week by the Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corporation and Healthtrust Inc., the two largest for-profit hospital chains, is simple and alluring.
The bigger the network the easier it is to drive down costs and provide every health service that patients might need.
The pivotal word is network.
Columbia/HCA, which will have more than 300 hospitals and 125 outpatient centers after the merger, will fall well short of its vision if its many pieces do not mesh.
To start with, Columbia/HCA has to exploit its added size to wring lower prices from suppliers.


Pataki Stresses Efficiency and Leadership
State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, contends that New York State has an anemic economy, crime-ridden streets, a meddlesome government and property taxes that are driving its residents away.
In making that bleak diagnosis during a two-hour interview with reporters and editors of The New York Times on Friday, Mr.
Pataki advocated sweeping away 12 years of Democratic policies under Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo that he said had engendered high taxes, crushing welfare costs and burdensome regulations.


For Voters, Hope Gives Way To Anger, Fear and Cynicism
This colonial city is so sedate that the biggest contretemps is how to retrieve the bench on Chippewa Square, on which Tom Hanks sat in the movie "Forrest Gump" and which has now been replaced by a dumpster.
But get them talking about politics, and residents here are no less irritable, dispirited or cynical than the rest of America.
Mannered they may be, but they are also angry.


Woman Raped and Man Beaten Near Abandoned Brooklyn Pier
A couple's evening out ended violently early yesterday morning near an abandoned Brooklyn pier when three men beat the man and raped the woman as he was forced to look on, and then stole their car, the police said.
The couple, whom the police will not identify, had been out for dinner and had just parked near the pier, on the border of Williamsburg and Greenpoint, about 1 A.M., said Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a spokesman for the Police Department.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
American Family Restaurants Inc., Norcross, Ga., an initial public offering of 2.5 million shares.
Fahnestock &amp; Co.


Patriots Still a Half-Ton Too Heavy For Pass-Happy Bledsoe to Carry
In a game noteworthy only in that it contributed to the on-the-job education of Drew Bledsoe, the Los Angeles Raiders dampened the euphoria that had been building in New England by defeating the Patriots today, 21-17.
The loss snapped a Patriot three-game winning streak and prevented New England from gaining a three-way tie for first place in the American Football Conference East with Buffalo and Miami.
Rather, the Patriots (3-3) are tied for third with the Jets, the team they play Sunday at Giants Stadium.


Send Problem Students To Boarding School
To the Editor:
I understand the reasons for Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines's plan to remove weapon-carrying students from the intermediate and senior high schools in New York City (news article, Oct. 1), but I very much doubt that the separation will benefit the troublesome students.


The Great Kindergarten Shuffle Succeeds
It's been another autumn of scrambling for the city's kindergartners, a rising tide of human potential whose numbers the crowded school system seems always to underestimate.
But as of this week, a month after the official start of school, officials say that virtually all children wanting a seat in a New York City kindergarten class finally have one, and that a handful more -- maybe -- could also be accommodated.


Morrison Restaurants Inc.(RI,N) reports earnings for 13wks to Sept 3


Seized but Not Burned
To the Editor:
I was concerned to read the letter from Jeryl Metz (Sept. 30) about the alleged burning by British Customs of a book that had been sent to a client in Britain.


Abroad at Home; The New Bolsheviks
Article V lays down the rules for amending the United States Constitution.
But without following that formal process, and with hardly any public attention, the Constitution has just been amended.
A new clause has been added to Article I, Section 3, as follows:
The Senate  Passage of any measure by the Senate shall require the affirmative votes of three-fifths of its full membership.


Cowboys Romp and Roar at Expense of Ryan and Cards
Certainly it is too early to call Buddy Ryan a failure in his latest fling with head coaching, this time with the Arizona Cardinals.
Despite a 38-3 thumping from the Dallas Cowboys today that dropped Ryan's Cardinals to 1-4, the season isn't even close to half over.
Even Ryan's good teams in Philadelphia tended to start poorly and finish well.
But what is one to make of his current bunch whose first two defeats were by a combined 5 points and whose last two defeats were by a total of 67?


Pataki on the Record: Excerpts From a Talk On Campaign Issues
State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor of New York, met with reporters and editors of The New York Times for two hours on Friday to discuss issues in the gubernatorial race and his goals if elected.
Here are excerpts from the session.
FISCAL MATTERS Taxing and Spending [ Senator Pataki was asked how he will be able to reconcile his campaign promises to cut taxes and control spending while also increasing aid to education and improving other state services. ]


DANCE
Bodies Upended in Moments Optimistic and Dark  Ohio Theater
Randy James, who performed with Dan Wagoner, has a curiously mixed dance vision.
There was a buoyant optimism to much of what he presented in a program of three new and recent pieces on Thursday night, even in the dances' quieter, darker moments.
At the same time, Mr.
James has a fondness for draped, drooping and upended bodies.
Both qualities worked well together, however, in "Estuary."


Some Markets Closed Today
Commercial banks, most Federal offices and some markets -- though not the stock exchanges -- will be closed today in observance of Columbus Day.
Markets in Japan are closed for Sports Day, a national holiday, and Canadian markets are closed for Thanksgiving Day.
Most traders in the Treasury bond market will not be working.
The New York Cotton Exchange will be shut.


Treasury Will Auction Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to bills, beginning with the regular weekly auction tomorrow of three- and six-month bills.
On Thursday, the Treasury will auction a 52-week treasury bill.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.89 percent, traders said, with the rate on the six-month issue at 5.32 percent.
The rate for the one-year bill was 5.66 percent.


Three Big Concerns Revamp Campaigns
Three large national advertisers are introducing significantly revamped campaigns.
I.B.M. will introduce tonight the first work in a global campaign from its new agency, Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, for the IBM PC Company, a subsidiary of the International Business Machines Corporation.
A television commercial features the disembodied head of the comedian Paul Reiser on a PC screen, chiding a frustrated woman who is having problems with another company's malfunctioning PC.
The spot, the first in a series that will also run in Latin America, Europe and the Asia-Pacific region, carries the new I.B.M. theme, "There is a difference."


Good Triumphs Over Evil, Again


Speaker of the House Has a New Ring to It; Town Meeting Puts Call-Ins on Cable
Cindy Mooney just wanted to have a private word with her elected officials when she called Town Hall here the other night.
Instead, people all over town wound up hearing what she had to say.
"I guess I'm on a speaker phone, is that right?" a puzzled Ms.
Mooney asked when her call was patched through to a Town Board meeting.


Caribbean Center Salute To Katherine Dunham
Katherine Dunham is being saluted in a monthlong 85th-birthday tribute sponsored by the Caribbean Cultural Center.
Photographic exhibitions will open on Oct. 20 at the center, 408 West 58th Street, and at the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs, 2 Columbus Circle.
Admission: $3; $2 students and the elderly.
A conference, "Defining an Esthetic for New World Africans," will be held on Oct. 21 and 22 from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, 515 Malcolm X Boulevard in Harlem.
Admission: $15 for both days; $10 for one day.


As Going Gets Tough, Kuwaitis Go Out to Eat
With thousands of Iraqi troops just north of the border, Kuwaiti reservists being mobilized and American soldiers on the way, many Kuwaitis are responding to the pressure by turning to one of the most beloved activities in the emirate -- eating.
Restaurants, fast-food outlets, ice cream parlors, pastry shops and candy stores are packed with jittery Kuwaitis, who hope there will be no replay of the 1990 invasion, when Iraqi soldiers sliced through meager defenses and rolled into Kuwait City.


Once, a Penny Saved; Now, a Dollar Charged
A PIECE OF THE ACTION How the Middle Class Joined the Money Class  By Joseph Nocera  464 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.
"Over the past two decades, we've been participating in nothing less than a money revolution," writes Joseph Nocera, a business and financial journalist, in his entertaining but uncritical cultural history, "A Piece of the Action: How the Middle Class Joined the Money Class."


Publishers Banking on Foreign Sales
At last year's Frankfurt Book Fair, Random House introduced its hottest new author, Gen.
Colin L. Powell, who was paid a $6.5 million advance for his autobiography, by displaying his oversized photograph all over its booth.
The goal was to find a publisher who would buy the overseas rights.
It didn't work.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The Met is facing a marketing challenge as it introduces a subtitling system for its operas.
THE radio spot opens thrillingly.
The theme from Bizet's opera "Carmen" swells and an announcer with a voice as rich as premium ice cream, intones: "A night at the opera. Think of it as a sun-drenched square in the Spanish city of Seville. Soldiers surround a gypsy girl, imploring her to name the one she loves."
The spot ends with, "At New York City Opera, where living, breathing theater gives this classic art form its contemporary edge."


INSIDE
Marathon Creator Dies
Fred Lebow, who founded the New York City Marathon and developed it into the largest such race in the world, was 62.
Page B8.
When Closed Means Open
A new study finds that more than one-third of United States military bases that were to have closed remain open in some way.
Page A12. 2 Faces of Simpson Trial
The official O. J. Simpson trial will feature the state v.
Mr.
Simpson; the unofficial one, his lawyers v. the Los Angeles police.
Page A13.


Who Endorses Whom: Do Voters Really Care?
GIVEN all the hullabaloo, you'd think the outcome of New York's race for governor depended on political endorsements.
When former Mayor David N. Dinkins finally announced his support for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo last week, after months of delicate negotiations, he got the royal treatment.
And what will Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani decide?
Will he cross the divide and endorse a Democrat, Mr.
Cuomo?
Will he support State Senator George E. Pataki, a fellow Republican?
Or will he, as most political insiders anticipate, hedge his bets and endorse Mr.
Pataki unenthusiastically as he winks at Mr.
Cuomo?


A Tough New Role For Police Official
The former New York City Police Commissioner has taken on a tough challenge in Haiti, trying to turn a group of bullies who have long served as an instrument of repression into a professional police force.


Victory Over Florida State Leaves Miami Breathless
The 10 turnovers, the frequent penalty flags and a series of uncharacteristic breakdowns by Miami and Florida State created a lasting impression throughout Saturday night that a championship-caliber rivalry had slipped, if only half a notch.
Maybe the series that has produced four teams that won or shared national championships in the last 11 years is taking this year off from the race.
For now, the Hurricanes and Seminoles appear wedged in a pack well behind Florida, Nebraska, Penn State and Colorado, the four teams with the best chance of emerging in the No. 1 position at the end of the season.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Three Players Celebrate A Tradition's Two Decades  92d Street Y
As the 92d Street Y once again reconsiders the nature and depth of its commitment to classical music, it continues to provide reminders of its illustrious history in the field.
Chamber Music at the Y, for example, which has presented everyone from Ax to Zukerman and from Bil Baird's Marionettes to the Scottish Chamber Orchestra, is celebrating its 20th anniversary.


Cedras Will Step Down Today, Haitian Military Officials Say
The Commander in Chief of the Haitian military, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, and other senior officers will step down on Monday, Haitian military officials said today.
Such an action, long sought by American officials here, would remove the final roadblock preventing the return of Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and his Cabinet.


ResultsPlus
AUTO RACING Andretti Says Goodbye as Tracy Wins  As Mario Andretti said farewell to Indy-car racing, Paul Tracy scored a convincing victory yesterday in the season-ending Bank of America 300 in Monterey, Calif.
Andretti, driving in his 407th and last Indy-car race at age 54, had a frustrating day, damaging his car in a first-lap accident and winding up 18th after his engine blew just three laps from the end.
He wound up watching from the pits as Tracy took the checkered flag.
"I'm just going to have to find out if there is life after driving after all," Andretti said.
"And I'm sure there is." The day quickly turned from one of nostalgia for Andretti to the brutal realities of racing.
On Lap 1, in the third turn, Michael Andretti, Mario's eldest son, was sidelined and the father's car was damaged in a multicar melee. (AP) After 56 Races, a Victory: Dale Jarrett broke a 55-race streak in which he failed to make the winner's circle yesterday by shooting past Morgan Shepherd with less than four laps left and holding on to win the Mello Yello 500 in a wild finish at Charlotte Motor Speedway in Concord, N.C.
His third career victory, and first since the 1993 Daytona 500, came one week after Jarrett had failed to qualify for the race at North Wilkesboro, N.C.
"I was at the bottom of the ocean last Sunday," Jarrett said.
"We have too good a team to not at least make a race. But I think that gave everybody a good wake-up call." Shepherd wound up second and Dale Earnhardt, who finished third, took a big step forward in his bid for a seventh Winston Cup season driving title. (AP) GOLF  Canada Upsets U.S. to Win Dunhill Cup  Canada took advantage of blunders by Tom Kite and Fred Couples to upset the United States, the defending champion, yesterday and win the Dunhill Cup in St.
Andrews, Scotland.
Dave Barr (70) defeated Kite, who lost his match by one after making a double bogey on No. 17.
Couples missed a 3-foot putt on No. 16 and also ended up one stroke behind Ray Stewart (71).
The two Canadian victories made Curtis Strange's seven-shot victory over Rick Gibson meaningless.
Strange closed with a sizzling 67.
Canada had never before advanced as far as the semifinals. (AP) U.S.
Captures Amateur Title: An American team led by 46-year-old Allen Doyle and 18-year-old Tiger Woods ended five years of frustration for the United States yesterday, running away with the World Amateur golf title in La Boulie, France.
After finishing second each of the past five years, the United States team turned its one-shot lead at the start of the final round into an 11-shot cushion at the end.
The United States has now won the title 10 of the 19 times it has been contested. (AP) TENNIS  Krajicek Aces Becker in Final  Seventh-seeded Richard Krajicek used 34 aces to beat second-seeded Boris Becker, 7-6 (7-5), 7-6 (9-7), 2-6, 6-3, in the final of the Australian Indoor in Sydney.
The victory was the third for Krajicek since returning from knee surgery in November. (AP)


In Simpson Subtext, the Defense Tries to Put the Los Angeles Police on Trial
In a sense, two trials are proceeding simultaneously these days before Judge Lance A. Ito of Superior Court.
In the first trial, the official one, the defendant is O. J. Simpson, charged by the State of California with murder.
In the second, the unofficial one, the accusers are Mr.
Simpson and his lawyers, and the defendant is the Los Angeles Police Department.
Mr.
Simpson's lawyers say the police have committed a variety of misdeeds, like bungling, bigotry, a cavalier contempt for the law, dishonesty, highly prejudicial leaks (of both genuine and bogus information), the planting of a bloody glove and possibly even the fabrication of a bloody sock.
One defense lawyer has accused the police of weaving "a tissue of lies"; in at least one instance, Judge Ito appeared to agree.
Nonetheless, the judge last week mowed down a series of efforts by the defense to throw out evidence against Mr.
Simpson on the grounds of police misconduct.


POP
A Voice From Folk, An Outlook From Today  Mercury Lounge
Katell Keineg has a voice so charged with feeling that it lifts everything she sings to the level of a primal wail.
A folk-pop singer and songwriter who was born in France, grew up up in Wales and now lives in Ireland, Ms.
Keineg recently released a debut album, "O Seasons, O Castles" (Elektra) whose songs are an eccentric mixture of autobiography, Celtic mysticism, political commentary and feminist outcry.


Belgian Rightists Gain
Far right parties that oppose full rights for immigrants made big gains in local elections in Belgium today, challenging traditional alignments in four of the country's five largest cities.
In Brussels, Belgium's largest city with a population of one million, early returns indicated the far right would win at least the 11.5 percent it won in European elections in June.
In 1988 the far-right vote there was less than 1 percent.


Fehr Finally Gets a Lift and Is a Bridesmaid No More
Until today, his had been a career of near-misses.
Rick Fehr had more second-place checks than the Buffalo Bills.
Since he last won a golf tournament in 1986, he had been a runner-up eight times on the PGA Tour.
And for a while this afternoon, it looked as if Fehr was going to be victimized again.
He nearly missed his tee time when his ride failed to show up on time to take him to the golf course for the final round of the Walt Disney World Oldsmobile Classic.
He was tied for the lead with Craig Stadler after three rounds, and the thought crossed his mind that he might just be disqualified.


Police Profile Stays Much The Same
Even as the New York City Police Department is trying to diversify its ranks, most of this year's new officers followed friends or relatives onto the force, according to interviews and a survey of the new Police Academy graduates.
And despite the department's expressed desire to attract more black and inner-city recruits, most of the new officers resemble the rest of the force: They are white and male, and grew up in the suburbs or in low-crime neighborhoods of Staten Island and Queens.


Plenty to Look At, but Too Much to Hear


A Romantic Tribute To the First Americans
The American Indian has endured enough at the hands of European newcomers to be spared the slings, never mind arrows, of a television reviewer.
And if tonight's opening episode of "The Native Americans," a six-hour celebratory history of, by and with American Indians concentrates more on the inspirational than on the strictly historical, it would take a stonier heart than mine to begrudge the impulse.
Tonight's opener focuses on the indigenous peoples of the Northeast, who had the misfortune to be in the path of the earliest colonizers of what Europeans called the New World.
It is a shameful and much-told story of the smashing of cultures and the decimation of tribes.


Clintons Should Address Health Care One Issue at a Time, Expert Suggest
Health policy experts, including many who advised Bill Clinton over the last two years, say he and Congress should set their sights lower, worry less about the goal of universal health insurance and try to make modest improvements in the nation's health care system next year.
They say two issues are likely to dominate the health policy agenda of the next Congress: proposals to curb the growth of Medicare and Medicaid, and proposals to give states more freedom to pursue their own health care plans.


Study Says Military Bases Survive Plan to Shut Them
After three rounds of closing military bases, and with the biggest round still to come, more than one-third of the installations that were supposed to close have managed to stay open in some way, a new study by a business group says.
The operations that survive at 26 major bases that have been ordered shut since 1988 could cost the Government more than $15 billion in the next five years, says an analysis conducted by Business Executives for National Security, a private Washington-based organization that seeks to reduce spending and eliminate waste at the Pentagon.





No Shortage Of Oil Seen If Gulf Erupts
Should the suddenly tense Persian Gulf erupt into fighting, energy analysts say they do not expect any shortages of oil but do think prices will rise, perhaps sharply.
Even if Kuwait lost its ability to produce the two million barrels a day of oil that it currently pumps, others in the Gulf Cooperation Council of which it is a part could pick up the slack, Mehdi Verzi, an oil analyst at Kleinwort Benson in London, said yesterday.
"There is enough capacity within the gulf area to counter a big drop in production in Kuwait," he said.


Stein Robaire Sale To Kresser/Craig
Stein Robaire Helm, the Los Angeles agency founded in 1988 by three former executives of Chiat/Day, is being sold as expected to Kresser/ Craig in Santa Monica, Calif.
The terms of the agreement, negotiated since May, were not disclosed.
The two agencies will begin working next month under the name Kresser Stein Robaire, combining the staffs at Kresser/Craig's office.
Bob Kresser, 52, chairman and chief executive at Kresser/Craig, will be chief executive of the merged agency, with billings estimated at $130 million.


POP
Of Hope Rising, Falling Or Just Surviving  Bottom Line
Ferron confided her songs on Wednesday night.
She sang in a husky whisper, her words slightly slurred, her voice nestled amid finger-picked guitars and cushioned by an electric cello.
She never raised her voice; the tone was always conversational, the advice of an older sister who's gone through heartbreak and held on to hope.
In "Cactus," from her current album, "Driver" (Earthbeat/Warner Brothers), she sang, "I found that all the world could love you save for one/And I don't know why it is, but that kiss will be the haunted one."


An Army Town Finds the Sendoffs Familiar
Betty Kidwill was nervous behind her dark sunglasses, chain-smoking in the parking lot of the Wal-Mart here and thinking about her soldier son getting ready for the long flight to Kuwait.
"I'd rather he didn't have to do it," Ms.
Kidwill said between drags, talking of her 20-year-old son, Daryl Deaver, who expected to ship out this week.
"If we had done the job right the first time, we wouldn't have to go in again."


The Hazy Gubernatorial Race
With less than a month to go before the election, the fierce race between Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York and his Republican rival, State Senator George Pataki, is caught up in a battle over dueling tax-cut plans, and the prevalent anti-incumbent mood, which registers in the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll as a strong A.B.C. factor: anyone but Cuomo.
The chance that a brand-name Democrat like Mr.
Cuomo, a longtime fixture in national politics, could lose to a relatively obscure Republican state legislator like Mr.
Pataki makes for one of the more compelling dramas of this election year.
But New Yorkers wishing to make an intelligent choice between the two candidates are thwarted by the absence of any campaign debates.
The candidates have yet to hold one, and there are no plans for any, either.
The reason?
The candidates cannot agree on the ground rules.


TRANSACTIONS: WEEKEND
East Coast Hockey League  ERIE PANTHERS -- Acquired Brad Harrison, forward, from Huntington for future considerations.


Pataki on the Record: Excerpts From a Talk On Campaign Issues
State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor of New York, met with reporters and editors of The New York Times for two hours on Friday to discuss issues in the gubernatorial race and his goals if elected.
Here are excerpts from the session.
FISCAL MATTERS Taxing and Spending  [ Senator Pataki was asked how he will be able to reconcile his campaign promises to cut taxes and control spending while also increasing aid to education and improving other state services. ]


Unitrin Inc.(UNIT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Oh, What Stories Uncle Zeppo Told!
To the Editor:
My father, Groucho Marx, told me that he never believed anything he read in the newspapers because "everything I read about myself is always wrong." That goes for Uncle Zeppo's recollections of how my father and mother, Ruth Johnson, met, which you published as excerpts from a Marx Brothers enthusiast's journal, The Freedonia Gazette (The Week in Review, Oct. 2).


Holiday Today
Columbus Day will be observed today. Here are holiday schedules. NEW YORK
PARADE: The Columbus Day Parade begins at 10:15 A.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street, proceeding north to 86th Street and east to Third Avenue.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal, state and municipal closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Alternate-side rules suspended.
SANITATION: No collection, street cleaning or recycling.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Open.
TRANSPORTATION: Subways, buses, Metro-North and Long Island Rail Road on regular schedules.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Local option.
SCHOOLS: Local option.
TRANSPORTATION: N.J.
Transit trains on regular schedules, bus schedules vary.
CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: New Haven Line on regular schedule. Traffic Alert TODAY
BOWLING GREEN ASSOCIATION FESTIVAL: Broadway between Battery Place and Fulton Street will be closed from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.


Bears Kick Sand In Saints' Faces
Bears 17, Saints 7
Thanks greatly to the sandbox known as Soldier Field, Steve Walsh yesterday remained unbeaten as Chicago's starting quarterback.
Playing his third straight game for the injured Erik Kramer, Walsh directed two long second-half scoring drives against his former team and the Bears took advantage of their torn-up turf for a 17-7 victory over New Orleans.
Lewis Tillman rushed for 100 yards and a touchdown for Chicago (4-2).


Stocks Rise in Light Trading; Dow Up 23.89
Stock prices rose sharply for the second straight day, led by technology and auto issues -- both of which were among last week's laggards.
On the technology side, continuing negotiations between Apple Computer Inc. and I.B.M. to establish a common standard for personal computers, along with acquisition rumors, pushed up the stock of both companies.
Shares of Apple rose 1 7/8, to 38 7/8, and I.B.M. advanced 3/8, to 71 1/2.
In addition, shares of Motorola Inc. closed at 52 3/4, up 2; the Intel Corporation closed at 607/16 , up 1, and Texas Instruments Inc. closed at 68 3/8, up 2 3/4.


The City's New Prosecutors Test Their Legal Legs
It was a normal day in Judge Karen B. Yellen's eighth-floor courtroom in Brooklyn Criminal Court.
The cases were being called at a rate of one every two or three minutes.
Most were swiftly settled with plea deals.
Shoplifting.
Assault.
Fare-beating.
Probation violation.
Driving with a suspended license.
Patronizing a prostitute.


At Last, Life Care Comes to New York
In 1989, Jim and Ceil Spero, both retired and in their early 60's, were invited to a meeting about a new idea for New York State: a retirement community that comes with a guarantee of health care at a predictable cost.
Ms. Spero did not want to go.


Out of the Closet and Onto the Stage
OUT THERE II Comedy Central, tonight at 9
Produced by Juliet Blake and Trevor Hopkins.
Keith Truesdell, director; designer, Lee Mayman; art director, Anita Louizos; music by Miriam Cutler.
An English Channel Production.
Amanda Bearse, host.
WITH: Kate Clinton, Mark Davis, Elvira Kurt, Frank Maya, John McGivern and Scott Silverman.
"Out There," billed as "television's first-ever gay and lesbian comedy special," was a success for Comedy Central, so much so that two of the performers were given solo showcases on HBO.
Now, inevitably, Comedy Central is offering "Out There II," carefully timed to coincide with National Coming Out Day.


Iraq's Attempt to Have Sanctions Lifted Quickly May Have Backfired
By his show of force near the border with Kuwait, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq may have harmed his chances of having economic sanctions lifted early.
The Iraqi troop movements were the culmination of a campaign of belligerence aimed as much at the United Nations as at Kuwait.


At a Book Fair, Brazil Is the Theme. Who Cares?
The theme of this year's Frankfurt Book Fair was the literature of Brazil, but you wouldn't have known it to talk to any of the hundreds of American publishers, editors, rights directors and literary agents who have spent a week here, wheeling and dealing like mini-Wall Street sharks.
"Brazil?" said one top American publisher, who asked not to be identified, coming up for breath between meetings.
"I'm afraid we don't give a hoot about Brazil. We're too busy."


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
Alabama-Birmingham
When Mike Getman arrived in Birmingham three years ago -- after achieving considerable coaching success at Harvard, including a Final Four appearance -- it was merely a question of time before the Blazers would be thrust into the national spotlight.
Getman's Blazers won 4 of 20 games in his first year at a school known primarily for its basketball program.
But with the help of the basketball coach, Gene Bartow, who is also the school's director of athletics, Getman was able to offer seven scholarships, and now the Blazers are on their way to becoming known for their soccer program as well.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Pennsylvania campaign for governor referred incorrectly in some copies to the charges against a convict whose pardon was recommended by the Democratic candidate, Lieut.
Gov.
Mark S. Singel.
The convict, Reginald McFadden, is charged in New York with rape, robbery and kidnapping in one case and is a suspect, not a defendant, in a homicide case.
In some editions the article also referred incorrectly to Willie Horton, the criminal who was the focus of television commercials in the 1988 Presidential campaign.
When released on furlough, he was a convicted killer, not a convicted rapist.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
For foreign investors, Russia is too big a business opportunity to avoid, despite the crashing ruble and rising crime.
In recent months, American and foreign investment funds and companies have been pouring in money, taking stakes in promising Russian enterprises.
They are betting that the nation's industrial core remains badly undervalued and that in the long run big parts of it will prove to be vibrant and profitable.  [ Page A1. ]


Vikings Stifle Hampton
The Giants needed an effective Rodney Hampton tonight to revitalize their ground game and to take some pressure off young quarterback Dave Brown.
Instead they got a somewhat rusty Hampton groping for some open space, searching for holes on running plays that were slow in developing and leading nowhere.
They got 27 yards out of Hampton and that would not be enough in a 27-10 loss to Minnesota at Giants Stadium.


Tears and Protest at Mock Slave Sale
As white actors in tricorn hats and ruffled waistcoats recreated the colonial custom of auctioning black humans here today, two modern-day blacks sat in silent protest on the steps of a restored tavern.
"This is 1994," said one, Dr.
Milton A. Reid, a Baptist pastor from Norfolk, Va.
"As far as we have come, to go back to this, for entertainment, is despicable and disgusting. This is the kind of anguish we need not display."


Teachers Walk Out in Denver


Q&amp;A
Buried Nuts
Q.  How do squirrels find the nuts they have buried?
A.
They seem to have a very good memory for where they put things, said Dr.
Lucia Jacobs of the University of Utah, who has studied the matter firsthand.
Wild squirrels' burial behavior gave some clues to the question.
In a small-scale study in a 15-acre tract of woods adjoining the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J., she focused on gray squirrels dining on hickory nuts.
An account of her research was published in Natural History magazine in October 1989.
Before burying a nut, she observed, wild squirrels removed the fragrant husk, reducing the chance of using smell to find it, but also reducing the chance that its hiding place would be obvious to other squirrels.
She carefully observed the digging of a hole an inch or two deep.
The nut was dropped in, then slowly and painstakingly covered with dirt and camouflaged with ground litter, reducing visual clues to other squirrels.
To address the question of memory, she used hand-reared squirrels allowed out one at a time to bury nuts in an outdoor arena.
They were then returned to their cages for 2 to 12 days.
While they were caged, she removed the nuts and put similar fresh ones in their place.
She also buried fresh nuts at random sites chosen from those other squirrels had used in the same week.
Given a potential choice between equal numbers of nuts in holes they had dug and nuts in holes dug by other squirrels, Dr.
Jacobs found, "each squirrel retrieved significantly more nuts from sites it had chosen than from other squirrels' hiding places." C. CLAIBORNE RAY


800-SOFTWARE TO BE PURCHASED BY CORPORATE SOFTWARE
Corporate Software Inc., a $384 million reseller of personal computer software and services to large corporate customers, has agreed to acquire 800-Software Inc. of Richmond, Calif., a subsidiary of the Digital Equipment Corporation. 800-Software had revenues of $141 million for the fiscal year that ended on March 31, 1994.
The company, which specializes in PC software and peripheral sales to government agencies, was acquired by Digital in 1992.
A Digital spokesman said yesterday that the sale was part of Digital's downsizing program.
The terms of the deal were not disclosed.
A spokesman for Corporate Software, which was taken private in March, said that after the acquisition Corporate Software would be the largest reseller of PC software to corporate clients.


Village Mourns Marchers Mowed Down by Van
This roadside hamlet of mud and concrete huts was in shock today, as relatives and friends grieved for those killed and injured on Sunday when a van of army sympathizers drove through a crowd of pro-democracy demonstrators.
At least 14 died immediately, but the toll was reported at 24 today, with at least 15 seriously hurt.


Ailing Spacecraft to Destroy Itself on Venus
AFTER orbiting Venus more than 15,000 times in the last four years, the ailing Magellan spacecraft is to receive its final radio command today, sending it into a suicidal descent into the planet's atmosphere for one last-gasp experiment that could improve the design and operation of future spacecraft.
As the craft loses altitude, entering the atmosphere of carbon dioxide and sulfuric acid at a speed of 16,000 miles an hour, friction is expected to consume Magellan with fire in less than a day.
What is not incinerated in the atmosphere will crash onto the surface, where the temperatures of 900 degrees Fahrenheit are hot enough to melt lead.


Segregating Student Troublemakers
Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines proposes to segregate New York City students who bring guns and other weapons to school in special disciplinary academies.
The history of such separate schools has been mixed, but Mr.
Cortines also suggests reasonable safeguards to prevent them from becoming mere dumping grounds.
The main question is whether City Hall and the Board of Education can find the money.
The schools' security problems were dramatized last month by a shooting incident in which one student was seriously injured at Sheepshead Bay High School -- not even considered a dangerous school.
Mr.
Cortines promptly asked a committee to examine ways to make schools safer.


CHRONICLE
Think you have a gift for song writing?
Never mind that, says GERALD MARKS, whose songs include "All of Me" and "Is It True What They Say About Dixie?" Success rests almost totally in the accidents of luck.
Mr.
Marks is giving a one-man performance tonight at the Bruno Walter Auditorium in Lincoln Center that he bills as "What I Found in the Alley."


COMPANY BRIEFS
BINDLEY WESTERN INDUSTRIES, Indianapolis, a wholesale distributor of drugs, and health and beauty aids, said it had completed the purchase of the assets of Kendall Drug Company, Shelby, N.C.


Russia Seeks Solution For Nazi Art Loot
To the Editor:
"Russia's Mute and Hidden Loot" (editorial, Oct. 5) is a welcome contribution to the debate on the restitution of captured art works.
This is not a new debate.
It is one that has preoccupied many museums and countries for many years.
The decision of the Russian Ministry of Culture and the State Hermitage Museum to display publicly objects seized in Germany after the Second World War is in great part the result of the Russian Federation's recent movement toward an open and active engagement in the world community.


History of a Song
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 3 review of "Show Boat" refers to "the most enduring songs in the score by Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein 2d," among which you list "Bill." But "Bill" was written by Jerome Kern and P. G. Wodehouse.


Critics Talk the Talk, but Bills Walk the Walk
Jim Kelly said he has been listening to doomsayers each week proclaiming that Buffalo, the four-time American Football Conference champion and four-time Super Bowl loser, had finally run out of steam.
There has been talk of how running back Thurman Thomas had lost a step and how Kelly's passing arm, troubled by tendinitis in the shoulder, didn't have that zing anymore.


Arab States Withholding Their Support For Baghdad
Under pressure from the Clinton Administration, Jordan and the Palestine Liberation Organization, which were among the strongest backers of Iraq in the Persian Gulf war, are withholding support for Iraq in its movement of troops toward Kuwait.
American officials said they had hoped for statements that were unambigiously critical of Baghdad, but they said they were pleased that both Jordan and the P.L.O. today conveyed a message that it would be wrong for Iraq to start another war.


Big Play by Mitchell May Remake His Image
It was only a 1-yard pass, but maybe, just maybe, it meant a turning point in the fortunes of the Jets and their flighty tight end, Johnny Mitchell.
The dramatic pass, on third down and goal to go with less than three minutes remaining, provided the only touchdown of the game Sunday as the Jets beat the Indianapolis Colts, 16-6.
Today, Mitchell and others talked about the play that helped end the Jets' three-game losing streak and perhaps ended the perception, or reality, that Mitchell often loses concentration.


Generals and Privates, the Marines Head Back to an Old Haunt
"Again! We're doing it again!" said Lieut.
Gen.
Anthony C. Zinni, clapping a marine on the back as his troops lined up in the baking sun here today for their desert boots, camouflage uniforms and field rations, preparing for the order to head for the Persian Gulf.
"Are you ready?" the general asked another marine at Camp Pendleton.
"You were born ready, right?"


Private Lives of Franklin and Eleanor
Opening a new season of "The American Experience," "F. D. R." turns out to be a personal sort of history.
The focus is less on President Roosevelt's public accomplishments, though they are duly noted, than on his triumph over polio and, especially, his complicated relationship with his wife, Eleanor.
Such matters lend themselves to off-the-rack psychologizing, some of which is offered here ("With an infirm father and a domineering mother," says the narrator, David McCullough, "Franklin learned to conceal his true feelings"); but the four-and-a-half-hour documentary also proves revealing and moving.


By Design; Drape It, Tie It or Let It Float
On the runways of Milan and Paris, models wear light-colored spring clothes with bare legs or pale fishnet hosiery and stiletto heels.
In the audience the fashion professionals are dressed as usual in somber black down to their hosiery and shoes.
It's sensible low-heeled shoes or knee-high boots for all but the most prestigious magazine editors, who teeter to their chauffeur-driven cars in high-heeled Gucci loafers or spindly Manolo Blahniks.
The one accessory everyone seems to agree on is the scarf.
Big fluffy mufflers of chiffon organza fishnet or cashmere are wound around the neck like fat sausages, or draped softly across the neck and chest tied loosely, or simply left hanging down the front.


CBS Shares Rise Sharply
Shares of CBS Inc. rose $9 yesterday, to $336.25, on the New York Stock Exchange after it was reported that the company's chairman and chief executive, Laurence A. Tisch, was courting Barry Diller, the head of QVC Inc., to join CBS as chief executive.
The report appeared yesterday in USA Today.
There have been some talks but they were very preliminary, a person close to the discussions said.


Burning Trash for Energy: Is It an Endangered Industry?
With its towering smokestacks, hungry furnaces and transmission lines vibrating with thousands of kilowatts of electricity, this city's immense garbage incinerator was once considered a safe and economical means for disposing of thousands of tons of trash.
Now Columbus is seriously considering permanently closing the 11-year-old plant and dumping its garbage in a landfill.


Market Place; Think air bags, not credit reporting, when evaluating TRW.
MENTION the name TRW and for many people what comes to mind is a credit bureau that provides consumer reports to lenders and merchants.
But to investors, TRW Inc. is -- or should be -- much more.
More than 50 percent of its revenues come from automotive products, especially the fast-growing air bag business.
An additional 35 percent of revenues stems from space and military systems.
Only 8 percent of the company's sales is derived from the broad area of information services, which includes not only credit bureaus, but also real estate information and transaction processing systems.


Broad Pulse of de Kooning in Top Form
Along with Jackson Pollock, Willem de Kooning is the American abstract gestural painter of the postwar years to be reckoned with.
A full-dress overview of his work is more than just a good idea; it is inevitable.
For all its strengths, "Willem de Kooning: Paintings," which opens today at the Metropolitan Museum of Art (through Jan. 8), is not that show, but it comes close.
What's missing?
The details: the dazzling minor successes and the revealing near misses; the sketches and drawings that cleared the way for larger things; all the blips and flourishes, in short, that shape an oeuvre, explain its stresses, strains and transitions, and warm the monuments we call masterpieces into life.


Premier Bancorp Inc.(PRBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Voter Registration
Today is the last day to register to vote in New Jersey.
Municipal buildings and town halls will be open until 9 P.M.
Mail registrations must also be postmarked by today.
Information is available by telephone from the local town or city hall.


The Video Poker Truck Stop: Ante Up and Fill 'er, Too
There are crickets in a hutch, fish guts in the trash, some dusty diesel pumps out front and in a back room, blinking giddily in the dark, rows of what everybody knows is the trucker's best friend: the video poker machine.
This is Somme's Lucky 7 Truckstop, a scruffy example of a flourishing Louisiana peculiarity -- the video poker truck stop.
Since the poker machines were installed in May, customers have tripled in number, and "they're spending in every direction," said the owner, Danny Somme.


The Personal Approach To Vietnam Revisited
The Vietnam War -- with its moral ambiguities, its surreal jungle conditions and the episodic quality of its fighting -- has tended to defy conventional narrative treatments.
In "Dispatches," Michael Herr found a nervous, willfully subjective voice that captured the chaotic texture of that war, and in "Going After Cacciato," Tim O'Brien employed the devices of magical realism to convey its disorienting psychological effects.
In his new book, "In Pharaoh's Army: Memories of the Lost War," Tobias Wolff tries to tackle Vietnam using old-fashioned, naturalistic methods; he writes about his decision to join the Army, his tour of duty in Southeast Asia and his return home one year later.
The result, despite its evocative title, has little to do with the specific emotional gravity of Vietnam; rather, it's a traditional coming-of-age story that might well have taken place against the backdrop of any war.


Two Posing as Police Officers Rob a Park Avenue Penthouse
When two men wearing jackets emblazoned with the word "Police" presented themselves and their gold shields at 6 A.M. yesterday at the entrance of a Park Avenue luxury apartment house, the doorman whisked them up to the penthouse, the police said.
The two men turned out to be thieves, whose masquerade gained them entry to the modern building, clad in white brick, at 920 Park Avenue, at 80th Street, and to the rooftop apartment, the police said.
They said the men claimed to be wielding a search warrant, but were actually armed with a 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistol.


Dorsey Trailers Inc.(DSYT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  EIGHT YOUTHS WOUNDED AT RAP CLUB
The altercation in a Manhattan rap club began with a shoving match, escalated into a spray of gunfire and ended with a stampede of 300 youngsters down East 29th Street.
Eight youths -- including at least one New York University student and one 15-year-old -- were left wounded on the dance floor at the Melting Pot.
B3.


CHRONICLE
Could it be that ALAN M. DERSHOWITZ, a member of the O. J. Simpson defense team, doesn't have enough to do?
Mr.
Dershowitz, the Harvard professor known for his high-profile law cases, has a little job on the side, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
He will play himself in an episode of the Emmy-award-winning CBS series "Picket Fences."


General Cedras Departs
With the resignation of Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, the Clinton Administration has reason to hope that its ill-considered Haitian gamble has worked.
After the earlier resignation of Brig.
Gen.
Philippe Biamby, and the flight of Col.
Michel Francois to the Dominican Republic, General Cedras's departure has paved the way for the return of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
All this has been achieved without the waste of one American life.
Now the Administration should seize the occasion to extricate itself as quickly as possible from a military venture that it should not have undertaken.


Observer; The Butler, Maybe?
Many persons have begged me to reveal the secret of how to write a newspaper column, and I now do so gladly, for --
Which brings us to Rule One: When a sentence threatens to get out of hand always cut it off, preferably with some unusual punctuation mark like a dash or something exciting like !!!!


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; To build Minolta's visibility and market share, a new campaign lets slip a watchdog of copiers.
GEORGE LOIS was barking.
No, Mr.
Lois, the flamboyant chairman and chief executive at Lois/USA in New York, hasn't gone mad.
Rather, he woofed to act out a campaign for a new client, the Minolta Corporation, which centers on a dog.


Prairie Ducks Return in Record Numbers
FEW birds are more avidly sought after by nature fanciers and hunters alike than the ducks, and a lot of people have been distressed to watch the sharp decline of wild duck populations over the last decade.
Now, though, the biggest flocks in years are forming up on marshes across the mid-North American continent for their annual migration south.
The once-dwindling numbers of mallards and widgeons, pintails and teal, redheads and canvasbacks, gadwalls, shovelers and scaups have suddenly and spectacularly rebounded, according to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, raising hopes for a long-term recovery.


Budapest Journal; Crisis of Goulash Capitalism: Where's the Paprika?
The Hungarians, a nation of hearty eaters who lace their food with lashings of paprika, are facing serious withdrawal pangs.
Their beloved paprika has been banned from stores and markets after one-third of test samples were found poisoned with lead oxide.
The drastic action was taken by health authorities last week after nearly 50 people were hospitalized with stomach aches, paralysis of limbs and other symptoms of lead poisoning.


Prodigy's Dream Has a Price
Jack and Pat Lipinski never intended to become the parents of a figure-skating phenom.
When their only child, Tara, was born 12 years ago, Jack seemed relieved to have a daughter.
"We don't have to worry if she's the best athlete in school," he told his wife.
Which was fine with Pat, who knew or cared little about sports, especially skating, where she couldn't distinguish a double axel from a double play.
"I ended up with more than I bargained for," Jack Lipinski said.


CHRONICLE
All those thousands of teacups, and not a drop to drink.
Since 1759, when the Wedgwood producers of fine china went into business in England, tea drinkers have had to steep other folks' leaves in their Wedgwood.
"Time to remedy that gap," PIERS ANTHONY WEYMOUTH WEDGWOOD, the fourth Lord Wedgwood of Barlaston and a direct descendent of the founder of the firm, said yesterday, explaining why the company is introducing its own line of teas.


Ernst &amp; Young Makes Deep Cut in Legal Staff
Ernst &amp; Young, one of the nation's largest accounting firms, said yesterday that it had dismissed about 240 people involved with its legal work, including 37 of its 65 lawyers.
The firm also disclosed that it had replaced its general counsel, Carl D. Liggio, on Oct. 1.
Mr.
Liggio, 51, was succeeded by Kathryn A. Oberly, 44, an associate general counsel who has been with the firm since 1991.
The company's chairman, Philip A. Laskawy, made the announcement internally in mid-September, Ernst &amp; Young said.


INSIDE
2 Americans Share Nobel Prize in Medicine
The Nobel Prize was awarded to Dr.
Alfred G. Gilman, right, and Dr.
Martin Rodbell for the discovery of G-proteins, an intermediary in the system by which living cells respond to outside signals.
Science Times, page C1.
The Cost of a Cleanup
More than 13 years ago, a state building in Binghamton, N.Y., was contaminated by PCB's.
The building cost $17 million to put up.
It cost $53 million to make safe.
Page B1.
They Love a Parade
In a celebration of electioneering, New York's politicians honored Columbus with an armada up Fifth Avenue.
And, as in most parades, positioning was everything.
Page B1.
Border War Over Bank Move
After Connecticut lured away Swiss Bank, New York City bought ads in Connecticut newspapers decrying the "unneighborly raid." Page B1.
Spoiling a Spice of Life
Hungarians are having a paprika crisis with reports that some local producers of their beloved spice have tainted it with a poisonous substance to enhance the color.
Page A4.
Skating's Insatiable Costs
Dreams of becoming an Olympic figure-skating champion have made a 12-year-old girl and her family confront difficult financial, social and educational decisions.
Page B9.
North Draws Criticism
Oliver North's Senate campaign hit a snag as military analysts denounced his saying that the military was not ready for Iraq.
Page A16.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a self-defense class at the 92d Street Y in Manhattan misidentified the instructor shown.
He was Abner Diaz, not Peter Ticali.


MacNeil to Retire From 'Newshour' In '95 After 20 Years
Robert MacNeil said yesterday that he would retire as a co-anchor of the "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour" next October after 20 years with public television's nightly news program.
The program, which is suffering budgetary constraints, is to close down its operation in New York and base itself in Washington.
When Mr.
MacNeil steps down, Jim Lehrer is to take over as single anchor of the broadcast, which will then be retitled "The Newshour With Jim Lehrer" and originate solely from WETA in Washington.
In a blow to WNET, Channel 13, in New York, the station where it began in 1975, the program and a staff that numbers about 50 will leave that station.


Transcript of Clinton's Address: No Evidence the Iraqis Have Pulled Back
Following is President Clinton's televised speech to the nation last night about United States actions in the Persian Gulf area and in Haiti, as transcribed by The New York Times:
Tonight I want to speak with you about the actions we are taking to preserve stability in the Persian Gulf in the face of Saddam Hussein's provocative actions.


For Haytaian, the Pace Of Running Is Frenetic
Watching Chuck Haytaian's race to become the first Republican to serve as a United States Senator from New Jersey in a generation, it is easy to recall that the word "campaign" originated with armies on the march.
Mr.
Haytaian, the Assembly Speaker, makes clear that running for office is not for the weak of heart or faint of grip.
Crowds of strollers at a Metuchen street fair are targets of invasion by his outstretched hand.
State workers at a Trenton suburb, worried about their pay raises, are targets of opportunity for a defense of Mr.
Haytaian's anti-tax message.
A Trenton City Councilman -- naturally a Democrat -- gets the full bear hug, the one that rates 8 out of 10 on the physicality scale.
Only the straight-ahead format of a weekend Columbus Day parade in this cradle of blue-collar Republicanism could keep Mr.
Haytaian from working the crowds.


Unsentimental Education: Brown Fails, Giants Fall
The nation watched as Lawrence Taylor stood at midfield, looked up at a packed Giants Stadium, and said goodbye.
His No. 56 jersey was retired in a classy and emotional ceremony.
Then, after that, quarterback Dave Brown showed the nation that as good as he is, as good as he can be, his education is not complete.
Not by a long shot.
If Brown wants a blueprint of a quarterback who is calm, cool and deadly, he didn't need to look any farther than across the field at Minnesota's Warren Moon, who eviscerated the Giants the way a family tears apart a Thanksgiving turkey.
Brown, on the other hand, was again intercepted and again it turned into a touchdown that turned the game around.


Grupo Televisa
The global depository receipts of the Mexican media giant Grupo Televisa S.A. fell sharply yesterday after Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company lowered its earnings estimates by 26 percent for 1994 and 24 percent for 1995, saying the company could be hurt by weakness in the Mexican advertising market.


Big Acquisition by Panhandle Eastern
The Panhandle Eastern Corporation agreed today to buy the Associated Natural Gas Corporation for $830 million in stock and assumed debt, in a deal that would create one of the nation's largest diversified natural gas companies.
Panhandle's purchase reflects the consolidation of an industry that until recently was fragmented, tightly regulated and local.
While the major oil companies have long combined every operation from wellhead to gasoline pump, the natural gas companies are only now achieving as much reach.


A Woman's Ordeal of Rape, and Treatment
The woman who was raped early Sunday on an abandoned pier in Brooklyn described a night of horror that began when she and a male friend stopped to view the Manhattan skyline and continued with what she described yesterday as a humiliating ordeal at Woodhull Medical Center.
The woman complained that at the hospital, she was required to sit in her examination gown among handcuffed male prisoners awaiting treatment at Woodhull, and that she had to rest in a dirty examination room with her feet in stirrups for half an hour until a doctor became available.
A spokeswoman for the hospital defended its procedures.


Catching Heck Over a No-Curse Rule
WHAT started Raritan officials thinking about cursing was Main Street.
Pretty little Main Street.
Nine blocks, two lights.
Many whiskey-barrel planters.
While the Mayor and Borough Council were proud of Main Street, they had this creeping concern: Things could change.
Someday, some so-and-so's could start congregating at corners, corrupting Main Street and offending the good citizens of Raritan with rude remarks and foul-mouthed four-letter words.


First Federal Savings Bank of Puerto Rico (FBP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New York City Is Vengeful in the Face of a 'Raid' by Connecticut
Just weeks after losing a spirited battle to keep Swiss Bank from leaving Manhattan, the Giuliani administration has taken out large display ads in Connecticut newspapers urging Connecticut residents to reject "this blatant and unneighborly raid."
The ads, designed by the staff of John S. Dyson, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's Deputy Mayor for finance and economic development, were the latest salvo in the on-again, off-again battle for business among New York City, New Jersey and Connecticut, all of which have relied heavily on tax incentives to lure or retain large companies.


Microchip Technology Inc.(MCHP,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Modest Eastern Europe Attracts Beauty Stores
The sparkling brass-rimmed counters, the glistening bottles and the efficient sales clerks in crisp navy suits at the new Estee Lauder store here are a shock to many shoppers in Eastern Europe.
Add a play corner with toys for children while mother spends and a brightly lighted seminar room for beauty consultations and customers could be forgiven for thinking they were in an affluent Western city.
The exceedingly modest incomes of most East European women have not stopped the big international cosmetic companies from hunting for new markets in the consumer-deprived region.
The opening of the Estee Lauder store recently completed a triumvirate for the company: Budapest in 1989, Warsaw in 1993, now Prague.
Guerlain and Christian Dior have glamorous stores in the three capitals and Elizabeth Arden has a spiffy boutique here.


North Draws Fire for Comments on Clinton Military Policy
Oliver L. North's relatively smooth-running Senate campaign has tripped over his suggestion that the United States could not stop an attack on Kuwait by Saddam Hussein and that President Clinton was to blame for a lack of military preparedness.
Mr.
North fanned criticism from his opponents and others today -- and even drew attacks on his own patriotism -- when in response to a question about President Clinton at a news conference in Richmond, he said, "Bill Clinton is not my Commander in Chief."


A Rara Avis Record Label Of Americana
Forty years ago Composers Recordings Inc. became a company that said yes when commercial record companies said no.
Financed by gifts, endowments and grants, not to mention a few record sales, C.R.I. has released 500 full-length recordings incorporating more than 1,000 pieces, most by 20th-century Americans.
The company is celebrating.
An exhibition of letters, manuscripts, pictures and documents opened at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at 65th Street, on Friday, accompanied by a recital and a short speech or two.
The exhibition will remain in place until January.


Prospects for Kohl Uncertain as Vote In Germany Nears
With less than a week to go before the German national elections on Sunday, Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who engineered German reunification in 1990 and did much to shape Europe's response, may well be returned to office for another term.
The question for the 60 million German voters is whether he will serve as a changed or greatly chastened ruler.
Mr.
Kohl has governed his country for 12 years, nearly as long as Konrad Adenauer, postwar West Germany's first leader, in a coalition that he and his party easily dominated.


When a Repertorial Show Stays True to the Repertory
The performance that the Smithsonian Jazz Masterworks Orchestra gave on Friday night at Miller Theater would have seemed ideal 10 years ago: precise, intelligent and straightforward.
Led by Gunther Schuller, the band made its way through the works of Duke Ellington, Count Basie, Glenn Miller, Artie Shaw, Benny Goodman, Fletcher Henderson and more, in an overview of orchestral works dating roughly through the late 1940's.
Mr.
Schuller is thoughtful, and his presentations manage an instructional blend of obvious material and pieces that are less known.
But in the last decade, concerts by the American Jazz Orchestra, the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra and the Carnegie Hall Jazz Band have made the repertory movement a little less earnest than it used to be.
All three orchestras have commissioned new pieces; all three have programmed thematic concerts, and all three have opened up compositions to fairly radical reinterpretation.
Repertorial shows nowadays are rarely repertorial.


Stainless Steel Widens Appeal
The rusted tailpipe may be going the way of the side-vent window.
In recent years, auto makers have increasingly been equipping cars and light trucks with rust-resistant exhaust systems made of stainless steel.
By the 1996 model year, virtually every car produced in North America is expected to have a stainless steel exhaust system.
Stainless steel is also making its way into household chimney liners, energy-efficient storm windows and a host of other applications in which consumers' demand for durability and quality has overtaken manufacturers' tendency to opt for the cheapest solution.


CLINTON SENDS MORE PLANES TO MIDEAST, SAYING HE SEES NO SIGN OF IRAQI PULLBACK
Iraq announced today that it was withdrawing its troops from provocative positions along the Kuwaiti border, but President Clinton told Americans tonight that the United States had seen no evidence so far of a withdrawal and was adding new firepower to its forces in the Persian Gulf region.
In a televised address from the Oval Office, Mr.
Clinton announced that he was dispatching hundreds more aircraft, which Administration officials said would bring to about 550 the total of American planes in the region.
A total of 356 aircraft ordered to the region today includes F-117 stealth fighters and B-52 bombers, the officials added.


Foreign Capitalists Brush Risks Aside To Invest in Russia
The ruble is crashing amid mounting fears of renewed inflation, and the fledgling stock market is still smarting from its first big downturn.
Bankers and entrepreneurs are being gunned down in the streets.
There is little financial regulation and considerable fraud.
But for American and other foreign investors, those unpleasant realities are becoming far less important than their growing sense that Russia presents a business opportunity so big that they can no longer afford to hold back.


Reviews/Fashion; Masculine, but Oh So Softly
There is always a certain defiance to a woman wearing a man's suit.
But Rei Kawakubo in her Comme des Garcons collection, the last show of the opening day of the Paris spring-summer season, sweetened that defiance by mingling elements of feminine dress with the manliest tailoring.
"Spiritually, there are no more differences between men and women," she said after the show.
"What is important is being human."
For one of her most wearble collections to date, Ms.
Kawakubo sent models out with hair sculptured into slick curls, 1940's style, and with ruby-red lips.
There was a scalloped, tiered starched white dress with a white jacket, layered over silk starched trousers.
A cascade of ruffles like those on a man's tuxedo shirt ran like an overflow down other dresses layered the same way.
An oversize double-breasted vest hung over a long sheer peach ruffled shirt, with lean men's trousers beneath.
Gray cutaway jackets had tiny aprons of ruffles in the same fabric tied onto the backs.
Straight skirts were layered over the pants of traditional men's two-piece suits.


RESULTSPLUS
TENNIS Martinez Takes Measure of Maleeva
Top-seeded Conchita Martinez had a tough opponent for her first-round match yesterday, but the Wimbledon champion defeated Katerina Maleeva, 7-5, 6-2, at the Porsche Grand Prix in Filderstadt, Germany.
Maleeva is a former top 10 player who has slipped to No. 37 in the ranking.
Martinez is ranked No. 3. (AP)


School Opens in Haiti, But Who Is in Charge?
Diderot Belizaire, the director general of Haiti's Department of Education, spends his days in a locked air-conditioned office.
Every time he has a visitor, his assistant must jump from her desk to fish out a ring of keys.
Inside, the director general sits before a wall-size map, suave and neat in a suit and tie, conveying a sense of purpose.
But outside that door, with schools starting today, the scene is far from orderly.
No one here knows who is in charge.


Legal Aid Lawyers Weren't Striking Against New York City
To the Editor:
Seven months ago I left my family and friends in Irmo, S.C. (a town with only a few traffic lights, a post office and a Piggly Wiggly supermarket), to work as a staff attorney for the Legal Aid Society in New York.
It is the job I had most wanted.
On Oct. 1, I went on strike with about 800 of my colleagues.
Because of the media coverage of the strike, the public seems to believe that I am a New York City employee.


Gators' Spurrier Grumbles, But Dean Is Still Winning
When a pass by Terry Dean was intercepted late in the second quarter Saturday against Louisiana State, Florida Coach Steve Spurrier ripped off his sun visor and threw it.
Spurrier's animated dissatisfaction with his fifth-year senior quarterback was nothing new, and it came even though Dean rolled up 217 passing yards and one touchdown in a 42-18 victory over L.S.U.


Among Haitians in Exile, A Mood of Unbridled Joy
In his art gallery in Cambria Heights, Queens, Guy Fleury was recalling the celebration in the Haitian-American community that greeted the news yesterday morning that Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras was resigning after three years as Haiti's military ruler and leaving the country.
"Today everybody is calling everybody else, saying, 'We're happy. We're happy,' " said Mr.
Fleury.


Iranian Faction Doesn't Get Fair Hearing
To the Editor:
Re "Report Won't Vindicate Iranian Faction" (letter, Oct. 5) by David C. Litt, State Department director of Northern Gulf affairs: Mr.
Litt's statement that the Administration's report will draw "heavily on the People's Mujahedeen's own stated views" is unconvincing.
The department has acted to the contrary.
In a Congressional hearing this week, Robert Pelletreau, Assistant Secretary for Near East affairs, asserted the Mujahedeen had acknowledged responsibility for the deaths of American nationals and had taken part in the seizure of American diplomats as hostages in Teheran.
Both statements are false.
The Mujahedeen have denied both allegations.
Mr.
Litt's letter is full of baseless allegations that originate in the Irangate deals and were part of the demands of the Khomeini regime.
These allegations have never been substantiated, and have already been answered by the Mujahedeen.
These responses have been ignored by the State Department, whose declared positions over the last six months contradict the objective study needed to prepare the report.
The compilers have made up their minds, violating impartiality.
The problem is not the Mujahedeen but those in the State Department who advocate a policy of appeasing Teheran.
They view discrediting Iran's democratic oppoosition as the only way to justify reconciliation with an international outlaw.
Congress and the public have made their will known: Don't appease the mullahs, don't prejudge, be objective, listen to all voices, particularly the subjects of the report.
This the State Department refuses to do.
MASSOUD BANISADR U.S.
Representative, National Council of Resistance of Iran Washington, Oct. 5, 1994


MAGMA POWER BOARD REJECTS CALIFORNIA ENERGY'S OFFER
The board of the Magma Power Company said yesterday that it had rejected the California Energy Company's $840 million tender offer to buy 51 percent of its geothermal power competitor's common stock, saying it is an "opportunistic attempt" to acquire Magma at an inadequate price.
California Energy, based in Omaha, made an offer on Sept. 19 to acquire the company.
The tender offer began Oct. 6 after the two companies were unable to come to terms.
Stockholders have been offered $35 a share, composed of a combination of $25 in cash and $10 of California Energy stock, with the deal open through Nov. 3.
A California Energy spokesman said yesterday that the company had no comment.


Southern National Corp.(SNB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Executive Changes
AMERICAN MEDICAL ELECTRONICS INC., Dallas, a manufacturer and distributor of advanced products for bone healing, appointed John F. Clifford president and chief executive.


BB&amp;T Financial (BBTF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Prices of Treasury Futures Rise
Prices of Treasury futures ended slightly higher yesterday, while the Treasury market was closed in observance of Columbus Day.
The corporate and municipal markets, which follow the Treasury market closely to price their securities, were quiet.


THREATS IN THE GULF: KUWAIT -- Keeping the Iraqis Back; Pentagon's Long-Term Problem Is to Avoid Recurring Need to Send Troops to the Gulf
Even if Iraq pulls its forces back from the Kuwait border, as its diplomats promised today, Baghdad's troop movements have created a new and vexing problem for the Pentagon: how to insure that Iraqi troops not only withdraw from the border but also keep a respectful distance.
An Iraqi withdrawal, which American intelligence had not confirmed tonight, may help ease the immediate sense of crisis, but it could create a longer-term problem.


Fed's Sense of Timing; Officials See Another Rate Rise Coming, But Will It Be Now or Later in the Year?
Top Federal Reserve officials say the American economy is growing briskly, making further increases in short-term interest rates almost inevitable in the coming months to try to prevent the economy from overheating and feeding inflation.
But while many bond market analysts worry that the next increase will come this week, there seems to be a growing possibility that the Fed will not raise rates again until the next meeting of its top policy committee on Nov. 15.


Garden State Warriors? Nets' Offense Looks Like It
Butch Beard trumpeted his offense in his first few months as the Nets coach, promising to push the ball, rather than walk it up the floor.
He failed to mention anything about the 6-foot-10-inch Derrick Coleman playing point guard, though.
"Why not?" Beard said after an abbreviated Nets practice today at Princeton University's Jadwin Gymnasium.
"It makes sense. How many power forwards do you know that are mobile enough to guard him up there?"


Legal Aid Questions Contract's Termination
In what some consider an attempt to save face as well as to restore a few months to a defunct contract with the city, leaders of the Legal Aid Society have sent letters to two officials claiming that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani did not have a legal basis for terminating the society's contract to represent the indigent.
Legal Aid lawyers privately conceded that even if the city found the letters persuasive, the Mayor's decision to terminate the contract was not likely to be altered, just postponed.
The society's contract with the city calls for a 90-day termination notice.


Private Lives of Franklin and Eleanor
Opening a new season of "The American Experience," "F. D. R." turns out to be a personal sort of history.
The focus is less on President Roosevelt's public accomplishments, though they are duly noted, than on his triumph over polio and, especially, his complicated relationship with his wife, Eleanor.
Such matters lend themselves to off-the-rack psychologizing, some of which is offered here ("With an infirm father and a domineering mother," says the narrator, David McCullough, "Franklin learned to conceal his true feelings"); but the four-and-a-half-hour documentary also proves revealing and moving.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  MORE U.S.
FIREPOWER TO THE GULF  Iraq said that it was pulling back troops from the Kuwaiti border, but President Clinton said the United States was dubious and that he was sending in more warplanes.
A1


Patterns
Packaging Street Fashion
Max Karic has always liked the tiny fashion-packed storefronts in the East Village.
So, he and his partners, Pippa Brooks and Brad Tuck, took over a dry cleaner's in London's Soho, at 21 Frith Street, and filled every square inch with American street fashion.


Scott Paper Unit Draws $1.6 Billion
Sappi Ltd. of Johannesburg and two other investors agreed to buy America's largest maker of glossy paper from the Scott Paper Company for $1.6 billion, the companies said yesterday.
Executives said it would be the biggest American investment by a South African company in more than 20 years.
For Sappi, South Africa's leading paper and forest products company, the purchase represents a big leap into the world paper market.
Sappi's sales totaled $1.7 billion last year, while the manufacturer it is acquiring, the S. D. Warren Company of Boston, sold $1.2 billion.


Esiason's Contribution Surpasses His Statistics
Fans remember the fourth quarter, not statistics.
So forget about Boomer Esiason averaging about 4 yards a toss, attempting with mixed success to throw off a sprained left ankle.
At the end of Sunday's game, when the Jets needed to put away the Colts, Esiason insured the 16-6 victory with a 1-yard touchdown pass to Johnny Mitchell.


Kuwait Crisis: Hussein Gambles to Keep Power
Saddam Hussein's latest confrontation with the United States illustrates both the success and the failure of Washington's handling of the Iraqi leader.
The success is that two successive Administrations have managed to maintain crippling global sanctions on Iraq that have created an economic crisis so desperate that President Hussein felt cornered.
But instead of recognizing the sovereignty and the borders of Kuwait, a condition set by the United Nations for easing the sanctions, he moved 70,000 troops toward the country that his troops invaded in 1990.


Companies Say Drugs Slow M.S.
RESEARCHERS from two companies said yesterday that two new drugs seem to be effective in slowing the progression of multiple sclerosis, an incurable neurological disease.
If federally approved, the drugs would join Betaseron, made by Berlex Laboratories, in Wayne, N.J., for use in treating the disease.


NATO Requests a Broader Right to Attack Targets in Bosnia
In a challenge to the United Nations, NATO has formally requested radical changes in its mandate in Bosnia, including the right to strike against numerous targets at once.
The request, made in a letter to Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali on Friday, reflects mounting concern within the alliance over a loss of credibility in Bosnia.


Minnesota's Old Man Riddles a Corps of Kids
It is common knowledge that the Giants' most glaring weakness this season is their secondary.
Tonight, the weakness showed more than ever.
On what was supposed to be Lawrence Taylor's night, another future Hall of Famer, Warren Moon, shredded the suspect secondary for 299 yards on 23-of-34 passing.
Though Moon finished 1 yard shy of his third consecutive 300-yard game, he and the Vikings handed the Giants their worst home defeat since Washington beat them, 28-10, in 1992, Ray Handley's last season as coach.


Executive Shifts At Three Agencies
Three agencies have announced changes involving creative executives.
Sam Scali, deputy chairman at Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York, said yesterday that he had relinquished his day-to-day involvement there.
"I believe it is now possible to work in a consulting role for the next year," he said in a statement, "so that I can remain available to clients." A successor will not be named.


Smithsonian A-Bomb Display Distorts History
To the Editor:
Three days after the atomic bomb fell on Hiroshima, Japanese statesmen and military leaders met with Emperor Hirohito in an underground bunker at the Imperial Palace.
During the meeting, word came of the explosion of a second devastating bomb over Nagasaki.
Adm.
Soemu Toyoda immediately announced that the Americans must have a production line for atomic bombs.
Despite this knowledge, the military leaders continued to advocate an all-out defense of the home islands against the coming invasion.
In my interviews with senior Japanese Army and Navy officials, Adm.
Rikihei Takuma, chief of staff of the kamikaze corps, told me that his group had hoarded fuel, armaments and more than 2,000 aircraft to employ against the invaders.
With far fewer planes the kamikazes had inflicted enormous losses on the United States Navy off Okinawa.


Chess
Everything went wrong for Michael Adams last month in Linares, Spain, during his semifinal match for the Professional Chess Association's world championship.
The 22-year-old English grandmaster was caught unacquainted in one game with an opening system that anyone playing on his high level should know.
In another game, he came prepared with a surprise improvement, but half way through the series of critical moves, he discovered a critical flaw in his analysis.
In still another game, he adopted a solid opening but was confronted with superior solidity and ground down.
When a whole series of mishaps like these take place, it is a good bet that overstrained nerves can be blamed.
The tension mounts as one goes up the ladder toward a title match, in this case with Gary Kasparov of Russia in late 1995.
It did not help that Adams's opponent was the brilliant 24-year-old Indian grandmaster Vishwanathan Anand.
And throughout the series Anand never looked as though he had any trouble.


Iraq's Reckless Ploy
Five days of Iraqi deployments and U.S. counterdeployments around Kuwait's northern border have left Bill Clinton looking like a born-again military strategist and Saddam Hussein like a dangerous and clumsy bully.
Iraq's announcement yesterday that it was withdrawing troops from the border region vindicates Mr.
Clinton's strategy of quick and massive military deterrence of any Iraqi plans for renewed aggression.
The Iraqi leader's motives and intentions are known only to him.
But if he thought he could force a resolution of the diplomatic stalemate over oil sanctions by stirring up a new military crisis over Kuwait, he was badly mistaken.
By foolishly conducting threatening military maneuvers near the Kuwaiti border, Baghdad has set back its cause among friend and foe alike.


Cablevision's Dolan, One Savvy Visionary
A decade or so ago, before Chuck Dolan was worth $715 million, the chairman of Cablevision Systems wanted to buy Madison Square Garden when it was owned by Paramount Communications (formerly Gulf &amp; Western).
"They said if they were going to sell, it would be $300 million," he said.
"Three-hundred million!" Dolan cheerfully repeated.


Virginia E. Montes, 50, Women's Rights Advocate
Virginia E. Montes, a former national secretary and lobbyist for the National Organization for Women, died Thursday at her home in Atlanta.
She was 50.
The cause was a stroke, the Atlanta medical examiner's office said.


Race for Governor: Cuomo Goes After Pataki's Tax Plan
CANDIDATE Mario M. Cuomo PRODUCER The Garth Group, New York City VISUAL This 30-second ad opens with letters on a black background reading, "George Pataki says he'll raise taxes. Don't believe it." The rest of the ad is devoted to three newspaper headlines about Mr.
Pataki's personal finances.


Oregon, Foiling Forecasters, Thrives as It Protects Owls
By now, the timber communities of Oregon were supposed to be ghost towns.
There was going to an epidemic of foreclosures, a recession so crippling it would mean "we'll be up to our neck in owls, and every millworker will be out of a job," as President George Bush predicted two years ago while campaigning in the Northwest.
Politicians in both parties agreed.
The villain was the northern spotted owl, an endangered bird fond of the same ancient national forests desired by loggers.
When restrictions on logging were ordered in 1991 to protect the bird, Michael Burrill spoke for many of his fellow Oregon timber mill owners when he said, "They just created Appalachia in the Northwest."


Even Shorn of Horns, Rhinos of Zimbabwe Face Poacher Calamity
THE black rhinoceros wore a radio collar and her horns had been shorn with a chain saw to make her less valuable.
Even so, Million Sibanda shouldered an AK-47 assault rifle as he circled in, trickling dust through his fingers to make sure he was downwind.
The gun was not for the rhino, but for poachers, who would kill the beast just for the pathetic stump remaining on her face -- and would kill a park scout like Mr.
Sibanda for being in the way.


Aristide Is Now Facing Daunting Job of Restoration
As the military rulers in Haiti stepped down, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide spent today trying to decide precisely how he will run the country, whom to name as prime minister and who among a jostling crowd of American politicians will be on the airplane that takes him home.
With his flight to Haiti five days away, the exiled President has neither formally announced who will serve alongside him nor revealed his immediate plans upon returning to power, worrying some White House officials who want assurances of stability for Haiti's future.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  TEXAS RANGERS -- Named Doug Melvin general manager.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Named Ed Lynch general manager.
Sent Todd Haney, infielder, Mike Maksudian, catcher-infielder, and Rafael Novoa, pitcher, outright to Iowa of the American Association.
Activated Mike Morgan, pitcher, and Kevin Roberson, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list and Jose Guzman and Anthony Young, pitchers, from the 60-day disabled list.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Named Jesse Barfield outfield coach.
Announced Matt Galante, third base coach, Mel Stottlemyre, pitching coach, Julio Linares, bullpen coach, and Steve Henderson, hitting coach, will return for the 1995 season.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Announced that Jim Gott, pitcher, refused a minor league assignment and elected to become a free agent.
New York-Penn League  JAMESTOWN JAMMERS -- Promoted assistant general manager Shawn Reilly to general manager.
Basketball National Basketball Association  MIAMI HEAT -- Signed Khalid Reeves, guard, to a multiyear contract.
SAN ANTONIO SPURS -- Released Demetrius Calip and Matt Othick, guards.
Football National Football League  CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Placed Walter Reeves, tight end, on injured reserve.
Re-signed Frank Hartley, tight end.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Placed Doug Skene, guard, on the injured reserve list.
Soccer National Professional Soccer League  HARRISBURG HEAT -- Re-signed Scott Henderson, defender.
Tennis Western Tennis Association  WTA -- Named Sally Schultz junior recreational programs coordinator.
College  GEORGE MASON -- Promoted assistant athletic director Sue Collins to senior associate athletic director.
MOUNT ST. MARY'S, MD. -- Named Eric Kloiber sports information director.
MUHLENBERG -- Named Matt Huegsen wrestling coach and Chris Gammes assistant wrestling coach.
OKLAHOMA STATE -- Named Terry Don Phillips athletic director.
SAINT LOUIS -- Named Doug Woolard athletic director.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about overcrowding in New York City kindergartens referred incorrectly in some copies to the school shown, where kindergarten classes were held in the cafeteria.
It was Public School 19 in Corona, Queens, not Public School 16.


'Me and You': No. 56 Bids His Fans Sweet and Fond Farewell
Wearing his blue "56" jersey, Lawrence Taylor looked up at 77,294 faces tonight in Giants Stadium.
"This is about me and you, Giants fans," he said.
"You've always been there. No matter what was said, no matter what was written, no matter what happened in my personal life, we've always been in this together. Without you, there would've been a Lawrence Taylor, but there wouldn't have been an L. T."


A General Departs, to the Rich and Bitter Sarcasm of the People He Ruled
The honor guard snapped to attention, more or less -- swords brandished, red-and-blue banners flapping, rifles carefully checked by American troops to be sure they were empty -- as the Commander in Chief of the Haitian Army, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, stepped forward to make his farewell address.
Not a word he said could be heard.


James Monks, 81, Actor and Model
James Monks, an actor who began his career on Broadway in the 1930's and later worked in films and modeling, died on Sunday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 81.
The cause was cancer, said Benedict Bonino, a friend.


Apple Stock Continues Sharp Rise
Shares in Apple Computer Inc. continued their sharp rise today, in reaction to reports that Apple and I.B.M. were making progress toward agreeing on a common standard that would make each company's computers compatible with the other's.
The International Business Machines Corporation also released new versions of the Power PC microprocessor today that it developed with Apple and Motorola Inc. and lowered prices on some existing chips.


A Shaken Jerusalem Tries to Get Back to Normal
Jerusalem, bruised and its wind knocked out, scrambled back to its feet today after its worst terrorist attack in years.
But the city was still shaken by two Arabs who came from the Gaza Strip and sprayed automatic-rifle fire along a crowded street of pubs and cafes, killing 2 people and wounding 13 others before the assailants were shot to death.
Fredi Engelberg went early today to her English-language book store on Yoel Salomon Street, a narrow lane popular with young Israelis and visiting foreigners but a frightening shooting gallery for long minutes on Sunday night.
She knew that she had to put her business back together.


Shirley Chernela; Temple Administrator, 73
Shirley Chernela, a former administrator of Temple Shaaray Tefila in Manhattan and the first woman to be president of the National Association of Temple Administrators, died Saturday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
She was 73 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said Janet Chernela Mount, her daughter.
Ms.
Chernela became the administrator of Temple Shaaray Tefila in 1972 and held the job for 20 years.
She was president of the national administrators' group from 1982 to 1985.
In 1991, she was elected an honorary trustee.


Daniel J. Melia, 75, Retired Pediatrician And Police Official
Dr.
Daniel John Melia, a retired pediatrician and longtime Police Commissioner of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., died on Sunday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 75 and had lived in Irvington, N.Y., since 1990.
The cause of death was cancer, said his son, John.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.77
4.77
2.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.89
4.89
2.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.32
5.32
3.06
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.68
7.68
5.25
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.90
7.90
5.92
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.75
8.76
6.87
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.69
6.70
5.41
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A New Weapon Is Added To Battle Gum and Graffiti
But for a single consonant, this might be big news: a gum-control plan will go into effect in midtown Manhattan today.
Yes, gum control.
The Grand Central Partnership and the 34th Street Partnership are scheduled to unveil a high-powered enemy of wall-defacing vandals or merely careless litterers: an $8,000 vacuum-cleanerlike machine that blasts gum off sidewalks and graffiti off walls and comes with more stainless-steel attachments than a door-to-door salesman could ever demonstrate.


The Japanese Victims
To the Editor:
By bowing to pressure from the American Legion and other veterans groups, the Smithsonian Institution compromises its coming exhibition on the atomic bombing of Japan (news article, Oct. 1).
A high-pressure campaign from veterans groups had already led the museum to make extensive changes to its script and to double the exhibition's size with an addition depicting Japanese atrocities before and during World War II.
These changes present the bombing, a unique event in history, as a justified military response to Japanese aggression.


Peak Performance: Why Records Fall
THE old joke -- How do you get to Carnegie Hall?
Practice, practice, practice -- is getting a scientific spin.
Researchers are finding an unexpected potency from deliberate practice in world-class competitions of all kinds, including chess matches, musical recitals and sporting events.
Studies of chess masters, virtuoso musicians and star athletes show that the relentless training routines of those at the top allows them to break through ordinary limits in memory and physiology, and so perform at levels that had been thought impossible.


For the U.S., Not to Worry
None of the tainted paprika reported in Hungary has been exported to the United States, according to Hungarian officials and United States spice importers.
The Federal Food and Drug Administration, which randomly tests imports of various foods for pesticides and other chemical contaminants, will begin testing the next shipments of paprika imported from Hungary.
"We're in the process of looking at imports to make sure that paprika from Hungary is safe," said John Vanderveen, director of the office of plant and dairy foods and beverages for F.D.A.


Accounts
*
Dodger Productions and Kardana Productions, both of New York, to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York, to handle advertising for the coming Broadway production of "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying." Billings were not disclosed. *
Discover magazine, New York, to Rubin Postaer &amp; Associates, Santa Monica, Calif., to handle its trade advertising account, previously at Ziff Marketing, New York, now defunct.
Billings were not disclosed.


N.H.L. Players Present New Plan to Owners
National Hockey League players proposed a 7 percent solution to their dispute with owners today, but the proposal most likely won't be enough to make the owners 100 percent certain they want to open the season on Saturday.
The owners will make that decision at a meeting in New York Tuesday after considering the players' new proposal, which calls for taxes ranging from 7 percent to 1 percent on the payrolls of the 16 teams with the highest revenue and 3 percent on the gate receipts of those teams.


Cult Leader In Swiss Case Still Missing
The Swiss police confirmed tonight that the financial mastermind of the Order of the Solar Temple was among 48 members of the religious sect found dead here last week, but the whereabouts of the group's charismatic spiritual leader remained a mystery.
The body of Joseph Di Mambro, a 70-year-old French Canadian, was identified by the police through dental records from Canada.
Only three days ago, the police said Mr. di Mambro and Luc Jouret, the 46-year-old Belgian homeopathic doctor who founded the group in 1984, were wanted on suspicion of murder.


Element Is Stripped of Its Namesake
FOR the last seven months, Element 106, an artificial element first created in 1974 by the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in Berkeley, Calif., has been provisionally named seaborgium in honor of Dr.
Glenn T. Seaborg, the laboratory's director at large, a Nobel laureate and the codiscoverer of plutonium.
But just as seaborgium is finding its way into textbooks and scientific papers, an international committee has created an uproar by dropping Dr.
Seaborg's name from the official roster of chemical elements.
In a decision announced yesterday in Chemical and Engineering News, a committee of the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, or I.U.P.A.C., recommended changes in the provisional names assigned to Elements 101 through 109.
The changes, which must be ratified next August by the full council of the British-based organization, drew angry responses from several leading American chemists and nuclear physicists.


Kuwaiti Troops Vow To Fight This Time
Kuwaiti troops deployed along the border with Iraq insisted today that they would not flee southward to Saudi Arabia, as many did in 1990, if Iraqi forces invaded again.
"This time is different," said Pvt.
Abdel Mussim al-Balushi, as he stood near a dun-colored Yugoslav-built tank sheltered behind a sand hill.
"If we were here alone we would be afraid, but the Americans are with us. If there were no Americans, I would go to Saudi Arabia."


Superior Industries Intl.(SUP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2 Americans Share Nobel For Cell Signal Finding
TWO Americans, Dr.
Alfred G. Gilman and Dr.
Martin Rodbell, won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine yesterday for discovering natural substances known as G-proteins and how they help cells convert signals from the environment and within the body into cellular chain reactions that control fundamental life processes.
Dr.
Gilman, 53, who heads the pharmacology department at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, is co-author of a leading textbook of pharmacology.
Dr.
Rodbell, 68, retired in June as head of the laboratory of signal transduction at the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, a Federal agency in Research Triangle Park, near Durham, N.C.
He said he stepped down because of the lack of Federal funds for his research.


U.S. Investigating No-Haggle Car Pricing
As part of a wider antitrust investigation of auto pricing, the Justice Department is looking into the increasingly popular practice of no-haggle selling by car dealers, according to dealers and others who have been questioned in the inquiry.
It is not clear what wrongdoing the Government suspects.
Besides possible price-fixing arrangements between manufacturers and dealers, the investigators might be looking at possible price-fixing efforts among the dealers themselves or the manufacturers themselves.


The Irishman as Barometer for Bigotry's Nuances
Daniel Magee's "Paddywack," the turbulent new Irish drama at the Long Wharf Theater here, puts two questions before an audience.
The first has to do with Damien, an Irish laborer who has just moved to London and taken up residence in a boardinghouse.
Soon after his arrival, a rash of bombings breaks out, prompting Damien's dormitory mates to ask themselves: Is he or is he not a member of the Irish Republican Army?


MILITARY LEADER IN HAITI RESIGNS, VOWING TO LEAVE
With a protective cordon of American soldiers around him and a crowd of jubilant Haitians drowning out his words with jeers and insults, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras resigned as commander in chief of the Haitian armed forces today, pledging to leave the country in the next few days.
"I will not be with you," a grim-faced General Cedras told a small group of his fellow Haitian soldiers at a brief ceremony at military headquarters here, as the commander of the 20,000 American troops on the ground here, Lieut.
Gen.
Hugh Shelton, sat stolidly behind him.
"I choose to leave our country for your protection, so that my presence will not be a motive for actions against the military establishment or a pretext for unjustified actions."


Lynch 'Flattered' to Become Cubs' G.M.
When Ed Lynch left New York for Chicago in 1986, he was admittedly heartbroken.
The Mets were a team on the rise, a team just a few months away from winning the World Series, and Lynch, a pitcher, was headed to the struggling Chicago Cubs.
"It was like living with a family all year, then getting kicked out on Christmas Eve," Lynch said.


Cable Group Seeks Deal With Sprint
A group of the nation's biggest cable television companies is talking with the Sprint Corporation, the nation's third-largest long-distance carrier, about collaborating on a nationwide wireless telephone network.
It remains unclear whether such an agreement can be reached, and the talks come at a time when every company with aspirations in wireless communications is talking with almost everyone else about some sort of national alliance.


Gore Stands In At Fund-Raiser
Vice President Al Gore was a last-minute stand-in tonight for President Clinton at a Democratic Party fund-raiser here.
About 350 people paid $1,000, $5,000 or $25,000 apiece to attend the fund-raiser, which benefited Senator Frank R. Lautenberg and other Democratic candidates in the state.


Bandag Inc.(BDG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Most Markets Open in U.S.
Most financial markets in the United States were open yesterday, although the cash market for Treasury securities was closed in observance of Columbus Day.
All the United States commodities markets were also open and futures on Treasury securities were traded.


RPM Inc.(RPOW,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


The 13-Year Cleaning Job; After $53 Million, a $17 Million State Building Finally Is Declared Safe From Toxins
In the early morning of Feb. 5, 1981, a 30-minute basement electrical fire filled the state office building in Binghamton, N.Y., with a thick cloud of toxic smoke, spreading PCB's and dioxins over everything, from the lottery tickets in the lobby to the law books on the 18th floor.
Health officials did not comprehend the extent of what had happened.
Two days later, they said the building would be closed for at least a week.
To reassure the public, Gov.
Hugh L. Carey offered to walk into the building, "swallow an entire glass of PCB's and run a mile afterwards."


In March of the Politicians, Pride and Proximity Count
New York's politicians honored Columbus with an election-year armada up Fifth Avenue yesterday, Republicans and Democrats tempest-tossed together in a journey in which position can be all.
Two things were clear in the crisp air of a perfect fall morning: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo was far more eager to embrace Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani than any of his fellow Democrats were to embrace Mr.
Cuomo, and New York these days is enough of a two-party town that Republicans need their own mustering corner on Fifth Avenue before a parade.


A Prudent Agreement
To the Editor:
Unlike conservative 2 percent wage increases given by New York City to its lawyers, the more prudent Legal Aid agreement reached Oct. 5 provides only for 2 percent bonuses in each of the contract's two years.
Unlike the raises given to city agency lawyers, these bonuses will not add to the base salaries of Legal Aid lawyers.
Moreover, the agreement provides arbitration in the second year on allocation of any increased health insurance costs.


Eight Youths Are Wounded In Shootings at Dance Club
The spray of gunfire in a Manhattan rap club early yesterday began with a shoving match and ended with a stampede of 300 youngsters down East 29th Street.
When it was over, eight youths -- including at least one New York University student and one 15-year-old -- were left wounded on the dance floor at the club, the Melting Pot.
Whatever the motive for the original scuffle -- which apparently began when one youth bumped into another -- the shooter fired his gun indiscriminately at the crowd before fleeing the club just before 2 A.M., the police said.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about Congressional passage of a $60 billion education bill referred imprecisely to the position of Senator Pete V. Domenici, Republican of New Mexico.
He supported the bill.


Sports of The Times; L.T.'s Rush Helped Sack Phil Simms
BY the time the workout was over, a couple dozen kids were outside the practice field, in the shadow of Giants Stadium, waiting for the quarterback.
Like a horde of sleepy buffalo, the other players trudged out the gate, past the kids, into the parking lot, toward the locker room.
Finally, as the quarterback appeared, the notebooks and pens converged in the manner of a ritual circle dance.
Dave Brown, who now appears to carry whatever hopes remain for a serious football future in northern New Jersey, smiled, and began to sign.


No Headline
"I will not be with you." -- LIEUT.
GEN.
RAOUL CEDRAS, Haiti's military leader.  [ A1:3. ]


Bill on Holocaust Lawsuits Dies in Congress
A bill that would have allowed a New Jersey man who survived the Holocaust to sue the German Government for reparations failed to pass the United States Senate before Congress adjourned last weekend.
A revised version of the bill passed the House in a voice vote, but did not reach the Senate floor for a vote before adjournment.


Abbott Laboratories (ABT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reviews/Fashion; In London, Designers Are All Grown-Ups
The way to look like a seasoned fashion professional in London is usually to mutter, "Forget what's on the runways," and head to Camden Market to see what vintage looks and handmade clothing people are pulling together.
But this season, starting with the grown-up collection of 24-year-old Nicholas Knightly, London proved that it could be serious and that the runways did, in fact, matter.


Corrections
A notice in Business Day yesterday about the Columbus Day schedules for the financial and commodities markets referred incorrectly to the New York Cotton Exchange.
It was open yesterday.


In Preliminary Work, New Test Detects Three Types of Cancer
A new test that can detect several kinds of cancerous human cells was reported yesterday by scientists from the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine in Baltimore.
The scientists say they can quickly develop the test into a general method for screening healthy people for the incipient stages of most kinds of cancer.
A test of this kind could well revolutionize the treatment of malignant disease, if combined with effective methods of attacking early cancers.
Other experts say the Johns Hopkins team appears to have made an important laboratory advance toward this goal, but that the work is preliminary and much more remains to be done to make the test available for widespread use, if it ever is.


A Mattel Account Is in Review
Mattel Inc. said yesterday that it was searching for an agency to handle advertising for the Cabbage Patch Kids line of dolls.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $20 million.
Mattel was awarded marketing and licensing rights to the dolls last month by Original Appalachian Artworks Inc. in Cleveland, Ga.
Hasbro Inc., which previously had those rights, used Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor in New York as its advertising agency.


Rivers Is Moving Well On Road to the Lineup
Through four days of practice, Doc Rivers' left knee has not betrayed him.
He has kept pace with his teammates.
He has not missed a workout.
And he has been encouraged by his performance.


Marcus Singer, 80, Professor Accused By 50's House Panel
Dr.
Marcus Singer, a longtime professor of anatomy and zoology who was Henry Willson Payne Professor of Anatomy at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, died on Saturday at his home in Cleveland Heights, Ohio.
He was 80.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his son Dr. Robert Singer.


Cutting Through Hype on Monitors
"MONITORS are not perfect," said Ray Soneira, who knows whereof he speaks.
His company, Sonera Technologies of Rumson, N.J., sells a useful program called Displaymate for Windows ($79; 800-932-6323) that can help uncover and correct imperfections in computer displays.
The program includes enough concentric circles, blinking lines and unusual color patterns to suggest that cable TV might want to consider a Test Pattern Channel.
Color monitors have improved greatly, but despite digital controls, they remain analog descendants of Howdy Doody-era ancestors.
For monitors, the black-or-white, yes-or-no certainties of the digital world must be translated into shades of red, blue and green that even the earth's magnetic field can skew.
The cards that send the signals often introduce their own distortions.
In Mr.
Soneira's view, "it's basically total anarchy."


William W. Lapsley Dies at 84; Retired General Led Con Edison
William W. Lapsley, a retired major general in the Army Corps of Engineers and former president of the Consolidated Edison Company, died on Thursday at his home in San Antonio.
He was 84.
The cause was leukemia, his family said.


Race for Governor: Pataki Criticizes Cuomo's Tax Record
CANDIDATE George E. Pataki PRODUCER Russo, Marsh &amp; Associates, Alexandria, Va., and Sacramento, Calif.
VISUAL: The ad almost looks like a video game, with a photograph of Mario Cuomo on the top of the screen with the heading, "Mario Cuomo's record on taxes and fees." A seemingly endless list of taxes scrolls up from the bottom, then from the lower right-hand side with computer-drawn images of a phone, a dog, a tree and a car.
The ad is 30 seconds long.


On My Mind; Drowning In Oil
The heart of the matter is not what Saddam Hussein will do or can do to harass his enemies in the West and Mideast.
It is what they can do and will do to destroy him at last.
Will they allow him one more victory so he can return again to threaten the Mideast and the U.S. next year?
Or will they push him finally into the grave he has been digging for himself, his regime and his nation?


With Click, Animation For Young
ON the screen is a picturesque village, English perhaps.
In the foreground, a monkey stands in the road leading into the village.
A click of the mouse button and the monkey scampers down the road, up the side of a building and onto the roof, where it chatters.
It took me less than five minutes to create that little scene with Amazing Animation, a Claris Clear Choice program by the Claris Corporation, a subsidiary of Apple Computer Inc.
The program was set to the limited "little kids" level, intended for children 5 to 8 years old.
After slight practice, a child at the upper end of that age range probably could beat my time.


Panel Finds Wide Debate in 40's On the Ethics of Radiation Tests
In the early years of the cold war, a systematic effort to gain knowledge of the effects of radiation from experiments on human subjects was secretly planned at the highest levels of the United States Government.
The number of experiments was some 10 times larger than known until now, but there was also more discussion than expected on the ethics of experimentation.
That is the outline of the complex picture being developed by the President's Committee on Human Radiation Experiments after six months of sifting through the archives of a dozen Federal agencies.
The committee has brought to light a wealth of documents about the Government's behavior -- sometimes furtive, sometimes ethical -- that will force historians to rewrite part of the history of the dawn of the atomic age.


Suntrust Banks Inc.(STI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Office Depot Inc.(ODP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Three pioneers in game theory won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science to three economists.
The award underscores a significant shift in thinking in economics.
Classical theories that focus on how markets behave are giving way to game theory, an approach that focuses on the give and take among "players."  [ Page D1. ]  Profiles of the three economists.  [ D6. ] Markets
Stocks staged a broad and powerful rally, lifted by better-than-expected profits from a number of large companies.  [ D1. ]
The dollar was little changed against other currencies.  [ D20. ]
Gold prices tumbled after tensions in the Persian Gulf appeared to have eased.
Crude oil prices also declined.  [ D20. ]
Prices of Treasury securities rose.
Investors continued to be encouraged by Friday's weaker-than-expected jobs report.  [ D21. ] Companies
A major Hollywood studio is being formed by Jeffrey Katzenberg, a former top Disney executive, along with Steven Spielberg and David Geffen, film industry executives say.  [ D1. ]
National Medical and American Medical plan to merge, creating create the nation's second-largest hospital chain.  [ D1. ]
Chrysler posted a 54 percent increase in quarterly earnings, showing strong demand for its mini-vans and other trucks.  [ D2. ]
The dismissals at Ernst &amp; Young's legal department shook outside lawyers and outplacement counselors.  [ D2. ]
Continental will sell a workers' compensation insurance unit to Fremont General for $250 million.  [ D21. ]
T.W.A. is seeking another huge revamping, proposing that creditors exchange $800 million in debt for new debt and equity.  [ D5. ] Conagra plans to sell six noncore businesses.  [ D5. ]
Biogen's stock continued to fall on results of a proposed drug for multiple sclerosis.
Shares of Chiron, a rival, surged.  [ D5. ]
Pepsico said earnings rose 18 percent in the third quarter.  [ D5. ]
Some members of the Shoen family won a $1.47 billion verdict.
The family, which has been feuding, owns U-Haul.  [ D5. ] ,
Goldman, Sachs named 58 new partners.  [ D7. ]
SBC Communications will take a 10 percent stake in a French cellular company in a deal worth $626 million.  [ D9. ]
BellSouth reached an agreement in China to set up cellular, wireless and long-distance telephone networks in two cities.  [ D9. ]
Sears is examining taking over the site of the Abraham &amp; Straus store at Herald Square in Manhattan.  [ B3. ] Business Technology
Can Packard Bell maintain its recent success?
Bigger competitors are now turning their sights to Packard Bell's turf of selling low-priced PC's at discount and department store chains.  [ D1. ]
Intel won a round in its copyright fight over software that is part of an Advanced Micro Devices clone of an Intel chip.  [ D8. ] International
The ruble plunged, forcing the Russian Government to intervene in an effort to stave off further economic instability.  [ A1. ] Today's Columns
Ethan Allen has revamped itself and its look.
Some analysts see it as an attractive investment.
Market Place.  [ D10. ]
How Hollywood sells films can be a lesson for mainstream marketing.
Advertising.  [ D22. ]


Review/Fashion; Back to the Future: An Elegant Edge
If the retro clothes on the runways really are the future, designers are making a curious case for their own obsolescence.
Today, though, three design houses -- Rifat Ozbek, Yohji Yamamoto and Mariot Chanet -- offered a stirring demonstration of fashion ideas.


Burton Abrams, 70, A Corporate Lawyer Active in Charities
Burton M. Abrams, a well-known New York lawyer who specialized in corporate and securities law, died on Sept. 23 at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
Mr.
Abrams, who lived in Brick Town, N.J., was 70.
The cause of death was cancer, a nephew, Paul Lieberman of Middleton, N.J., said.


Continental Corp. to Sell Insurance Subsidiary
The Continental Corporation, an insurance company in the midst of rebuilding its financial strength, said yesterday that it was selling a profitable workers' compensation insurance subsidiary to the Fremont General Corporation for $250 million.
Continental is also on the verge of announcing an agreement to collect $200 million of additional capital from outside investors, financiers involved with the company said.


Book Notes
Booker Prize Winner
After the usual televised drama, complete with a panel of local literati providing sports-style commentary, the 1994 Booker Prize was announced in London yesterday.
And the winner was "How Late It Was, How Late," a pungent story about a down-on-his-luck laborer in Glasgow, by the Scottish novelist James Kelman.
Mr.
Kelman's novel, published by Secker &amp; Warburg, beat out five other nominees for the $31,500 prize, winning 3 to 2 after a long debate by the five judges.
The Booker is annually awarded to a novel written in English and published first by a British publisher.


Professor Wins Reinstatement After a Sex Harassment Charge
A recent Federal court order that reinstated a University of New Hampshire professor will help free other instructors speak openly in classroom lectures, without fear of being accused of verbal sexual harassment, lawyers for colleges and universities across the nation say.
The Sept. 16 order by Judge Shane Devine of Federal District Court in Concord, which is not likely to be appealed, is a boon to academic freedom, said the president of the National Association of College and University Attorneys, Lee Liggett.


T.W.A. Seeks to Reduce Debt in Revamping
Trans World Airlines proposed a sweeping financial restructuring yesterday, the latest step in its continuing struggle to flout predictions of its demise.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the nation's seventh-largest carrier suggested that its creditors exchange $800 million of the company's $1.8 billion in debt for new debt and equity to help lower interest payments by about $80 million a year.
The airline added that if the creditors did not agree to the proposal, it might file a prepackaged Chapter 11 bankruptcy plan.


Seeking a Way to Stop Hamburger Fatalities
Tonight's "Turning Point" retells the story of the appearance of E. coli bacteria in ground beef in California and Washington State in 1992 and '93.
"Deadly Meat: When a Hamburger Can Kill" focuses on the families of four children who died and of others who became seriously ill, in most cases after eating undercooked hamburgers from Jack-in-the-Box fast-food outlets.
In standard news magazine fashion, there are snapshots and home movies of the pretty children before they were stricken, followed by grim hospital scenes.
The reporter, Meredith Vieira, goes on to accuse the Federal Department of Agriculture of not doing enough to protect consumers from contaminated meat.
As journalists long ago discovered, nothing is more moving than the death of a child, and you can't help feeling for the parents who lost their children because a fast-food chain served hamburgers containing a lethal bacteria.
The step from sympathy to indignation at officialdom for not preventing the deaths is easy.
Too easy, perhaps, and tonight's expose, like most of its sort, never confronts the question of whether the costs of the tighter regulation demanded by parents and "meat safety activists" would be justified.


Incineration Worked At Toxic Waste Site
To the Editor:
To dramatize an otherwise valid point about the task of cleaning up hazardous waste, "Toxic Messes: Easier Made Than Undone" (The Week in Review, Oct. 2) omits facts about the successful incineration of drummed wastes at the abandoned Vertac Chemical Company in Jacksonville, Ark.


'Homicide' Is Back, in a Cloud of Tension
As an unconventional show that has already had two unsuccessful runs in prime time, the critically acclaimed crime drama "Homicide: Life on the Street," returning on Friday night at 10, needs all the help it can get.
But a dispute has arisen over whether NBC -- which broadcasts the show, and this year even owns it -- is giving it any help at all.
The film director Barry Levinson, who is a co-creator of the series and its executive producer, says NBC has already given up on "Homicide." Warren Littlefield, the president of NBC Entertainment, says the network is devoted to the show's success.


Not a Rosicrucian
To the Editor:
An Oct. 6 news article on the mass sect deaths in Switzerland and Canada says it was not clear whether sects led by Luc Jouret had any connection to the several groups that go under the name of Rosicrucians.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct 7
Sept 30
Oct 8
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.4
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.5
3.4
Gasoline stocks
212.0
212.0
210.4
Distillate stocks
144.9
141.8
128.4
Crude imports, daily
7.2
7.6
7.0
Product imports, daily
1.6
1.9
1.4
Crude stocks
328.6
332.5
330.9
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
92.3
93.9
92.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI URGES LONGER PRISON TERMS
State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, called for holding violent criminals in prison longer as the central element of his crime program for New York. 1.
NEW YORK CITY


Business Owners Fear Chaos at the Hands of Mobs When Aristide Returns
Up in the hills, where the air is sweet, the lawns are trimmed and life is lived in languor, they call him "the little monkey" and "the little jerk," and add that eight months of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide as President were enough to lay a road to civil war.
"Wait until the day of his arrival here and you will see scenes of people going crazy," said Olivier Nadal, a Haitian businessman of French descent whose family imports and exports food and operates in the shipping and banking industries.


BellSouth Plans China Joint Venture
The BellSouth Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed with a Chinese telecommunications company to set up cellular, wireless and long-distance telephone networks in two large cities in China.
Though few details were disclosed, the deal looks likely to give BellSouth a firm footing in one of the world's mostly hotly competitive markets, starting with Beijing and the nearby industrial city of Tianjin.


C.W. Post Professors Strike Over Classroom Teaching Load
The faculty at the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University went on strike today after contract talks collapsed over a union demand for a lighter teaching workload.
University officials said classes would still be conducted for the 7,000 graduate and undergraduate students, with the help of administrative personnel and nonunion adjunct professors, if necessary.


Men Whose Wives Work Earn Less, Studies Show
Working mothers often worry about the "mommy track," fearing that they will be consigned to lower-paid, less-prestigious jobs.
But their husbands, at least those who are managers or professionals, may face a penalty, too.
According to several recent studies, men from traditional families, in which the wives stay at home to care for their children, earn more and get higher raises than men from two-career families.


Pine Chip Gets the Rail
Pine Chip, the world's fastest trotter, who will be making the final start of his career, drew the rail yesterday for the $300,000 Cadillac Breeders' Crown Open Trot at Freehold Raceway Saturday.
He was installed as the 3-5 early favorite in the six-horse field.
The 4-year-old, who will be driven by the Hall of Famer John Campbell, set the mile mark of 1:51 in a time trial on Oct. 1 at the Red Mile in Lexington, Ky., eclipsing the record of 1:514/5 set by the mare Beat the Wheel.


Indurain Finds a '95 Route to His Liking
No Tours de France are easy but some are easier than others, which explains why Miguel Indurain was trying to restrain a smile today.
He had just seen the route for the next Tour and it appears to be tailored for him as he seeks to become the first rider to win the world's greatest bicycle race five successive years.


CHRONICLE
FRED WERTHEIMER announced yesterday that he was leaving Common Cause, the national organization that works on governmental ethics, after 24 years (including 14 as its president and chief executive).
"I've been thinking about this for a while," Mr.
Wertheimer, 55, said,"but we have been involved in a battle on campaign finance reform and I wanted to complete this round of trying to clean up the system in Washington."


Crown Hts. Judge Won't Step Down
A Federal judge denied a defense motion yesterday that he step down from the case of a teen-ager charged with violating the civil rights of a Hasidic scholar who was fatally stabbed during the 1991 racial violence in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
Judge David G. Trager of Federal District Court in Brooklyn gave no reason for the denial, saying he would state his reasons later.
Lawyers for the defendant, Lemrick Nelson Jr., 19, who is accused of inflicting at least one of the four stab wounds that killed Yankel Rosenbaum, had asked the judge to recuse himself.


Picked Apart and Picking On Each Other
Lawrence Taylor had just walked through the Giant locker room, wishing each player good luck before the team's game against Minnesota.
Then, on the night Taylor's No. 56 jersey would be retired and only minutes before the game, the defense held a players-only meeting.
It was the latest of several such meetings since New York lost last week to New Orleans, and the message from Erik Howard and others, several players said, was clear.
Stay together.
No finger-pointing.
No coming apart at the seams.
Then New York went out and was thrashed by 27-10.
As the game started to get out of hand, with Warren Moon moving the Vikings up and down the field at will, the message of staying together was quickly forgotten.


Peter W. Allport, 74; Led Ad Association
Peter W. Allport, former president of the Association of National Advertisers, died on Oct. 3 at the Royal South Hants Hospital in Southampton, England.
He was 74 and lived in Bronxville, N.Y.
He died after having a heart attack on the Queen Elizabeth 2 while on his way to France, said his wife, Margaret Nichols Allport.


Jets' Glenn Sidesteps Rookie Label With Veteran Moves
It was time for the rookie to look at some serious videos yesterday.
So Aaron Glenn returned "A Bronx Tale" to the rental store, and headed for the Jets' training camp complex in Hempstead, L.I.
"I've never seen Drew Bledsoe," Glenn admitted.
"All I know about him is what I read in the papers. He's thrown for 300 yards for five straight games."


Race for Governor: An Independent's View
CANDIDATE: B. Thomas Golisano.
PRODUCER: Jay Inc. of Rochester.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The alchemy of successful movie campaigns may offer lessons for mainstream marketing.
WHAT, then, is the true magic of the cinema?
A movie advertising campaign that works.
For the agencies that struggle to sell new films for the entertainment-industry mega-companies, the first hurdle is the newness factor.
"Each ad is for a brand-new product that may possibly succeed or fail in a single weekend," said Aubrey Balkind, chief executive of Frankfurt Balkind Partners, which has worked on the recent campaigns for "Forrest Gump," "City Slickers II" and "Wolf."
"There are so many uncertainties," said Mr.
Balkind, whose agency has $120 million in annual billings.
"In traditional advertising, you are following a blueprint like constructing a building, but in film advertising it's more like spinning the wheel of chance."


Is a Kiss Still a Kiss Or Will It Lead to More?
Suddenly, it seems, there's no getting away from Roseanne.
Last night she was exploited in the trashy Fox movie "Roseanne: An Unauthorized Biography." Tonight at 9 she stars in her own hit ABC series, "Roseanne." And then at 10:30, she pops up as a guest star on HBO's "Larry Sanders Show." All of which, oddly enough, only leaves Garry Shandling and his "Larry Sanders" repertory company looking better and more ingeniously subversive than ever.
As Larry, late-night talk-show host, Mr.
Shandling, who once subbed regularly for Johnny Carson, wanders with diabolical innocence through a world of jumpy neuroses and fragile egos, none more demanding than those of Larry himself.
Crises in recent weeks, complete with scattered eruptions of obscenities, have included the disintegrating marriage of Larry's sidekick, Hank (Jeffrey Tambor), who had his wedding on the show a year earlier.
Hank insisted that in his heart of hearts, he knew Larry would never touch his young, gorgeous wife.
"Not without your go-ahead," Larry assured him.


State Dept. Stops Free Speech at the Border
To the Editor:
Re "Among the Ruins of the Left, a Pillar Stands" (Mexico City Journal, Oct. 5):


Wine Talk
A SMALL but well-known New York restaurant, Montrachet, plans to have a rather special dinner on Jan. 11.
It will cost $750 a person.
Originally there were to be just 12 guests.
When every seat was quickly sold, the list was expanded to 18, then to 24.
As of yesterday, there were still a few places left.


U.S. Troops Take Over Government Buildings
American soldiers took over Haiti's National Palace and other government buildings today in preparation for the return of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide and his elected Government.
Crowds gathered and cheered as hundreds of troops in full combat gear marched onto the grounds of the National Palace and into several nearby ministries.
Many of the Haitians crowed like roosters, a symbol of Father Aristide's political movement.


Bush Campaigns for Son But Stays Out of the Issues
There were 500 people for lunch at $500 a head.
There were centerpieces in red, white and blue and a "Jeb for Governor" banner over the head table.
But the big draw for the Republican faithful here at the tony Design Center of the Americas and elsewhere across the state in the last two days was less Jeb Bush, the party's candidate for governor, than Jeb Bush's parents, former President George Bush and his wife, Barbara.


Commissioner Plays Hardball on Ice
Gary Bettman couldn't quite bring himself to say the "L" word.
Even after he announced the further postponement of the National Hockey League season yesterday, the vowels and consonants that make up the word "lockout" never passed through his lips.
"Draw your own conclusion," the National Hockey League commissioner finally said.
"Absolutely."


In Twist, One Democrat Is Gaining on a Republican Senator
This tiny state, which some here joke has barely enough voters to fill a Chicago precinct, could play a pivotal role next month in determining the balance of power in the Senate.
What is most unusual, however, is that contrary to the national trend in this volatile election year, it is the Republican incumbent who may be vulnerable.
Senator William V. Roth Jr., 73, is seeking a fifth term and is being challenged by State Attorney General Charles M. Oberly 3d, 47.
And with less than a month before the Nov. 8 election, polls show Mr.
Roth ahead but with Mr.
Oberly apparently gaining.


Football Bedfellows: If Notre Dame Loses, NBC and ABC Do, Too
Each year, it seems, Notre Dame is at the center of televised college football.
It is the best TV attraction, the only university with its own deal, for six home games on NBC.
Whether the Fighting Irish's games are on ABC or NBC, the hope at the network end is that Lou Holtz's team will be ever in the hunt for a national championship.
But last week, when Notre Dame was thrashed, 30-11, by Boston College on ABC, its title hopes were virtually squashed.
When it comes to Notre Dame, what's good for the Irish is good for both ABC and NBC, despite an NBC deal that does not help ABC's ratings.


3 Economists Share a Prize for Insights Into How Rivalries Function; John C. Harsanyi
Born May 29, 1920, in Budapest, John C. Harsanyi has spent virtually his entire career at the Haas School of Business at the University of California at Berkeley.
He was appointed a visiting professor there in 1964 and a professor in 1965.
A leading scholar of game theory, ethics and social choice, Dr.
Harsanyi is Flood Research Professor in Business Administration, emeritus, and professor of economics, emeritus, at Berkeley.


Chrysler Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Graf Still Sidelined With Back Trouble
STEFFI GRAF's aching back has forced her out of another tournament.
The world's top-ranked woman player yesterday pulled out of next week's Brighton International, a tournament in England that she has won six times.


At Ernst &amp; Young, Dismissal Shock
When telephones rang Sunday night in the homes of employees in the New York City area with a future in Ernst &amp; Young's legal department, they were told to report in the morning to the Inter-Continental Hotel in Manhattan.
But of Ernst &amp; Young's 65 lawyers in New York and elsewhere, 37 were told to report to their offices.
The reason: they were about to be dismissed.


Market Place; Ethan Allen revamps its furniture, and its stock outlook.
PERHAPS one of the best-known names in American home furnishings is Ethan Allen Interiors.
The company's colonial-style furniture has graced middle-class homes for decades.
But after a buyout that brought new management, Ethan Allen has an entirely new design style -- hip, contemporary and fresh -- and that also describes its new investment outlook.
Ethan Allen went public in March 1993 at $18 a share and climbed steadily to a high of $32 in February.
Since then, the stock has dropped and recently has been trading between $22 and $24, closing yesterday down 12.5 cents, to $21.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.
The price slid as rising interest rates cooled investors' ardor on all home-furnishings stocks on the theory that a slowing economy and rising rates make people less inclined to buy furniture or build new homes.


Core Industries(CRI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Chiquita Brands International
Shares of Chiquita Brands International have fallen sharply since reaching a six-month high of $17 on Sept. 22, though it edged up slightly yesterday.
On Monday, the produce company said it expected to report a loss for the third quarter.


56 Arrested in Raid Against Gambling Ring
From an elegant Bronx apartment with a view of the Palisades and a cache of money and jewels, to a Queens butcher shop with 14 hidden slot machines, the police raided 32 locations in three boroughs yesterday and arrested 56 people who they said were connected to perhaps the largest numbers ring in the city.
The target of the raids was a three-decade-old gambling ring controlled by Jose Miguel Battle Sr., a former Cuban police officer who fled the United States in 1992 but continues to run his operation from South America, investigators said.


A Few Miles Offshore, Thousands of Marines and Sailors Wait for Their Call
The ammunition boxes are lashed to trucks and jeeps, the grenade launchers stand oiled and mounted and the amphibious landing craft sit ready to be disgorged from the bowels of this vessel into the placid, emerald-green waters.
American forces can throw an array of sophisticated bombs, artillery shells and missiles at the Iraqi troops along Kuwait's border from fighter planes, ground batteries and ships in the region.
But the key ingredient in the American plan, if fighting erupts, are the 2,000 marines and 2,000 sailors who are anchored a few miles off Kuwait City.


'Wonderful Town' to Open
Kay McClelland, Crista Moore and Richard Muenz are to be the leads in the New York City Opera production of Leonard Bernstein's "Wonderful Town," to open on Nov. 8 at the New York State Theater for a two-week run.
The musical is to be directed by Richard Sabellico.
Tickets are $15 to $73.
Information: (212) 870-5570.


A Changing Ethiopia Deserves Support
To the Editor:
Donald N. Levine's concern for human rights in Ethiopia (letter, Oct. 3) is commendable, but there is a danger in not relating the whole context.
Amhara rule in Ethiopia has been overtaken by events, just as rule by descendants of the Boers and British has in South Africa.


Correction: Leg of Lamb The Morley Safer Way
A recipe for grilled leg of lamb last Wednesday with an article about the "60 Minutes" correspondent Morley Safer and a lunch he prepared omitted red wine from the marinade.
1. Lay lamb out flat, and sprinkle with salt and pepper on all sides.
2.
Put oil in baking dish large enough to hold lamb.
Add lamb, and sprinkle on both sides with mustard seeds, cumin, garlic, thyme, fennel seeds, rosemary, bay leaves, lemon juice and red wine.
Turn and rub lamb so it is evenly coated with the ingredients.
Marinate in a cool place for 1 or 2 hours, or in a refrigerator up to 6 hours.
If lamb is refrigerated, let it return to room temperature before cooking.
3. Preheat a charcoal grill or oven broiler.
4.
Remove lamb from marinade and reserve marinade.
If a grill is used, put lamb flat on grill.
If broiler is used, place lamb under broiler 4 to 5 inches from heat.
Cook lamb uncovered on grill or under broiler about 15 minutes.
Turn and cook 10 to 15 minutes on second side.
For medium or well-done meat, cook longer.
5.
Meanwhile, in a baking pan large enough to hold lamb, bring reserved marinade to a boil, stirring until the liquid is reduced by half.
Remove from heat, and swirl in butter and parsley.
Transfer lamb to marinade pan, cover loosely with foil and keep warm.
Let meat rest 10 to 15 minutes before serving.
Slice thinly and serve with pan gravy.
Yield: 6 to 8 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 400 calories, 25 grams fat, 130 milligrams cholesterol, 130 milligrams sodium (before optional salting), 40 grams protein, 5 grams carbohydrate.


In Copyright Fight, Intel Wins Round
The Intel Corporation has won a round in a long-running copyright fight with Advanced Micro Devices Inc.
Intel said today that a Federal judge had ruled that Advanced Micro did not have a license to copy or distribute a portion of Intel's software that is commonly included in chips for the purpose of debugging computer systems.
The ruling, by Judge Patricia Trumbull of the United States District Court in San Jose, Calif., is a side issue in two of the three suits currently pending between Advanced Micro and Intel.
Advanced Micro's primary business is selling "clones" -- or copies -- of Intel's industry dominant 486 and 386 microprocessors.
The right of Advanced Micro to make copies, under a previous license from Intel, and accusations that the company violated Intel copyrights, are the basis of the suits.


No Headline
"I wouldn't call it a panic, but just a very cruel reality. It's an extraordinary change in the market situation that will have an effect on every Russian citizen." ALEKSEI A. OBOZINTSEV, a banker in Moscow, describing the slide of the ruble.  [ A6:3. ]


Topics of The Times; Taxing Innovation
Build a better mousetrap and the world will beat a path to your door?
Maybe once, but no longer.
Build a better mousetrap today, and you had better scramble for $365 to pay for the patent, lest someone pirate the invention and earn a fortune in your stead.
As Sabra Chartrand of The Times reports, patent application fees are being increased from $710 to $730 for large companies, and from $355 to $365 for small companies and individuals.
The increase for individuals would not seem so injurious if the fee were not already high.
The increase is also a hidden tax on innovation.


The Man Who Rendered Jesus For the Age of Duplication
With the race for best-known artist of the century nearly over, Pablo Picasso and Andy Warhol are running neck and neck, with Andrew Wyeth a respectable third.
But when the official tally is made, all three are likely to be buried in a landslide vote for Warner E. Sallman.
Warner Sallman?


Giving Poland What It Needs
The Clinton Administration is deciding whether to admit Poland and other countries in Eastern Europe to NATO, which is tantamount to committing U.S. troops to their defense.
At a recent meeting of NATO ministers, Volker Ruhe of Germany began a drive to broaden membership in the alliance, setting off active discussion in Washington.
There are excellent reasons such a commitment should not be made now.
Never mind that Eastern Europe's armies are still largely Soviet-trained and -equipped and not ready to join NATO.
Enlarging NATO would oblige the U.S. to defend countries mainly threatened by internal disunity and their own regional rivalries, not Russian resurgence.
Furthermore, expanding NATO now could jeopardize the future of Boris Yeltsin and fellow reformers in Russia, increasing Eastern European insecurity.
Why run this risk when NATO membership does not meet Poland's most immediate need, which is political reassurance rather than a military alliance?


Battle of Unbeatens Is a One-Team Game This N.F.L. Season
This is what you need to know about Bobby Ross.
He is in his third season as the San Diego Chargers' head coach.
He is driving to Jack Murphy Stadium here for a game.
He gets to the parking entrance.
An attendant asks him to pay $5 for the parking fee.
The attendant does not know who Ross is.
Ross doesn't want to make a fuss.
He pays the fee.


Coffee, Tea Or Ouch?
THE conventional wisdom used to be that a steaming-hot cup of coffee was preferable to a tepid one.
But starting the day with a hot cup of coffee -- or tea -- may be hazardous to your health.
In August, a jury in Albuquerque, N.M., awarded $2.9 million to Stella Liebeck, 81, who was burned by a cup of McDonald's coffee that she spilled in her lap.
The verdict was reduced to $640,000 last month by a state District Court judge, and now both sides are appealing.


Life Studies


Runners Far Ahead In Aging Healthfully
ACTIVE Americans do not wear out, but sedentary ones are likely to rust out, according to the findings of an eight-year study of nearly 800 people 50 and over.
As they age, the study showed, those who regularly engage in vigorous aerobic exercise like running are much less likely to develop life-inhibiting disabilities.
The study, conducted by a research team from Stanford University and published in the current issue of Annals of Internal Medicine, followed the health of 451 members of a runners' club and 330 nonrunners living in the same community.
All participants were 50 to 72 when the study began.


Supreme Court Roundup; A Cross High Above San Diego Is Dealt Another Setback
The Supreme Court declined today to review a lower court's ruling that a 43-foot cross, a San Diego landmark that sits on the highest point of the city, cannot remain on public land.
Without comment, the Justices turned down the city's appeal, which defended the cross as a historic property that had the secular purpose of honoring San Diego's war veterans.


Katzenberg to Form Studio With Geffen and Spielberg
Jeffrey Katzenberg, a former top executive at the Walt Disney Company, is joining forces with the filmmaker Steven Spielberg and the Hollywood billionaire David Geffen to form a major movie studio, film industry executives said tonight.
Mr.
Katzenberg is set to make the announcement of the new studio on Wednesday, joined by Mr.
Spielberg and Mr.
Geffen.


Park Electrochemical Corp.(PKE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Staying Alert to the Mysterious 'Gulf War' Syndrome
The Defense Department is sending monitors with the troops going to the Persian Gulf to watch for symptoms of an unexplained illness that afflicted thousands of troops after the war there in 1991.
The military medical specialists will monitor for toxins, investigate suspicious incidents and document all medical treatment of soldiers, said a Pentagon spokesman, Lieut.
Col.
Doug Hart.


Head of U.N. Inspection Team Says Baghdad Threatens Weapons-Monitoring Effort
The head of a United Nations team monitoring Iraq's weapons programs said today that threats to inspectors and Iraqi troop movements on the Kuwait border raised new questions about Baghdad's trustworthiness just as the monitoring system was beginning to operate.
Rolf Ekeus, the head of a special commission on Iraqi compliance with a United Nations order to halt production of weapons of mass destruction, released a largely favorable report today on the installation of an inspection system that could have cleared the way for the Security Council to consider lifting sanctions against Iraq.
Mr.
Ekeus will formally present the report to the Security Council on Thursday.


Seagate Technology Inc.(SGAT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chrysler Profits Rise 54% in Third Quarter
Underscoring the fervor for light trucks and mini-vans in the United States, the Chrysler Corporation reported today that it earned a record $651 million in the three months ending Sept. 30, up nearly 54 percent from last year's record of $423 million.
The earnings, of $1.76 a share, came on record third-quarter revenues of $11.66 billion, up 20 percent from last year's $9.71 billion.


CPC Intl(CPC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Argonaut Group Inc.(AGII,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bucks Ignore Robinson and Sign Mobley
Unwilling to meet a small forward's demand for $100 million, the Milwaukee Bucks signed a big center for considerably less yesterday, coming to terms with ERIC MOBLEY on a four-year contract worth $4.64 million, according to his agent, DONALD WALTON.
Mobley, a 6-foot-11-inch, 250-pound Bronx native who starred for Salesian High School in New Rochelle, N.Y., before going to Pitt, was the second of the Bucks' two first-round draft choices and the 18th selection over all.


Ministers Endorse Cuomo in His Bid for 4th Term
A group of 50 ministers representing the most prominent black churches in New York City endorsed Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo for re-election yesterday, but only after extracting a promise from Mr.
Cuomo to meet with them again after Election Day to discuss appointing more blacks to senior posts, and other concerns.
The endorsement came after an unusual four-hour session at the New York Theological Seminary in Manhattan, a session organized last week after the ministers met to endorse State Comptroller H. Carl McCall but could not produce a consensus on whether to support a candidate for Governor.
Mr.
Cuomo and his Republican rival, State Senator George E. Pataki, each answered questions privately for about an hour yesterday, missing each other by a few minutes as Mr.
Pataki left and the Governor went in.


Judge Complains About Test Delays in Simpson Case
Judge Lance A. Ito suggested today that prosecutors in the O. J. Simpson murder case had taken indefensibly long to test crucial blood samples, including blood taken from the Ford Bronco and from a glove retrieved outside his home, that he might exclude the evidence.
His impatience and incredulity evident, Judge Ito concurred with complaints from Mr.
Simpson's lawyers that numerous items -- many of them central to the case -- were turned over to laboratories for DNA testing weeks after they had been collected by police investigators.
Some tests are still under way, meaning that results may not be available until just before testimony begins, probably early next month.


Name: Biakabutuka; Game: Touchdowns
Unfazed by the myths and legends of this game in his adopted country, and undaunted by its complexities, Tshimanga Biakabutuka discusses football at the University of Michigan the way he can run with one.
He cuts past the confusion and heads directly into the clear.
Before his rapid progress was accelerated by the preseason shoulder injury of Tyrone Wheatley, Biakabutuka had not planned on becoming such an important part of Michigan's attempt to return to the Rose Bowl.
His route from Zaire to Montreal was hardly the path of a big-time prospect, particularly since he was not interested when first approached by a high school coach.


3 Economists Share a Prize for Insights Into How Rivalries Function; Reinhard Selten
Reinhard Selten says that he plays no sports, except perhaps hiking, "if one can say that is a sport."
He lives outside Bonn and says he hikes deep into the hills for three to five hours each Saturday.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Darryl Stanley, a United States marine officer checking his boots as he prepared to leave for the Persian Gulf, misstated his rank in some editions.
The Marine rank is lieutenant colonel, not lieutenant commander.


Hard Work in Off Season Finds Knicks' Harper in Championship Form
Derek Harper reported to Knicks training camp in better shape than anyone else.
So said Pat Riley, who puts great importance on such things.
For Harper to be in better shape than Charles Oakley, or Anthony Mason, or John Starks, speaks volumes about how seriously Harper takes his profession.
It also indicates how badly Harper wants to win a championship.
For Harper, who turns 33 on Thursday, time is running out.


Sports of The Times; Missionary Of New York Basketball
AS a basketball coach, a profession where too many project crass, Frank McGuire was class.
He knew how to win.
More important, he knew how to lose and how to act.
One of 13 children of a New York policeman, he was a missionary for "New York basketball," a dapper dresser in blue double-breasted suits and black alligator shoes long before Pat Riley discovered Armani fashions.
He didn't argue with referees.
He advised them.
When he died yesterday at age 80 in his home in Columbia, S.C., two years after a severe stroke, a little air went out of all the basketballs in all the gyms and all the playgrounds.


World News Briefs; NATO to Meet with U.N. Over Role in Bosnia
NATO officials will meet here this week with representatives of Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to try to resolve differences over how to make NATO's role in Bosnia and Herzegovina more effective.
The discussions come as the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, has threatened to ask United Nations forces to leave Serb-held areas.
United Nations officials said today that if Dr.
Karadzic made that demand on Wednesday as he has warned he might, the Secretary General would refer questions about the future of the peacekeeping force to the Security Council.


A King and His Compatriots: Creepy, Creepier and Creepiest
Halloween may still be weeks away, but the celebration of the scary season has already begun in downtown Hartford.
The old G. Fox department store building on Main Street has been converted into Haunted Happenings, promisingly billed as Connecticut's largest spook house.
And at the Hartford Stage Company on nearby Church Street, there's another ghoulish divertissement, for those who prefer their gore and goblins mixed with blank verse and English history.
It is called "Richard III."
As conceived by Mark Lamos, the company's artistic director, this production features the gifted Richard Thomas working hard to find the Freddy Krueger in Shakespeare's meanest monarch.
This is no icy, insinuating Machiavelli of a King, in the manner of Laurence Olivier or, more recently, Ian McKellen.
No, Mr.
Thomas wears his psychosis very visibly on his back, which has as exaggeratedly convex a hump as you're ever likely to see.


Station Renovation, Step by Step


COMPANY BRIEFS
ABC RAIL PRODUCTS CORP., Chicago, has filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell one million common shares owned by KARC Acquisition Co., an affiliate of Kohlberg &amp; Co., Mount Kisco, N.Y.
CHESAPEAKE CORP., Richmond, , a paper and packaging concern, said it planned to spend $48 million to expand two paper plants.


Baram Journal; Scene: A Purist Kibbutz. Topic: Bringing Up Baby.
Elam Minerbo does not realize it -- he is only 3 years old, after all -- but he has painfully divided this kibbutz on Israel's border with Lebanon.
The question is where should he and Baram's 160 other children sleep at night.


Ban on Cursing Approved
The Borough Councxil, after a boisterous public meeting attended by about 150 people, approved an ordinance tonight that bans cursing in public.
The measure, which forbids "profane, vulgar or indecent language," in public, will become law after it is advertised in a local paper.
Violators could be fined up to $500 and be sentenced up to 90 days in jail.


Borden and Grey Part On Two Accounts
Borden Inc. and Grey Advertising Inc. said yesterday that they had agreed to part ways on the company's cheese and dairy products accounts, which had been consolidated at Grey in November 1992.
Billings were not disclosed.
Borden said it had selected Sive/ Young &amp; Rubicam in Cincinnati to handle the cheese account without a formal review.
Sive/Y.&amp; R. already handles several Borden brands like Cremora coffee creamer.
Competitive Media Reporting, a New York company that tracks ad spending, estimated spending for Borden's cheeses at $4 million in 1993.


RESULTS PLUS
ASIAN GAMES  Syrian Is Top Athlete  Although the Chinese were expected to win the major share of women's track and field events, Sheaa Ghada of Syria earned the title of best all-round athlete by winning the seven-event heptathlon at the Asian Games yesterday in Hiroshima, Japan.
China took only one of the day's four women's track events, and one of the three men's.
China seized eight gold medals for the day, with three each in yachting and shooting in addition to two in track and field to bring its total to 100.
With five days of competition remaining, China leads in total medals with 188, followed by Japan at 136.
As expected, China won the women's 3,000 meters.
Zhang Linli's time of 8 minutes 52.97 seconds broke the games record of 8:57.12.
Harumi Hiroyama of Japan failed in the homestretch to catch Zhang and took the silver in 8:53.74.
Olga Chichigina of Kazakhstan edged two Chinese, Zhou Hongyang and Zhang Yu, in the 100-meter hurdles.
The times were 12.80 seconds, 12.87 and 12.90.
In the heptathlon, Ghada piled up 6,360 points, beating the games record of 6,231.
Zhang Xiaohui of China was second with 5,800.
China's men's victory came in the long jump by Huang Geng with a leap of 27 feet 4 1/2 inches. (AP)
TENNIS  Hingis Routs Sukova  Martina Hingis, the 14-year-old tennis prodigy, began her second pro tournament yesterday at Filderstadt, Germany, by routing Helena Sukova, an opponent more than twice her age, in two quick sets.
Hingis needed only 45 minutes to trounce the 29-year-old Sukova by 6-2, 6-1 and reach the second round of the Porsche Grand Prix.
She next faces Christina Singer, a wild-card entry who upset fourth-seeded Gabriela Sabatini, 3-6, 7-5, 6-1. (AP)
Ivanisevic Overcomes Qualifier: Top-seeded Goran Ivanisevic had to battle through a tie breaker for a second-round victory in the $1 million Seiko Super tournament yesterday in Tokyo.
Ivanisevic beat a qualifier, Joshua Eagle of Australia by 7-6 (7-4), 6-1.
Fourth-seeded Todd Martin sprayed his shots in the first set and lost it to Nicklas Kulti of Sweden, 3-6.
Martin then won the last two sets by 6-2, 6-2.
Stefan Edberg, seeded third, defeated Alexander Mronz of Germany, 6-1, 7-5. (AP)


Real Estate
SLEEK stainless steel traffic signals and street lights being installed along Post Oak Boulevard are the first visible signs of an $11 million face lift under way in the affluent Houston neighborhood surrounding the Galleria, a major retail, hotel and office development.
Owners of commercial property in the district, who are being taxed to pay for the project, have hopes of giving the area, known as Uptown Houston, a strong national identity after the fashion of Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills, Calif.
Another goal is to attract tenants to the area, which is also known as Houston's "Second Downtown," six miles west of the central business district.
Five vacant office buildings in the neighborhood are glaring reminders of the city's overbuilt office market.


Lutece, a Bastion of Classic French Cuisine, Is Sold
Lutece, the world-renowned Manhattan restaurant that has epitomized classic French cuisine for more than 30 years, was sold yesterday by its chef and owner, Andre Soltner, to a company that primarily owns theme restaurants.
Mr.
Soltner, 62, said that under the terms of the sale to the Ark Restaurants Corporation, which left him with a minority interest, he and his staff of 42 would remain, indefinitely if they choose.


Graves Is Out 2 Months Following Back Surgery
Even if the National Hockey League season finally gets under way, Adam Graves won't be available to the Rangers until at least December.
Graves, the star left wing of the team's top line, underwent surgery yesterday for removal of a herniated disk in his lower back.
The operation was performed in Los Angeles by Dr.
Robert Watkins.
Graves will spend three nights in the hospital and can't travel for 7 to 10 days, according to Colin Campbell, coach of the Rangers.


Personal Health; No, the food you eat will not be radioactive.
THE arguments against food irradiation have a familiar ring.
At the turn of the century, people opposed to another new process to safeguard food voiced similar complaints, arguing:
This process is an excuse for distributing a dirty product.
Better controls and inspection are what is needed.


Both Sides Agree: It's Hard to Do Business Without Rules
Major league players, general managers -- the people charged with building new rosters and new working relationships every off season -- probably stopped looking for a miraculous end to the two-month-old players strike long ago.
Now, they look for a clue as to how to conduct business and restore some semblance of order in a sport that has ground to a halt.
Business as usual has stopped being conducted, devastating to a sport whose off season is filled with time-honored patterns, dates, rules and expectations.
Uncertainty, pervasive and real, now courses through the game.


Profit News Helps Dow Rise 55.51
A flurry of strong third-quarter earnings reports helped propel the stock market to its largest gain in a month.
With corporate leaders like Chrysler, Motorola and Pepsico announcing better-than-expected profits, the Dow Jones industrial average scored its third consecutive double-digit gain, surging 55.51 points.
Rising bond prices again allowed the stock market to move higher on its own steam.
On the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond, the yield, which moves in the opposite direction from price, fell to 7.86 percent yesterday from 7.90 on Friday.  [ Page D21. ]


Some in G.O.P. Raise Democrat's Lesbianism as Issue
From the moment Karen S. Burstein won the Democratic primary for state attorney general, the Republican candidate, Dennis C. Vacco, has said publicly that her homosexuality should not be a campaign issue.
But three of his most prominent supporters have been working in recent weeks to make it one.
The three have used various public settings to remind voters that Ms.
Burstein is a lesbian, which they say puts her out of touch with the average voter.
And today -- after the comments of one of them, Guy V. Molinari, triggered a campaign contretemps -- all three vowed to continue their efforts.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about a rise in foreign investment in Russia misstated the affiliation of Eugene K. Lawson.
He is president of the U.S.-Russia Business Council, not the Council for Trade and Economic Cooperation.


First Empire State Corp.(FES,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article in Science Times yesterday about the renaming of chemical elements misidentified the scientist for whom mendelevium is named.
It is the Russian chemist Dmitri I. Mendeleyev, not the geneticist Gregor Mendel.


Hurry Up, Knicks: N.H.L. Season Nowhere In Sight
The National Hockey League commissioner, echoing the words and positions of management in the two-month-old baseball strike, called off the start of the season yesterday for the second time and insured the continued shutdown of two of the four major professional sports leagues.
In extending the owners' lockout of their players, Gary Bettman said the N.H.L.
Board of Governors decided unanimously not to open the season until the two sides have a new collective bargaining agreement.
That agreement, the commissioner said, "has to address the issues and concerns we have been expressing."


First Virginia Banks Inc.(FVB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Judgments In a Report About Espy
The White House issued its ethics report today on Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy, who is resigning to defend himself against a special counsel's investigation, but the review reached no judgment on Mr.
Espy's conduct and offered no recommendations for remedial or disciplinary action against him.
A senior White House official explained the report by saying that no further action was warranted because the Agriculture Secretary announced last week that he was resigning at the end of the year and had reimbursed the Government for some personal expenses.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Announced that Tom Bolton, pitcher, refused minor league assignment and elected to become a free agent.


Low-Fat Variation On a Pizza Theme
A RECENT analysis of pizza slices for The New York Times, by Certified Analytical Group, proved pizzas have lots of fat and calories.
A letter in response said pizzas in Italy have little cheese and a variety of toppings.
It inspired this dish, to be served with honey-mustard salad.
Pizza Fantasy
1 pound new potatoes  Nonstick pan spray  12 ounces whole red or yellow peppers, or 11 ounces ready-cut (about 3 cups)  1 tablespoon olive oil  8 ounces whole zucchini, or 7 ounces ready-cut (about 1 1/3 cups)  6 ounces whole mushrooms, or 5 ounces ready-cut (2 cups)  4 7-to-8-inch flour tortillas (the no-oil variety, if possible)  10 medium imported olives  6 ounces cooked peeled shrimp  1/8 teaspoon salt  1 ounce Parmigiano Reggiano ( 1/3 cup grated).
1.  Prepare stove-top grill; turn oven to 450 degrees.
2.
Scrub and slice potatoes thin (less than 1/4-inch).
Spray on both sides with nonstick pan spray, and grill until brown on both sides.
3.  Wash, trim, seed and slice whole peppers.
4.
Heat a large nonstick pan until very hot.
Reduce heat to medium-high; add oil and saute peppers until soft.
5.  Meanwhile wash, trim and slice whole zucchini, and add.
6.  Wash, trim and slice whole mushrooms, and add. Cook until vegetables have softened.
7.
Wrap two tortillas in aluminum foil, and heat in oven or toaster oven for 3 to 5 minutes.
8.
Pit olives and stir into vegetables along with the shrimp and the grilled potatoes.
Add salt.
9.  Grate cheese.
10.  Arrange half of the topping on two hot tortillas. Sprinkle with half the cheese.
11.
Heat remaining two tortillas while eating the first two, and add the rest of the topping.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 745 calories, 20 grams fat, 140 milligrams cholesterol, 810 milligrams sodium, 40 grams protein, 105 grams carbohydrate.
Honey-Mustard Salad
3 ounces assorted greens  1 tablespoon raspberry vinegar  1 teaspoon honey mustard.
1.Wash and dry greens.
2.  Mix vinegar and mustard in serving bowl. Toss with greens.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 15 calories, 0 grams fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 35 milligrams sodium, 1 gram protein, 3 grams carbohydrate.
Game Plan
Prepare pizza through
Step 7.  Make salad.  Finish pizza.


Topics of The Times; Palms Down
Eternal life is one feature of Federal programs we have come to expect.
So it was a shock last week when a consortium of semiconductor companies volunteered to give up a $90 million-a-year Federal subsidy.
Sematech, whose members include I.B.M., Intel and Motorola, was created in 1987 to resurrect U.S. production of semiconductors by underwriting research on manufacturing.
Under the program, American companies have surged from near-extinction to world leaders.
Maybe Sematech did not cause the U.S. resurgence, but no one could prove it did not.
Its future seemed assured.
Even so, the consortium called a halt -- on the disarming principle that the subsidy was not needed anymore.
Sematech will continue, but without taxpayer money.


Nebraska's Frazier Finally Leaves Hospital
Nebraska quarterback TOMMIE FRAZIER left the hospital yesterday and was resting at his apartment in Lincoln, a school spokeswoman said.
Frazier had surgery to relieve the cause of recurring blood clots in his right calf, which put him in the hospital twice.
Nebraska officials have said he probably is out for the season. (AP)


As U.N. Debates Sanctions, Iraqi Families Struggle to Get By


Gap Narrowing for Poor School Districts, Study Finds
In the first detailed academic analysis of New Jersey's controversial four-year-old effort to funnel millions of dollars to poor school districts to narrow the gap with wealthier ones, a group of independent researchers has concluded that the money has been well spent.
"The much-maligned law really did make a difference for poor, urban school districts, without hurting wealthy ones," said one of the researchers, William A. Firestone, a professor at the Rutgers Graduate School of Education.


Food Notes
Pet Waters
Doubts about the quality of tap water have spurred sales of bottled water in this country.
And evidently those concerns are not only about human consumption.
A telephone study conducted this spring among 1,814 pet owners in the United States determined that 40 percent of them were concerned about giving tap water to their dogs and cats.
Enter the Original Pet Drink Company in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., which is introducing liter bottles of Thirsty Dog and Thirsty Cat, bottled water for pets.
Both are made of lightly carbonated purified water bolstered with vitamins and flavorings: Crispy Beef for dogs (slightly sweet) and Tangy Fish for cats (a bit fishy).


Guy Molinari, From the Gutter
Complaining that the Republican candidate for State Attorney General was "too much of a gentleman" to bring it up, Guy Molinari, the Staten Island Borough President, did bring it up.
Karen Burstein, the Democratic candidate, is a lesbian, he said at a Columbus Day meeting of a police group, and for that reason not fit for the office.
Mr.
Molinari, who is also New York City chairman of George Pataki's Republican campaign for governor, is half right on the subject.
He is right to characterize himself as less of a gentleman than the Republican candidate, Dennis Vacco of Buffalo.
He is contemptibly wrong to quarrel with Mr.
Vacco's position that sexual orientation has no relevance to the job's qualifications.


INSIDE
Sexual Orientation as Issue
Some backers of the Republican Attorney General candidate in New York see an issue in the fact that his opponent is a lesbian.
Page B4.
A New Hollywood Marquee
The former Disney executive Jeffrey Katzenberg is expected to join Steven Spielberg and David Geffen to form a movie studio.
Page D1.
No Sign of Life for Hockey
The National Hockey League called off the start of the season for the second time in its dispute with players over a labor contract.
Page B9.
Lutece Is Sold
Andre Soltner, the chef and owner, sold his renowned Manhattan restaurant to a company that primarily owns theme restaurants.
Page B1.


The Streets Are Paved With Potholes; In the Inner-City Economy, Flat-Tire Shops Fill a Void
For every espresso bar that percolates on the Upper West Side and every fancy boutique that blossoms in SoHo, there is a greasy storefront operation in one of New York City's poorer neighborhoods that solicits business with a simple sign announcing: "Flat Fix."
Just as cafes and boutiques have sprouted in Manhattan's disposable-income districts, these shops where drivers with a flat tire can stop for a quick, cheap patch or an inexpensive used tire have multiplied in areas where money is short, tires are old, roads are rough and immigrant entrepreneurs abound.
They prosper in neighborhoods where service stations have been replaced by gas stations whose attendants only take cash through bulletproof glass.


Men's Wearhouse Picks Asher/Gould
The Men's Wearhouse Inc., a discount retailer of tailored men's clothing in Fremont, Calif., said yesterday that it had named Asher/ Gould Advertising Inc. in Los Angeles to handle the creative portion of its account, which had been at Hoffman/Lewis in San Francisco for the last two years.
Billings were estimated to exceed $20 million.
Asher/ Gould was assigned the creative portion without a formal review; the media portion continues at MJA Advertising in New York, which has handled it for the last 19 years.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Walking past the corner of Lexington Avenue and Gramercy Park North, I came upon what appeared to be a junior high school or high school class on a tour of the park, guided by their teacher.
Pencils and notebooks in hand, the well-scrubbed, attentive class was earnestly taking down his pearls of wisdom.
"Look across the park at that white building," he said.
"That's the site of the oldest passenger elevator in New York City."


Sears Is Said To Seek Site In Herald Sq.
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, which has offered its wares almost everywhere but Manhattan, now wants a home on Herald Square.
According to people familiar with the negotiations, the nation's No. 2 department store chain has been furiously investigating the legal, demographic and financial aspects of taking over the site of the Abraham &amp; Straus store between 32d and 33d Streets on Avenue of the Americas.
The location is the most prominent of the six stores in the metropolitan region that Federated Department Stores Inc. has said it would like to sell as part of its planned merger with R. H. Macy &amp; Company.


Barton A. Cummings, 80, Leader Of Major Advertising Concerns
Barton A. Cummings, who headed one of the United States' largest agencies, Compton Advertising, before becoming chairman emeritus of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide, died on Sunday at his home in Princeton, N.J.
He was 80.
The cause was heart and lung disease, said his daughter, Ann Iverson.


3 Economists Share a Prize for Insights Into How Rivalries Function; John F. Nash
John F. Nash, by most accounts the rock on which the mathematics of game theory was built, was born in Bluefield, W. Va., in 1928.
He went to college at the Carnegie Institute of Technology, now Carnegie-Mellon University, in Pittsburgh, switching from chemical engineering to mathematics after his freshman year in 1945.
His ascent into the academic elite was rapid.
After receiving both a bachelor's and master's degree from Carnegie in 1948, he completed a Ph.D. in mathematics at Princeton University in just two more years.
His Ph.D. thesis, "Noncooperative Games," which was published in the journal Annals of Mathematics, laid out the framework for much of modern game theory.


Treasury Issues Rise; Bill Rates Are Mixed
Prices of Treasury securities rose yesterday, with much of the activity coming early in the session on buying left over from Friday's rally, which was ignited by a weaker-than-expected employment number.
With no major economic reports due until tomorrow and Friday, when the Government reports on producer and consumer prices, the market managed to find some footing to mount what some market participants called an old-fashioned bear market rally.


Reversing Gulf War Stand, King Hussein Condemns Iraq
In a sharp break from his support of Iraq in the Persian Gulf war, King Hussein of Jordan today condemned Saddam Hussein's aggressive moves toward Kuwait and tacitly backed possible Western military moves to punish the Iraqi leader.
At a joint news conference with Secretary of State Warren Christopher, King Hussein used far more stinging language than he had previously in criticizing the Iraqi leader, saying he "would like to express a very deep sadness and disappointment and anger" over the troop movements in southern Iraq.


Biogen Test Fails to Help Shares
Shares of Biogen Inc. fell sharply again today after the company's presentation of data on its proposed drug for multiple sclerosis at a conference here on Monday.
Shares in the Chiron Corporation, which currently produces a similar drug, soared.
In Nasdaq trading, Biogen's stock fell $2 a share, to $50, after dropping $2.75 on Monday.
Chiron shares jumped $4 today, to $65.


Now Let Jewish Women Seeking Divorce Find Religious Justice
To the Editor:
I am a director of Agunah Inc., an organization created and directed by Orthodox Jewish women to assist women chained to dead marriages because their husbands refuse to grant them a Jewish divorce, or "get." It is a relief that the civil courts of New York are now protecting women who have been doubly abused, first by their husbands and then by the Orthodox rabbinic court system (news article, Oct. 5).


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  U.S.
SEES SIGNS OF IRAQI RETREAT  Pentagon officials said intelligence reports showed the first signs that Iraq was retreating from the Kuwait border.
But the United States continued to pour troops and planes into the region.
A1  CRISES AND THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL  News analysis: With his highly visible successes this week at the expense of dictators in Haiti and Iraq, Bill Clinton's political luck may finally have turned.
A11


A $3.3 Billion Hospital Deal Is Proposed
Just a week after the two largest hospital companies in the United States announced that they would merge, National Medical Enterprises Inc. and American Medical Holdings Inc. said today that they would join forces in a $3.3 billion deal that would create the nation's second-largest chain.
Last Tuesday, the Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corporation agreed to buy Healthtrust Inc. for $5 billion, breaking up three-way merger talks that industry sources said had been under way between Healthtrust, National Medical and American Medical.


U.S. Sees Signs of Iraqi Retreat but Continues Buildup
Pentagon officials reported today the first signs that Iraq was beginning to retreat from the Kuwait border.
But American troops continued to pour into the area while Washington worked on a plan to keep Iraqi forces in check.
To press Iraq to proceed with its withdrawals, the Pentagon announced that it had sent 100 more warplanes to the Persian Gulf, which would bring the total number of American planes and helicopters in the region to about 650.


Public &amp; Private; Hillary at Midterm
Hillary Rodham Clinton's office is surprisingly modest, not much larger than that of a junior partner at a big law firm, with a poster-size photograph of her husband, looking serious and a bit tired, gazing down from the wall.
The size of the room belies her influence.
The framed black-and-white photograph of Eleanor Roosevelt on a table bespeaks it.
Her staff says reports that she has withdrawn from a policy-making role after the crash-and-burn denouement of health care reform are simply wrong.
After the First Couple's Vineyard vacation, reporters wrote that Mrs.
Clinton, bruised and battered by criticism of everything from her investments to her wardrobe, had fled to California to escape the pressures of politics.
"She went to campaign for Kathleen Brown," Lisa Caputo, Mrs.
Clinton's press secretary, says drily.
"We made about 11 stops in a day and a half."


A Documentary's Partisan Plea To End the Bloodshed in Bosnia
"Bosna!," Bernard-Henri Levy and Alain Ferrari's documentary polemic about the war in Bosnia, is a blunt, impassioned call for the countries of Western Europe and the United States to step in and halt the bloodshed.
The movie, which opens today at Film Forum, is narrated by Mr.
Levy, the noted French philosopher, who also wrote the script.
With its grisly images of children mutilated in the siege of Sarajevo and of emaciated Bosnian prisoners near starvation in Serbian death camps, the film, which was shot between September 1993 and March 1994, wants to prick the conscience of the world.
The Serbian forces carrying out their policy of "ethnic cleansing" are denounced as butchers and thugs seeking to establish a racist dictatorship.
The defenders of Sarajevo are seen as heroic freedom fighters struggling against terrible odds to preserve a democratic ideal.


When Women Know Too Much
Three years ago, when I was 40 and in the eighth month of a first, much-desired and difficult-to-achieve pregnancy, I discovered that I had breast cancer, the disease that killed my mother at 47 after five harrowing years.
Her mother, in turn, had died of lung cancer in her 50's, never having smoked a cigarette in her life, and the doctors now think my grandmother's cancer might have started in the breast.
My great-grandmother also died relatively young from cancer; nobody is alive to tell us what kind.
So I wasn't surprised when one of my doctors phoned the other day and asked if I would participate in a breast cancer gene study.
We both knew that I'm just the sort of person the researchers are looking for.
In a few weeks, I'll go to the hospital and have some blood drawn, and the map of my genes will be studied for long hours under a microscope.
One breast cancer gene has just been identified, and researchers are close to isolating a second.
What does this mean for women like me, and families like mine?


Flirty clothes for a dream life: C12


TBC Direct Gets Five Echo Awards
TBC Direct in Baltimore took top honors, winning 5 awards, at the 65th annual International Echo Awards competition sponsored by the Direct Marketing Association.


CHRONICLE
Somewhere out there, someone, probably a child, is bereft over the loss of a teddy bear.
JANE PAULEY is determined to reunite owner and bear.
Ms.
Pauley, the television newswoman, was in a taxi in Manhattan on Monday evening when one of her children found the teddy bear, "small and brown and clearly a veteran of years of love," she said yesterday.


Packard Bell's Surprising PC Rise
Just a few years back, while the giants of the personal computer industry were still focusing their energy on selling machines by the hundreds to the lucrative corporate market, Packard Bell Electronics Inc. was quietly selling low-priced computers one at a time at Wal-Mart Stores Inc. and other discount and department stores.
It was this consumer-market retailing strategy that helped Packard Bell rise from obscurity to the top ranks of the computer industry.
The privately held company recently unseated I.B.M. to become the nation's third-largest seller of personal computers, and it now sells more computers to the consumer and home-office market than any other company.
Packard Bell will account for nearly 10 percent of the the nation's personal computer market this year, up from only 4.6 percent in 1992, and is expected to have sales of nearly $2.5 billion.


Frank McGuire, 80, Basketball Coach, Dies
Frank McGuire, who helped popularize the game in the South after developing a pipeline that transported big-city high school basketball stars to the region, died yesterday at his home in Columbia, S.C.
He was 80 years old, and had been in failing health since suffering a severe stroke two years ago, officials at the University of South Carolina said.


ALOFT WITH: Franklin Graham; On a Wing and a Prayer
CLIMBING to 14,000 feet above the North Carolina Piedmont, the controls of a six-seater airplane at his fingertips, Franklin Graham set a course to Asheville, in the Blue Ridge Mountains, to pick up his parents.
"For a time, Daddy wouldn't fly with me," he said and smiled.
Daddy is the Rev.
Billy Graham, who, along with Ruth Bell Graham (Billy's wife and Franklin's mother), was coming to see him preach that night in Raleigh.


Some Educators See Experimental Hybrids As Country's Best Hope for Public Schools
In a strip shopping center, just past Dr.
Wally Unruh's Chiropractic Arts center and the Cat's Meow florist, sits what many people are increasingly touting as the best hope for saving America's public schools.
Housed in a converted grocery store, the Academy Charter School is a new kind of public school that operates autonomously under state charter rather than under local school district control.
Like other such "charter schools" opening across the country, Academy -- where 271 well-scrubbed students follow a strict dress code and study a back-to-basics curriculum -- was put together from scratch by a group of parents and educators unhappy with the choices offered by their school district.


Kidnapping of Soldier Leads Israel to Halt P.L.O. Talks
Israel broke off negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization tonight after the militant Islamic group Hamas announced it was holding an Israeli soldier hostage.
In a videotape and a handwritten statement, Hamas's armed wing, the Qassam Brigades, warned that the soldier would be killed unless more than 200 Arab prisoners, including Hamas's founder and two militant Muslim leaders kidnapped from Lebanon, were freed by Friday night.


Weis Markets Inc.(WMK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


U.S. Is Said to Waste Billions on Computers
Congressional investigators said today that the Government wasted billions of dollars a year on computers and that the machines were often obsolete by the time they were installed for use by Federal employees.
"The process of acquiring Federal computer systems takes significantly longer than the process of developing new technology," said Senator William S. Cohen, Republican of Maine.
And this "increases the likelihood that the technology will be obsolete once delivered," he added.


MBNA Corp.(KRB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Professor, Husband and Wimp
Even viewers who have never seen the classic 1951 film "The Browning Version," with Michael Redgrave as an emotionally chilly professor at a boys' school, will recognize the ghost of the past in the new film directed by Mike Figgis.
Today's "Browning Version," with Albert Finney as the classics professor, has been updated but not substantially changed.
It carries the unmistakable whiff of a musty tale dragged into the 90's, where it seems conspicuously out of place.
The story, from Terence Rattigan's 1939 play, was always a slight, rickety concept, redeemed by Redgrave's touching performance.
You might think of Andrew Crocker-Harris (Mr. Finney) as the anti-Mr.
Chips, a man who with each year becomes more dictatorial and humorless.
He has no idea how to talk to adolescent boys.


Navy Moves Into Position to Counter Iraqi Threat


Lebow Memorial Service
A lone bagpiper will begin playing at 11:30 this morning and there will be four brief eulogies at 12:30 P.M.
But the heart of today's memorial to Fred Lebow will come when Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Alan Steinfeld, the president of the New York Road Runners Club, lead a mass walk across the finish line of the New York City Marathon near West 67th Street in Central Park to honor the founder of the event, who died of brain cancer on Sunday.


Con Edison Goes on Trial in Asbestos Case
Five years after a steam-pipe explosion rocked the Gramercy Park area in Manhattan, sending a stream of sludge 18 stories into the air, a criminal trial opened yesterday into charges that the Consolidated Edison Company and one of its former executives concealed that large amounts of asbestos were released by the blast.
Eight women and eight men, four of whom will be alternates, were selected as jurors yesterday after Federal District Judge John S. Martin Jr. posed a series of questions.
"You will be asked to judge whether the defendants failed to report, in certain instances, the fact that the explosion had released asbestos into the area," Judge Martin said.


Holtz Second-Guesses Handling of Powlus
Coming off a 30-11 blowout at Boston College last Saturday, Coach LOU HOLTZ of Notre Dame (4-2) is re-evaluating his approach with quarterback RON POWLUS and mulling some lineup changes for Saturday's home game against Brigham Young (5-1).
"We looked at eight or nine different people changing on the depth chart," said Holtz, who also second-guessed himself about whether he had made Powlus's job more difficult by not pushing the first-year starter harder in practice.


Clinton's Gain: The Big Stick Speaks
With his highly visible successes this week at the expense of dictators in Haiti and Iraq, Bill Clinton's political luck may finally have turned, just four weeks before Election Day.
Instead of counting the casualties from what would have been a hugely unpopular Caribbean invasion, which had seemed likely only two weeks ago, the President can revel in the retreat of at least some elements of Saddam Hussein's Republican Guard, the imminent departure for exile of the Haitian leadership and the return to the island of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Golisano Looms as Spoiler for Pataki
State Senator George E. Pataki is trying everything possible to have B. Thomas Golisano thrown off the gubernatorial ballot.
But if you didn't know which man was which -- and many New Yorkers might still have trouble picking either out of a lineup -- it would be hard to tell one candidate's positions from the other.
Both men say they are fiscal conservatives and social moderates.
Both spend most of their time assailing what they call the state's anti-business climate, its free-spending welfare bureaucracy and tolerance of crime.
Both approve of the death penalty and propose enormous cuts in state taxes, although Mr.
Golisano's would be much larger.


D.M.B.&amp; B. Official Is Planning to Retire
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles said yesterday that George J. Simko, president of its European and Mideast operations, would retire after 34 years at the agency, effective Jan. 1.
Mr.
Simko, 59, who has been based in New York, has held the position for the last four years, supervising 70 offices in 34 countries with more than 1,900 employees.
He will remain at D.M.B.&amp; B. on a part-time basis, working on special projects.


Rabin and Arafat Reported to Share Nobel
The Nobel committee has decided to award the Peace Prize this year to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, people familiar with the normally secretive deliberations of the committee said today.
The report of the decision first appeared in the Norwegian daily Aftenposten this morning.
It said the decision stirred a dispute within the committee, with one of its members threatening to resign.


Mother Tells Of Pressures On Jewish Son By a Rabbi
Crying on the witness stand, the mother of a Jewish teen-ager who prosecutors say was kidnapped by an ultra-Orthodox rabbi and his wife testified yesterday that shortly before her son disappeared for nearly two years the defendants intensely pressured her to leave the boy with them.
The mother, Hana Fhima, said that at one point before her son, Shai Fhima Reuven, vanished in April 1992 she had to call the police for help in getting her son away from the rabbi's yeshiva in Brooklyn where she had allowed the boy to stay for nearly a month.


A Frenchwoman Sails Smart and Leads
The day before leaving the docks in Charleston, S.C., for the start of the BOC round-the-world race, a French solo sailor, Isabelle Autissier, carefully opened a small gift box.
Inside was a pair of long, dangling earrings, a present from one of her admirers.
"Ah, earrings," Autissier said.
"People know how I like these. But I cannot wear them when I am at sea." She put them on, tilting her head as if to look in a mirror, then asked, "How do they look?" It was the feminine side of Autissier, a woman who has used wit and might to build a substantial lead in a decidedly masculine race.


The No-Reform Congress
If the members of the 103d Congress find themselves confronted with a cynical electorate back home, they have only themselves to blame.
Ordinary Americans had every reason to expect major changes in the way Washington does business -- chiefly campaign finance reform and a serious reduction in the power that special interests wield over legislative business.
A stubborn and self-centered Congress left Washington's official culture undisturbed, and the voters have every right to feel cheated and sour.
That things would end this badly -- that the "reform Congress" promised by House Speaker Foley would turn out to be the no-reform Congress -- seemed almost unimaginable when the session began just under two years ago.
With a reform-minded Democrat in the White House, and the House populated with 125 new members -- many of whom ran on platforms of change -- this Congress presented the best chance in a generation to enact an overdue cleanup.
What went wrong?


Off the Menu
Food-Service Award
Carole Riley, who owns two McDonald's franchises in Harlem, just received the first "woman of distinction" award from the Roundtable for Women in Food Service, a networking organization based in New York.
Ms.
Riley has owned the franchises -- at 444 Lenox Avenue (132d Street) and 215 West 125th Street -- for two years.
When Ms.
Riley took over the restaurant on 125th Street, near the Apollo Theater, she remodeled it to reflect the neighborhood, using African kente cloth for uniforms and as patterns for tile work, and displaying works by black artists, including Romare Bearden and George Mingo.
Since she has owned it, gross sales have nearly doubled and were $2.3 million last year.
A New Kind of Olive Garden
An Olive Garden restaurant opened in Manhattan today at 201 West 47th Street, overlooking Times Square.
It is unlike any of the other 460 restaurants in the chain.
This Olive Garden features dishes not served in the chain's other restaurants, like spaghetti Bolognese with meatballs and Tuscan grilled chicken with polenta and endive.
Prices, ranging from $4 to $7.95 for appetizers, $9.50 to $13.95 for pasta and $11.25 to $17.50 for main dishes, are about 30 percent higher than Olive Gardens elsewhere.
And though the pinkish stucco, arches and plants reflect the look of the rest of the chain, here the tables are covered with cloths and paper.
Beer Club at Cafe Centro
The beer bar at Cafe Centro, in the Met Life Building, 45th Street and Vanderbilt Avenue, has started the Beer Bar Beer Club.
Membership is free to anyone who completes an application form at the restaurant and entitles card-holders to invitations to beer dinners, a free round of up to six beers on the member's birthday, samplings of new draft beers and other brew benefits.
Italian on the Park
Pierro's on the Parc, opening on Tuesday at 150 Central Park South, will be decorated with works by LeRoy Neiman, the artist known for his paintings of athletes in action.
But this is not a sports bar.
The pictures are prints of Mr.
Neiman's paintings of Paris.
The restaurant, owned by Florence De Pierro, an owner of Taormina in Little Italy, and Jason Jacobs, Mr.
Neiman's business manager, will have a large, traditional Italian menu.
Hudson River Harvest
On Oct. 24 at 6:30 P.M., the Hudson River Club, 250 Vesey Street, in the World Financial Center, is holding its annual New York State barrel tasting and fall harvest game dinner.
A six-course dinner featuring pheasant, snowshoe hare and venison will be served with wines from 12 New York wineries.
Some of the proceeds will benefit the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Tickets, $95, can be reserved by calling (212) 786-1500.
Metropolitan Guides
A new restaurant guide for the budget-minded, "Good Cheap and Ethnic Eats Under $10 in and Around New York" by Robert Sietsema (City &amp; Company, $9.95) not only delivers a lot of title for the money, but also is filled with short, reliable descriptions of nearly 100 places in Manhattan, the Bronx, Brooklyn, Queens and New Jersey.
And the fourth edition of "Vegetarian Dining in New York City" by Arthur S. Brown and Barbara Holmes (Callaloo Press, $8.95) has just been published.
The number of entries in the guide, at 130, is nearly double that of the first edition.
Unfortunately, the names of the restaurants are in a typeface that is difficult to read.
The book is sold in bookstores or by mail from the publisher, Box 846, Brooklyn 11230.
Postage is $1 a book, and there is a discount for orders of four or more.
Also being published this month is "$25 and Under, 1995: A Guide to the Best Inexpensive Restaurants in New York," by Eric Asimov (Harper Perennial, $10).
It is a collection of the weekly columns Mr.
Asimov writes for The New York Times.


Russia's Art Trove Wasn't a State Secret
To the Editor:
I am puzzled by your Oct. 4 front-page article on the plan by Russia's State Hermitage Museum to exhibit Impressionist art that was believed to have been lost in World War II.


Bruce Quits as Arena Football Coach
EARLE BRUCE, the former head coach at Ohio State and Colorado State, resigned as coach of the Cleveland Thunderbolts team in the Arena Football League yesterday, saying he did not have enough time to attend to the team and meet other responsibilities.
The Thunderbolts were 2-10 in their first season under Bruce.


Clinton Lauds His Policies, But Listeners Are Sparse
President Clinton took his autumn campaign for Democratic candidates on its first road test today, flying to a booming Ford assembly line to sit in a red Mustang, lift the hood, check the dipstick and tell auto workers that the Republican Party was determined to ruin their newly found prosperity.
It was a fiery performance, given to a much-smaller-than-advertised crowd and a smaller-than-advertised number of Democratic nominees willing to associate themselves with it.


When Nets Call Benjamin, He Better Start Running
Benoit Benjamin casually stepped onto the scale in the training room today as he was leaving practice at Princeton University.
He peeked as the needle sailed passed 250 pounds, the limit on the scale.
"I could shed another seven or eight pounds," Benjamin said as he walked to his car in the parking lot.
"That's no big deal. I'm in pretty good shape."


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about a Justice Department antitrust investigation of pricing in the auto industry overstated a sales practice by the General Motors Corporation.
The company offers a value-priced program, popularly known as no-haggle selling, for 70 of its more than 120 models sold in California, not for all the models it sells in California.


Frank McGuire, 80, Basketball Coach Dies
Frank McGuire, who helped popularize the game in the South after developing a pipeline that transported big-city high school basketball stars to the region, died yesterday at his home in Columbia, S.C.
He was 80 years old, and had been in failing health since suffering a severe stroke two years ago, officials at the University of South Carolina said.


M.S. Carriers Inc.(MSCA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Game Theory Captures a Nobel
The 1994 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science, a $930,000 award to be divided among three pioneers in the field of game theory, celebrates achievements in building the foundations for analyzing interactions among businesses, nations and even biological species.
But just as important, the prize awarded to John F. Nash of Princeton University, John C. Harsanyi of the University of California at Berkeley and Reinhard Selten of the University of Bonn acknowledges a sea change in economics that has occurred in the last two decades.


World News Briefs; Gun Linked to 2 Sites Of 48 Swiss Cult Deaths
The Swiss police concluded today that at least one person who was present at the murder or suicide of 23 members of a religious sect in one Swiss village last week then drove 100 miles to another village where soon afterward 25 more sect members lost their lives.
They said they came to that conclusion because a handgun used at the first site was found at the second.
But investigators conceded that they were still no closer to understanding what happened in the farming village of Cheiry and the mountain hamlet of Granges-sur-Salvan last week.
There is evidence of murder, based on the bullet wounds in 20 of the 23 bodies found at Cheiry.
And there are indications that some victims committed suicide.


First Union Corp.(FTU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ruth Blumka, 74, an Art Dealer And Donor to Many Museums
Ruth Blumka, a prominent New York dealer in medieval and Renaissance art and a donor of artworks to museums around the country, died on Monday at New York University Hospital.
She was 74 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications from ovarian cancer, said her son, Anthony Blumka.


Baked Eggplants of Autumn Balance a Year-Round Dish
IN searching out the freshest, most economical food for this menu, I confirmed the obvious: seasonal foods are the best buy.
Granted, it is sometimes difficult now to determine what is "in season"; so many foods are available almost year-round that the line between what is and what is not in season has blurred.
The first course here is a ragout, or stew, made with eggplant, a vegetable that is an indisputable late-summer-to-early-fall favorite in the Northeast.


Shop of Dreams Is Termed Field of Fraud
For sports memorabilia fans, there is no joy in Levittown.
A store owner here was charged today with selling photographs and other items with forged autographs of some of the greatest names in baseball -- from DiMaggio to Williams to Mantle to Mays.
Nassau County officials say today's arrest of Glen Beram, 23, a high school math teacher in Mahopac, N.Y., who is president of the Wall of Fame sports memorabilia store on Hempstead Turnpike, came after investigators bought autographed items from the store and checked them with the players themselves.
In each case, Nassau officials said, the players denied having signed the photographs, lithographs and commemorative baseballs, some of which sold for as much as $475.


Media General Inc.(MEG.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Review/Fashion; Chloe's Lacy Dream World
Karl Lagerfeld did it again.
He brought the Paris fashion scene to brilliant life in the Chloe spring collection he showed on this morning.
Concentrating on dresses with lingerie touches, he conjured up a vision of romantic femininity that suggested a life many women dream about but few attain.
It's a leisurely life of evenings spent dining well, dancing and flirting.
His Chloe woman doesn't have a mundane job or a baby who drools on her delicate chiffons.


Game Theory Takes Prize in Economics
The Nobel Memorial Prize in economics will be divided among three pioneers in the field of game theory.
The award underscores a radical shift in thinking, as classical economics -- with its focus on how markets behave -- gives way to game theory, an approach that focuses on the give and take among "players."
Business Day, page D1.


Commercial Flights to Haiti Resume


Synovus Financial Corp.(SNV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gore Criticizes North's Remarks On U.S. Military Preparedness
Vice President Al Gore today added his voice to the criticism of Oliver L. North for having suggested that the United States military could not repel an Iraqi attack on Kuwait.
Mr.
Gore characterized Mr.
North's remarks as irresponsible, dangerous and wrong.
Asserting that American forces were fully prepared in the Persian Gulf while others were engaged in Haiti, Mr.
Gore accused Mr.
North, the Republican candidate in the Virginia Senate race, of placing politics above national security.


Professor, Husband and Wimp
Even viewers who have never seen the classic 1951 film "The Browning Version," with Michael Redgrave as an emotionally chilly professor at a boys' school, will recognize the ghost of the past in the new film directed by Mike Figgis.
Today's "Browning Version," with Albert Finney as the classics professor, has been updated but not substantially changed.
It carries the unmistakable whiff of a musty tale dragged into the 90's, where it seems conspicuously out of place.
The story, from Terence Rattigan's 1939 play, was always a slight, rickety concept, redeemed by Redgrave's touching performance.
You might think of Andrew Crocker-Harris (Mr. Finney) as the anti-Mr.
Chips, a man who with each year becomes more dictatorial and humorless.
He has no idea how to talk to adolescent boys.


Laser Is Saving Once-Hopeless Heart Patients
FOR a few very sick heart patients, a new surgical technique using lasers may offer a chance of survival.
In a form of high-tech bypass called laser revascularization, surgeons create new blood supplies for the heart using computer-controlled lasers to drill tiny channels directly into heart muscle that has been starved by blocked arteries.


A Rarity, An Uproar At Weekly Reader
An article on smoking has created a firestorm at what is seldom thought of as a cauldron of controversy -- Weekly Reader, a staple in classrooms around the country.
At issue is an article titled "Do Cigarettes Have a Future?" that is featured in the current Weekly Reader, distributed to 600,000 fifth graders around the country.
The publication goes out to eight million schoolchildren, with separate issues for each grade level from prekindergarten to sixth grade.


Jazz's Attic Now Looks Like a Proper Institute
The Institute of Jazz Studies at Rutgers University in Newark gets strange calls, like the one from a film maker who needed song titles referring to illness.
The curators made him a tape; Red Allen's "You May Get Better but You'll Never Get Well" closed it.
It's also a place jazz scholars can call to find out about anything that has ever happened in the jazz world.
In its 5,000 books one can find excellent fiction, including William Gwin's "Jazz Bum" from 1954 and David Hulburg's 1952 classic, "H Is for Heroin." There is also "The Negro in Colonial New England," a five-volume Mercury Records discography, an early Vanity Fair guide to New York City night life and histories of jazz in Arabic, Danish and English, among other languages, along with autobiographies and biographies.
And that's just books.


Mayor Reveals Plan to End Illegal Vendors in Harlem
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced a plan yesterday to force illegal sidewalk vendors off 125th Street in Harlem starting on Monday, by creating a nearby open-air market for many of them and then moving ahead with police sweeps of unlicensed vendors who remain.
Under the plan, the city would grant special licenses to more than 400 illegal vendors and permit them to sell their wares at an "alternative market" in two vacant lots at Lenox Avenue and 116th and 117th streets.
Any vendors who continue to operate illegally on 125th Street would be subjected to fines of $250 to $1,000, confiscation of their goods and possibly arrest.


Now or Never for the N.A.A.C.P.
In dismissing its executive director, the Rev.
Ben Chavis, the N.A.A.C.P. put on a show that we watched with the titillation and embarrassment that we would feel from a neighbor's loud, messy divorce.
The board meets tomorrow to begin seeking a new executive director.
But we now know enough about the scandal and debt that have dragged down the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People to understand that a change of one individual at the top, although necessary, won't restore the association to what we need it to be.


Suits for Both Sexes, Starting in the 1500's
Sex and Suits
By Anne Hollander
Illustrated. 212 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
Open Anne Hollander's book, "Sex and Suits," turn to pages 156 and 157, and you will see a gorgeous fashion triptych.
Blond Marlene Dietrich is in the top left-hand corner, all strategic ease, her eyes commanding us to look and worship, her foot poised on the running board of a big, dark, handsome car.
On the right are two unidentified and in celebrity terms unknown black men, draped and poised for casual conversation on the bench of a Greyhound bus terminal.
The painter Balthus is in the center, seated in a chair, legs crossed, staring into space with intent but elegant concentration.


Accounts
*
Sun Apparel Inc., New York, to Houston Effler Hampel &amp; Stefanides, New York, to introduce X-Pro jeans.
The agency, which already handles advertising for other Sun Apparel jeans, was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $3 million, without a review. *
DC Comics, New York, to Mad Dogs and Englishmen, New York, as the first agency to handle its trade advertising account.
Billings have not been determined.


Prodigy's Debut: Hotel, Nap, Snack, Taxi to Hall
YES, that was a big-name television personality a few tables away (Paul Shaffer, the band leader on "Late Show With David Letterman").
Never mind.
What captivated Hilary Hahn were the waiters whizzing by on roller skates.
"Wonder if they ever crash?" she said as a salad sailed by, arced around a table and landed gracefully between the knife and fork of a beefy-looking man in rolled-up shirtsleeves.
No, she does not skate herself, and certainly not on in-line skates, the balance-defying single-row-of-wheels kind.
"Even with wrist guards, it could be trouble," she said.
"I smash my elbow, real trouble. And you've got to practice to be able to stop like that."


RUBLE PLUMMETS IN ITS WORST DAY
The ruble suffered its steepest one-day plunge in value today, forcing the Russian Government to step in with a plan to bolster the currency's value and avoid lapsing into further economic instability.
After a day of extraordinary turmoil in the Russian financial markets in which the ruble lost more than 25 percent of its value against the dollar, the Government acted to defend its credibility as fears grew that its hard-won gains against inflation could be reversed.


Pepsi Impresses Wall Street With Strong Third Quarter
Pepsico Inc., which sent shivers through the investment community in June when it disclosed that its second-quarter earnings would be flat, attracted enthusiastic applause on Wall Street yesterday after it reported third-quarter results that were better than expected.
The company said net income rose 18 percent, to $541.5 million, or 68 cents a share, from $458.2 million, or 56 cents a share, in the comparable period a year earlier.
Revenue for the quarter, which ended on Sept. 3, was up 12 percent, to $7.06 billion from $6.32 billion.


New Kitchen for a Cool Million
GRAY KUNZ, the chef of the four-star restaurant Lespinasse, rests one hand on his glistening $120,000 steel-and-brass stove and wears the self-assured expression of a teen-ager who has just buff-waxed his first car.
"There is no reason today why kitchens can't be pleasant places to work in," he said.
Pleasant is somewhat an understatement when it comes to the sumptuous Lespinasse, in the St.
Regis Hotel.
A recent renovation costing more than $1 million has given Mr.
Kunz the most expensive and the most technologically advanced kitchen in the city, if not the country.


Goldman, Sachs Names a Record Class of Partners
Despite a nose dive in profits this year, Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, Wall Street's last major private partnership, named 58 new partners yesterday, its largest crop ever.
Each new member of Goldman's exclusive club of owners is almost certainly guaranteed to be a multimillionaire within a year or two.


Now Let Jewish Women Seeking Divorce Find Religious Justice; State Unduly Interferes
To the Editor:
It is astonishing to me that a Brooklyn judge would penalize an Orthodox Jewish man for refusing to grant his wife a get, or religious divorce (news article, Oct. 5).
This is a clear violation of the constitutional principle of the separation of church and state.


Colorado Justices Strike Down a Law Against Gay Rights
Homosexuals won a major legal victory today when the Colorado Supreme Court struck down a measure forbidding local governments to enact laws that protect gay people from discrimination in jobs and housing.
The 6-to-1 decision was the first by the highest court of any of the states -- where the battle over anti-gay-rights measures has been fought out to the virtual exclusion of the Federal judiciary -- holding that the denial of certain rights to homosexuals is unconstitutional.


Pataki Urging Longer Terms In Crime Plan
State Senator George E. Pataki yesterday called for holding violent criminals in prison longer as the central element of his anti-crime program for New York.
The Republican candidate for governor proposed to do this by lengthening sentences and by denying parole or work release to violent felons.
He would also stiffen sentences for crimes committed with guns and reinstitute the death penalty.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.57
3.07
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.92
4.89
3.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.34
5.32
3.12
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.64
7.68
5.26
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.86
7.90
5.92
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.72
8.75
6.93
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.65
6.69
5.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


MISSION TO HAITI: U.S. Troops Take Over Government Buildings; Christopher to Go to Haiti
Secretary of State Warren Christopher will almost certainly accompany Father Aristide to Haiti when he returns on Saturday, Administration officials said today.
Mr.
Christopher would be the highest-ranking United States official in a delegation that will also include members of Congress and members of Father Aristide's Cabinet, the officials said.
The group is likely to fly from Washington in a United States Government aircraft.


Coltec Industries(COT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


U.S. Forces Continue to Pour Into Gulf
Most of the elite Iraqi forces massed near the border with Kuwait are withdrawing, but the United States continues to pour troops and warplanes into the region as a hedge, Pentagon officials said today.
As Iraqi troops loaded tanks, artillery and armored personnel carriers on railroad cars heading north from Basra, American military officials said it would take several days to determine the Iraqi forces' ultimate destination.


Don't Victimize Women Inmates Twice
To the Editor:
"Women Locked Up" (Op-Ed, Oct. 5) is a powerful indictment of the increased incarceration of women throughout the world, particularly when questions remain about the connection between violence against women and their incarceration.
Women serve excessive sentences in New York State prisons for defending themselves against their abusers.
Studies show that 90 percent of women imprisoned for killing men were battered by those men.
Most women incarcerated for killing their mates had no prior criminal offenses.
Moreover, their incarceration has a devastating effect on their children and families.


Among the Small Skirmishes, War Still Rages
Major league club owners and striking baseball players are expected to beckon each other to the negotiating table by next week at the latest.
What they will find there will most likely be the same old issues and probably the same old stances.
What they might also find, though, is a possible source of relief emanating from Washington.
For yesterday, rumblings of efforts to renew talks were accompanied by rumblings that the executive branch might try to spur the two sides to resume efforts to settle what has become the longest work stoppage in the history of professional sports.


Hope and Anxiety for Kin Of Those Missing in Iraq
The rumblings of war along the border with Iraq have heightened the hopes and anxieties of the hundreds of Kuwaitis who have relatives believed to be held in Iraqi prisons since the Persian Gulf war in 1991.
Senior Kuwaiti officials, who are lobbying hard to establish an exclusion zone in southern Iraq to limit future military movements, also say they will now press for a final accounting of 609 Kuwaiti citizens who vanished with retreating Iraqi troops during that conflict.


Up From the Ruble's Rubble
President Boris Yeltsin of Russia, following a stunning 25 percent drop in the value of the ruble on Tuesday and only a small recovery yesterday, dismissed his Finance Minister and demanded that Parliament fire the head of the Russian central bank.
But Russia needs to do more than sack a few officials.
The currency debacle has been months in the making.
To keep its drive to freer markets from stalling, Russia needs to turn its policies around, with help from the West.
Recently, the Russian economy has looked O.K.
Inflation fell from 20 percent per month to 4 percent.
The deficit, though large, was set at respectable levels.
Stores have been stocked with plenty of goods.
But the favorable signs masked problems waiting to explode.
Inflation fell because the central bank drove interest rates to impossibly high levels that, left alone, would have crushed economic activity.
The bank relented this summer, flooding the market with new rubles in an effort to bring rates lower.
That in turn triggered inflation.


'Show Boat' Breaks A Box-Office Record
"Show Boat," which opened at the Gershwin Theater on Oct. 2, has broken the Broadway record for a week's ticket sales, according to box office figures released on Tuesday.
The show sold tickets worth $842,636 for its first full week of performances, Oct. 4 to 9, beating the old record of $837,851 set by "Miss Saigon" in the first week of January 1992.
Some mezzanine seats at those "Miss Saigon" performances cost $100.


Six Gulf Nations Pledge to Repay Much of U.S. Costs and Back Efforts to Contain Iraq
Saudi Arabia and five other Persian Gulf nations agreed today to repay the United States for much of the cost of defending Kuwait and also backed the Administration's efforts to find ways to prevent Iraq from threatening Kuwait again.
"We stand shoulder to shoulder to resist any aggression from Iraq," said Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who flew to Kuwait today to meet with the Foreign Ministers of the Gulf nations.


Victim of Carjacking Visited Psychic to 'Help Ease My Pain'
Haunted by memories of the execution-style killing of his best friend and frustrated by the failure of psychotherapy to help him, the survivor of a fatal carjacking sought the advice of a psychic last month "to help ease my pain, help ease my mind," he testified today in Rockland County Court.
The survivor, Scott Nappi, 19, is the only witness to the carjacking, and lawyers for the suspect, Edward L. Summers, said Mr.
Nappi's visit to a psychic raises questions about his crediblity.


First Bank System Inc.(FBS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Prudential Pact Said To Be Near
Prudential Securities will be compelled to acknowledge wrongdoing at the firm to avoid indictment on criminal fraud charges stemming from its sale of more than $8 billion worth of limited partnerships in the 1980's, people involved in the case said yesterday.
The acknowledgment will be contained in a document called a deferred prosecution agreement, under which Federal prosecutors will agree not to indict the firm on criminal charges for a period expected to be a year or more, these people said.
During that time, Prudential would be operating under terms akin to voluntary probation.
If it violated the law in a material way before the period ended, prosecutors could then elect to bring an indictment.


COMPANY BRIEFS
R.
R.
DONNELLEY &amp; SONS, Chicago, said it would close a plant in Des Moines with 875 employees unless unions agreed to concessions within two months.
MITRE CORP., Bedford, Mass., a military research concern, said it was laying off 300 workers at operations in Bedford and in McLean, Va.


Detective Who Cleared Name but Then Quit Force
The day was nothing special, Detective Humberto Arroyo recalled, just another routinely frenetic Friday in the homicide squad of Manhattan's drug-ridden 34th Precinct.
He had arranged long ago to spend the weekend in Atlantic City with his fiancee.
If he could break away a bit early, he'd get a jump on traffic.
Then 36, he had been on the job almost a dozen years, carried the same gold shield number as his father before him, and was celebrated for a leading role in solving the 1989 rape of the Central Park jogger.


Expect Esiason, Come Rain or Pain
Boomer Esiason said and did all the right things today.
He is supposed to because he is the quarterback.
Esiason returned to work on his sprained left ankle and confidently predicted he would be "close to 100 percent" for Sunday's game against the New England Patriots at Giants Stadium.


Romanian Leader Calls Ex-King a Threat
President Ion Iliescu, who refused entry to Romania's deposed King after he landed at the airport here last week, declared this week that the exiled King Michael posed a threat to the country's political system.
After being kept waiting on the tarmac for an hour on Friday, Michael was ordered out of the country on the ground that his British passport was not in order.
Under the immigration rules of Romania, a British passport holder may apply for a visa at the airport.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Oct. 5, about the effects of a 1978 law that requires utilities to buy power from independent generators, misstated the rates that New York State utilities charge residential customers.
The base rates charged a kilowatt-hour for a customer using 500 kilowatt-hours a month are:


AT HOME WITH: Ed Feldman And Joe L'Erario; The Two Stooges Of Furniture Repair
Here is the secret: Ed Feldman and Joe L'Erario, known to their passionate if offbeat fans as television's Furniture Guys, in reality don't give a varnish about furniture.
"I tell people the apocryphal story of my rise to a low level of fame," Mr.
Feldman says one rainy morning while seated at the 1950's kitchen table of his television partner.


U.S. OFFERS PLAN TO AVOID THREAT FROM IRAQ AGAIN
As President Saddam Hussein pulled back most of his troops from the border with Kuwait, the United States sought allied support today for a plan that would require Iraq to permanently withdraw its better-equipped Republican Guards but would allow 50,000 regular Army troops to remain in the area.
The proposal was less sweeping than an idea suggested on Monday by Defense Secretary William J. Perry: a huge demilitarized zone that would have excluded all tanks and heavy artillery and left Mr.
Hussein with virtually no military control over the southern part of his country.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17 U.S.
SEEKS IRAQ TROOP LIMITS  President Saddam Hussein pulled back most of his troops from the border with Kuwait.
The United States sought allied support for a plan that would require Iraq to permanently withdraw its elite Republican Guards from the south.
A1  Americans kept pouring in despite the Iraqi pullback.
A16  Saudi Arabia and other gulf nations pledged to repay the U.S.
A17  Some say the cost of the U.S. deployment could exceed $1 billion.
A17  Kuwaitis grew more worried about relatives in Iraqi prisons.
A17  Norman Schwarzkopf said Iraq may be fishing for a deal.
A16  ISRAEL AND P.L.O.
SQUARE OFF  Israel and the new Palestinian self-rule authority were locked in a severe crisis after the abduction of an Israeli soldier by Islamic radicals.
The kidnappers released a videotape in which the soldier said he would be killed unless Israel freed more than 200 Palestinians.
A1  DICKERING OVER ARISTIDE'S GUESTS  Pentagon officials are trying to determine just how many American officials and Aristide supporters American troops can protect when the ousted Haitian President returns home this weekend.
A1  Panama granted asylum to Haiti's former top army leaders.
A8  Haitian-American soldiers face a special plight.
A8  YELTSIN REACTS FIRMLY TO RUBLE  President Yeltsin moved quickly to try to calm Russians and restore confidence in his Government after the plunge of the ruble.
He dismissed the acting Finance Minister and called the Prime Minister home from vacation.
A3  A COMEBACK FOR GERMAN GREENS  After languishing for years on the fringes of power, Germany's environmentalist Green party is riding a wave of success, and its leaders hope to become kingmakers in Bonn after Sunday's elections.
A7  German politicians called for a ban on the Scientology movement.
A6  2 AMERICANS WIN PHYSICS PRIZE  Two Americans won the Nobel Prize in Physics for adapting beams of neutrons as probes to explore the atomic structure of matter.
A Canadian won the chemistry prize for discovering new ways to break apart and rebuild compounds of carbon and hydrogen.
A12  Romania has declared its exiled King a menace.
A5  Five were slain in Algeria, including a Korean businessman.
A10  Folkestone Journal: The Channel Tunnel makes a sedate debut.
A4  National A20-24, B12-14 BIG PLANS FOR A NEW STUDIO  Three Hollywood power brokers -- Steven Spielberg, David Geffen and Jeffrey Katzenberg -- announced plans for a new motion picture and entertainment company whose creation could involve reclaiming ownership of Universal Studios from the Japanese.
A1  NEW EMBARRASSMENT FOR C.I.A.
The Central Intelligence Agency's director removed two senior officials for giving an award to a colleague only hours after the man had been reprimanded for failing to oversee Aldrich Ames.A1  STILL A SYMBOL FOR CHANGE?
President Clinton has embarked on a vigorous campaign with one theme: Democrats want a change for the better; Republicans want a change for the worse.
A1  HEALTH ADVISER'S FUTURE DEBATED  As the Administration regroups to devise new health care proposals, the future role of Ira Magaziner, the architect of President Clinton's ill-fated health plan, is uncertain.
A1  CHOOSING SIMPSON JURY: PHASE 2  Eighty-four people were ushered into the courtroom for the next step in the winnowing of the jury that will decide the fate of O. J. Simpson in his double murder trial.
A20  HATE CRIME OR RANDOM ROBBERY?
The murder of two homosexuals in Laurel, Miss., has angered the small, subdued homosexual community and has increased tension in the small Southern town.
A20  SURGICAL TECHNIQUE EFFECTIVE  A study of a surgical technique used to correct poor distance vision shows the method is safe, but may lead to accelerated decline in the ability to see things up close.
A22  TEAMSTERS V. DISNEY WORLD HOTEL  The teamsters union filed charges against a Disney World hotel, saying its "English only" policy discriminated against the hotel's Haitian and Hispanic workers.
A23  HALTING THE USE OF PESTICIDES  The Environmental Protection Agency settled a lawsuit demanding that it eliminate possible cancer-causing residues from processed foods.
The agency will move against as many as 36 pesticides in two years.
A24 Metro Digest B1 Business Digest D1  Home Section C1-13  Arts/Entertainment C15-22  Music students in Poland.
C15  Broadway cutting back on stagehands.
C15  Theater: Young Playwrights Festival.
C19  Dance: Paul Taylor Dance Company.
C15  Books: "The Willows in Winter," by William Horwood.
C19  Sports B17-23  Column: Vecsey on antidote for lockout.
B17  Football: Bledsoe leads Patriots.
B17  Hockey: Thoughts of N.H.L. salary cap.
B17  Obituaries B15-16  Joan Kahn, book editor.
B15  D. Bennett Mazur, New Jersey Assemblyman and a professor.
B15  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials  Up from the ruble's rubble.
Abortion: Where are the doctors?
Brent Staples: Cyber-rudeness.
Letters  William Safire: What about Assad?
Frank Rich: Manchurian Candidate II.
Richard Rorty: Sex, lies and Virginia's voters.
Phil Baum: A civil tongue.
Bridge C20 Chronicle B28 Crossword C19


Nets Cautious On Anderson
Coach Butch Beard does not want to take chances with the health of Kenny Anderson, so the All-Star guard will sit out the Nets' first preseason game tomorrow night against the Detroit Pistons.
Anderson, who missed his third day of practice yesterday, is nursing a sore left hamstring.
He may also sit out the second game, against the Cleveland Cavaliers in Dayton, Ohio, Sunday night.


Joan Kahn, 80, Respected Editor Of Mysteries, Dies
Joan Kahn, a book editor whose imprint was a hallmark of suspense stories for many years, died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 80 and lived in Manhattan.
She died after a brief illness, her family said.


Flowers at the Finish Line


Bank Rescued in Japan In Sign of Deeper Woes
In a sign of the deepening troubles in Japan's battered financial system, the Mitsubishi Bank today announced its second major rescue operation in two weeks, saying it would spend at least $2 billion to take control of a collapsing bank, the Nippon Trust Bank.
Even though the announcement had been expected, since the trust bank's problems with bad real estate loans have been well publicized, the news provided grim evidence of the worsening plight of the Japanese banking system.
The Finance Ministry has resisted allowing any banks to fail, or disclosing adequate information on the depth of the bad-debt problems, so today's announcement represented an uncommonly open admission that the situation was still getting worse.


Garden Q &amp; A
Meet the Beetles
Q.
I'm having problems with cutworms and cabbage worms.
Is there a natural control, and can you tell me where I might find it? -- Nicholas Hackett, Forest Hills, Queens.


Ira I. Miller, 76, Developer on L.I.
Ira I. Miller, a Long Island builder who was active in Jewish life in the United States and Israel, died on Monday at North Shore University Hospital.
He was 76 and lived in Great Neck, L.I.
The cause was a cerebral hemorrhage, his family said.


Taking Another Look
WHAT some people once found glamorous -- tables of embossed alligator skin, sconces of tortoise shell -- animal- rights advocates may now find anathema.
Nonetheless, the Karl Springer retrospective at the Design Gallery of the New York School of Interior Design, 170 East 70th Street, is a look back at a more naive time.
Inspired by French Art Deco and Chinese and African designs, Mr.
Springer, who died in 1991, clad classic shapes in exotic materials: porcupine quills, sharkskin and lacquered goatskin.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a sharp decline in the value of the Russian ruble misstated its cause in some editions.
Traders sold off rubles because the Russian Government suspended efforts to support the currency, not because the earlier efforts were deemed insufficient.


Foes of Ban On Smoking Win Changes
After a vigorous lobbying campaign by the tobacco industry and local restaurants, the City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, said yesterday that the Council would weaken a bill that would have imposed sweeping new restrictions on smoking in New York City.
Council leaders and staff members said they had not decided exactly how to amend the bill.
But they said that they had been swayed by objections of the tobacco companies as well as by complaints from restaurateurs who said the proposed legislation would cause people to eat out less often and thus cripple their businesses.


Gay Men's Slaying: Hate or Robbery?
Two homosexual men were slain here last weekend, and the sheriff of Jones County was speculating about why one was found with his running shorts pulled down to his ankles.
"Let's think about it a minute," the sheriff, Maurice Hooks, said on Tuesday as he surveyed the overgrown railroad embankment where the bodies were discovered.
The men happened to be engaging in sex at the time, the sheriff theorized.
"Someone walks up: Pow! Pow!" he continued, imitating gunfire.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.71
2.85
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.97
4.92
3.01
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.33
5.34
3.09
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.69
7.64
5.26
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.89
7.86
5.91
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.75
8.72
6.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.66
6.65
5.39
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CLASSICAL MUSIC
In the 15th Century, With Words and Without  Corpus Christi Church
Lionhart and Ex Umbris, two recent arrivals on the New York early-music scene, joined forces on Sunday afternoon to open Music Before 1800's season with an overview of musical life in 15th-century Ferrara.
These expert young ensembles complement each other perfectly: Lionheart is an a cappella quintet and Ex Umbris is an instrumental ensemble whose four musicians play an arsenal of string, wind and percussion instruments and sing when necessary.


A Generally Healthy America Emerges in a Census Report
As a people, Americans are living longer, smoking less, spending more money on books, newspapers and magazines, are less likely to get a divorce or own a gun and more likely to belong to a church.
They are even eating more broccoli.
These are some of the highlights of the 1994 Statistical Abstract of the United States, a potpourri of facts compiled by the Census Bureau.
The report, published annually since 1878, provides a snapshot of changes in American life over 20 or 30 years or more.


Student Loan Marketing Assn. (SLM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
Although Rudolf Nureyev, who died in January 1993, made no provision in his will for the education of those who would follow in his footsteps, it was a cause dear to his heart, his longtime friend and colleague JANE HERMANN said the other day.
At a reception yesterday evening at Lincoln Center, Curtis Harnack, the president of the School of American Ballet, announced that the Rudolf Nureyev Dance Foundation had established a scholarship program for young men at the school.
Peter Martins, the artistic director of the New York City Ballet and the faculty chairman of the ballet school, shared some of his memories of Nureyev.


JAZZ
A Night of Klezmer Free Jazz. (Don't Let Its Name Scare You.)  Knitting Factory
John Zorn, the instigator of downtown musical mayhem, has been branching out from the frenzied blend of free jazz and hard-core punk characteristic of his 80's work.
He has produced various pieces in a classical or at least fully notated mode, only a few of which have been entirely convincing.
He has also tackled Jewish subjects and shown an unexpected interest in klezmer styles.
His group Masada, which played on Sunday night as part of the Knitting Factory's Merkin Concert Hall series, practices a form of klezmer free jazz, and despite the ominous name, it is Mr.
Zorn's most ingratiating work to date.


Suit Accuses Hotel at Disney World of 'English Only' Policies
In a lawsuit that goes into murky legal territory, the teamsters union filed civil-rights charges against a Walt Disney World hotel yesterday, contending that its "English only" policies discriminated against the hotel's Haitian and Hispanic housekeeping and laundry workers.
The class-action complaint, filed in Federal court in Orlando, said the Dolphin Hotel, one of many lodgings on the grounds of Disney World, recruited Haitian and Hispanic workers who speak no English for the jobs that require little customer contact, but issued its job manual, safety warnings and work orders only in English.
The complaint also charges that workers were harassed for speaking their native language.


Why We're Seeing a Persian Gulf War Rerun; Elite Guard's Escape
To the Editor:
"Clinton's Line in the Sand" (front page, Oct. 10) maintains that Saddam Hussein's elite Republican Guard escaped destruction in the final hours of the Persian Gulf War because President Bush ended the war before our ground forces could complete their job.
This is wrong.
In my 1993 book, "The Pentagon Wars" (pages 243-55), I describe the confusing and chaotic end of that war, and why the blame for the Republican Guard's escape rightly falls on Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf and Lieut.
Gen.
Frederick Franks Jr., his VII Corps commander, not President Bush.
General Schwarzkopf's plan called for Gen eral Frank's VII Corps to race through the desert west of the guard's position, circle behind the guard and cut off its escape routes.


Reeves Takes Out Drawing Board
Last season, after the Giants had lost consecutive games to the Jets and the Cowboys, they decided to go back to basics.
There would be no more concerns about schemes and what other teams were doing.
It was time to concentrate on themselves, to get their own football lives in order.
Today, a year later, after two losses in which the offense hasn't been able to run the ball and the defense hasn't been able to stop anyone, the Giants are going back to elementary school.
They will focus on why they have been their own worst enemy during their two-game losing streak.


D. Bennett Mazur, a Professor And New Jersey Legislator, 69
D.
Bennett Mazur, who combined service in the New Jersey State Assembly with a career as a professor at Ramapo College, died on Tuesday at Holy Name Hospital in Teaneck.
He was 69.
He died of complications from a stroke he suffered in November 1991, the hospital said.


U.S. Steel and Nucor Join On Production Technology
The giant of the traditional steel industry, the U.S.
Steel Group of the USX Corporation, has agreed to join with the leader of the upstart mini-mill steelmakers, the Nucor Corporation, to develop a cheaper, more environmentally friendly method of producing steel.
The unusual alliance, involving companies that have been critical of each other in the past, is an indication of the technological change under way in the steel industry.
Basic methods of converting iron ore into steel, largely unchanged for more than 100 years, are being transformed, mainly to reduce costs and pollution.


Geon Co.(GON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Smith (A.O.) Corp.(SMC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Campaign Briefs; North and Robb Battle For an Edge in Virginia
With the latest poll showing Senator Charles S. Robb and his Republican challenger, Oliver L. North, deadlocked in the Virginia Senate race, the candidates spent another day today trying to gain the advantage, with surrogates helping them attack each other.
In a statewide survey by Virginia Commonwealth University of 813 voters, conducted Oct. 6 to Oct. 11, Mr.
Robb, a Democrat, and Mr.
North each had the support of 39 percent of those interviewed.
J.
Marshall Coleman, a Republican running as an independent, had 12 percent.
The poll had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points.


A Woman Among Men, And Just Call Her Phil
Add to the skimpy list of this season's promising new series "Under Suspicion," still struggling for survival on Fridays at 9 P.M. on CBS.
Created by Jacqueline Zambrano, this is another cop show swelling the revival of hourlong dramas on the weekly schedule.
On the other hand, this is not just another cop show, primarily because of a direct-hit performance by Karen Sillas in a major role.
Set in a Northwestern city (filming was done in Oregon), "Under Suspicion" focuses on a squad room of detectives supervised by Capt.
Mickey Schwartz (Seymour Cassel), a no-nonsense veteran and aspiring wordsmith.
His word for the day might be abound, as in "this city abounds in crime." The only woman on the squad is Rose Phillips.
"Call me Phil," she says.
This is where Ms.
Sillas comes in, definitely not one of the guys and not about to take guff from any of them.


Rumor of Microsoft Interest Helps Push Up Intuit Shares
Shares of the software company Intuit Inc. rose for the second consecutive day today, at least in part on a published rumor that the company might be acquired by the Microsoft Corporation.
Both companies declined to comment.


Cuomo's Prescription For Fighting Crime
Warning against simple solutions to the problem of violence, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo released a crime plan yesterday in which he agreed with his Republican opponent that some violent felons should be locked up longer, even if that resulted in a need for more prisons.
But speaking a day after State Senator George E. Pataki announced his own prescriptions on crime, Mr.
Cuomo continued to insist that many other, nonviolent felons need not be incarcerated.
If they were placed in treatment programs instead of cells, he said, prison populations might be reduced.


A Decorator's Vision Of the Handmade
TRICIA GUILD, the London-based textile designer, has never done things halfway.
Since Ms.
Guild founded her company, Designers Guild, in 1970, she has championed a total look in decorating.
That means more than coordinating wallpaper and sofa upholstery.
It means bringing verve and exuberance to every new collection.


Singular visions in Paris: C13


Corrections
A chart yesterday about school spending in New Jersey referred incorrectly to the 12 districts surveyed.
They included poor districts, middle-income districts and wealthy districts, not just middle-income.


Results Plus
TENNIS  Bruguera and Becker Are Losers in Japan
Sergi Bruguera and Boris Becker dropped their matches to low-ranked players at the $1 million Seiko Super tournament yesterday in Tokyo, and Jeff Tarango dropped his pants.
The second-seeded Bruguera went ahead, 5-1, in the final set of his second-round match, but Tommy Ho of the United States, who is ranked 145th in the world, came back with a strong attacking style to win, 6-7 (4-7), 6-2, 7-6 (7-1).
The fifth-seeded Becker lost to Brett Steven, a New Zealander ranked 110th, 6-3, 6-4.
But most fans went home talking about Tarango, who dropped his pants after losing the eighth game of the second set to Michael Chang and waddled off the court with his shorts around his ankles.
"I felt that I let the match slip away a little bit, and I wanted to make light of it," said the 25-year-old Californian.
"I had exposed my weakness to Michael." The left-hander retired with Chang up by 4-1 in the third with an injury to his left forearm and later apologized profusely for causing "embarrassment." Tour officials said they would assess a fine today. (AP) Navratilova Storms Back: Martina Navratilova, playing the final European tournament of her career, came alive in the third set yesterday to beat Ann Grossman, 6-4, 3-6, 6-0, in the first round of the $400,000 Porsche Grand Prix in Filderstadt, Germany.
The crowd of 2,800 cheered wildly for the 37-year-old star as she roared back against the 23-year-old American.
She opened the third set by attacking the net on every serve by Grossman.
Top-seeded Conchita Martinez of Spain beat Leila Meskhi of Georgia, 6-2, 6-3, to advance to the quarterfinals with Mary Pierce of France.
Pierce, the No. 3-seeded player, edged Chanda Rubin of the United States, 7-5, 7-6 (8-6).
BOXING  &gt;Tapia Claims Superflyweight Crown  Johnny Tapia, spurred on by an exuberant hometown crowd in Albuquerque, N.M., stopped Henry Martinez in the 11th round last night to win the World Boxing Organization superflyweight title.
Tapia (27-0-1) used a three-uppercut combination to knock down Martinez at 1 minute 23 seconds of Round 11.
Martinez (16-2-1), who lives in San Francisco and fought for El Salvador in the 1988 Olympics, got up but could not continue.
Tapia then performed his customary back flip, hoisted Martinez on his shoulders and carried him around the ring. (AP) ASIAN GAMES 1-2 Finish for Chinese in the 800 Meters
Qu Yunxia, the women's world record-holder at 1,500 meters, led a one-two Chinese finish yesterday in the 800-meter run at the Asian Games in Hiroshima, where winds of up to 23 miles an hour forced the postponement of six other track and field events.
Qu, a member of Coach Ma Junren's "army" of star distance runners, was timed in 1 minute 59.85 seconds with her teammate Liu Li second in 2:00.66.
Japan slightly expanded its lead over South Korea in their battle for second place in gold medals.
Japan had 41 golds to 38 for the Koreans.
China was far ahead with 106.
In total medals, China had 204 to 147 for Japan and 119 for South Korea. (AP) YACHT RACING  It's Still Quite a Struggle for Americans  The top two American competitors in the BOC yacht race around the world continued to struggle for gains yesterday as the leader, Isabelle Autissier, logged the most miles of the day.
Autissier, who was 2,284 miles from the fleet's first port-of-call, Cape Town, South Africa, was ahead of Steve Pettengill, of Middletown, R.I., in fifth place, by 753 miles; and in front of David Scully, of Chicago, sixth, by 977 miles.
Nineteen solo sailors are competing in the race aboard 40-60-foot sailboats.


Clinton Campaigning Again As the 'Symbol of Change'
Behind the month of political barnstorming that President Clinton began this week lies a basic calculation by strategists in and out of the White House: unless Democrats do something, Republicans will walk away with the vast -- and growing -- bloc of voters who are dissatisfied with Washington and long for change.
It is a bloc that could wreck not only Democratic hopes for the midterm elections, never very robust, but also Mr.
Clinton's re-election prospects two years later.
And so the message that the President delivered at a political rally in Michigan on Tuesday, and will repeat through Nov. 8, is tailored for their ears: Democrats want a change for the better; Republicans want a change for the worse.


Wiretapper Is Accused of Warning Drug Suspects
A telephone company employee assigned to help law-enforcement officials tap the phones of drug suspects tipped off the suspects, exposing an undercover investigation of two cocaine distribution rings, the authorities said today.
Prosecutors said Frank Voce, who has been working for Nynex as a telephone services technician in Rockland County since 1992, told one drug dealer who was a friend that the authorities were listening in on a phone at the bar where the group of dealers operated.
Mr.
Voce was charged today with conspiracy and hindering prosecution.


Panama Grants Asylum to Leaders of Haiti Junta
Panama granted asylum today to Haiti's former military leaders, who were scheduled to arrive here early Thursday morning on a flight from Port-au-Prince.
President Ernesto Perez Balladares agreed to allow the Haitian military leaders -- Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras and Brig.
Gen.
Philippe Biamby -- and their families into the country after the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's elected President, formally requested asylum for them in a letter today from Washington, officials of the Foreign Ministry here said.


Playing Fate's Game in a Twisted World
The genius of Paul Taylor's choreography lies in its "how," not its "what." "Moonbine," which was the premiere at the Paul Taylor Dance Company's gala on Tuesday night, tells a simple determinist tale of life and death.
But, as is always true with Taylor dances, the rich texture and depth of the piece come from an accumulation of sly detail in movement and structure.
The world gone wrong in "Moonbine" is a game of leapfrog played backward.
Like its made-up title, which evokes a plant with lunar power, "Moonbine" has a certain hypnotic fascination.
The piece grows on you as you watch it and by the time Jennifer Tipton's wondrous lighting dips a moon projection into a horrifying cherry-red tinge, the miracle is that Mr.
Taylor has made the foreordained anything but ordinary.


Federal National Mortgage Assn. (FNM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


3 Rob Gathering Of Fraternal Society
Everything was fraternal at the monthly meeting of the Mayo Society of New York, the police said, until three men invaded the gathering in Queens on Tuesday night, produced a gun, fired a shot and robbed 31 of the 34 participants of jewelry and cash.
According to the police and neighborhood residents, the holdup took place about 8:40 P.M. inside the Four Provinces Club at 39-30 58th Street in Woodside, where Irish organizations have been meeting for at least 20 years.


Why We're Seeing a Persian Gulf War Rerun
To the Editor:
William Safire's bellicose call for tougher actions against Iraq (column, Oct. 10) manifests a furious hatred for Saddam Hussein that is amazing.
Mr.
Safire is too sophisticated to have swallowed all the villainization of the man that attended George Bush's war, so it must have other sources.
His recommendation of "a fight to the finish" -- our troops parading in Baghdad, war crimes trials, establishment of Kurdistan -- brings a smile.
The support of the American people for this sort of enterprise in the name of propping up a feudal monarch of a puppet state, Kuwait, is problematic, to say the least.


Double Role for Haitian-Americans
Sgt.
Patrick Marc-Charles knew he would be part of the American force that would invade Haiti, but he did not know whether he was going to return to the country of his birth with weapons blazing.
Perhaps more than any other of the 20,000 American soldiers here, he had a special reason for concern: his brother, Henri-Robert Marc-Charles, is a colonel in the Haitian Army.


How Much Will Gulf Action Cost?
Military analysts have not yet figured an exact cost for the American military buildup in the Persian Gulf this week, largely because it is still unclear exactly how many soldiers and machines will be sent and for how long.
About 40,000 troops and 770 aircraft have been committed to action so far.
The 1991 Persian Gulf war cost $71 billion.
The United States paid $7.4 billion, but sought funds from countries around the world to pick up the rest.
Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and other gulf nations paid about two-thirds of the difference.
Japan and Germany paid most of the rest.


Abortion: Where Are the Doctors?
On March 10, 1993, a physician named David Gunn was killed in Pensacola, Fla., by an anti-abortion activist.
Dr.
Gunn had divided his time among six abortion clinics in Georgia, Florida and Alabama.
On July 29, 1994, Dr.
John B. Britton was also killed by an anti-abortion activist.
Dr.
Britton regularly flew from his home elsewhere in Florida to work at Pensacola's only other abortion clinic.
The physician who reportedly succeeded Dr.
Britton, Steven Chase Brigham, is equally peripatetic.
In the last two years his medical license was suspended in New York and Georgia and restricted in New Jersey and California amid accusations of improper procedures.
Anyone looking for proof of the shortage of abortion providers in the United States has only to look to Dr.
Gunn's 1,000-mile-a-week marathons, Dr.
Britton's cross-state commuting and Dr.
Brigham's record.
The murders of Dr.
Gunn and Dr.
Britton are stark proof that the small number of people still performing abortions are working in a war zone.


After the Revolution, A Russian Restoration
WHEN the Consulate of the Russian Federation in New York opens its doors to the public for the first time on Oct. 26, guests should not be surprised if the hosts play Mussorgsky's "Pictures at an Exhibition" as the trays of pirogi and shot glasses of Stolichnaya Cristall are passed around.
The 20-year restoration of this 1902 Beaux-Arts palazzo at 9 East 91st Street, overlooking the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, has been detoured by politics (the Soviet Union's move into Afghanistan), impeded by nature (a decade of exposure to the elements) and galvanized by glasnost (i.e., American generosity).


Schwarzkopf on Hussein: Calculating 'Carter Factor'
The allied commander in the Persian Gulf in 1991 says the most likely explanation for Saddam Hussein's tactics is "the Jimmy Carter factor" -- the hope that a crisis could bring in the former President as a mediator, and that Iraq could get a better deal from Mr.
Carter than it has got from the Bush and Clinton Administrations.
Asked about his old foe after a speech here on Tuesday night, the commander, Gen.
Norman Schwarzkopf, said the Iraqi troop movements in southern Iraq may have been nothing more than routine military exercises.
But the general, now retired, said there were more troops than normal for basic maneuvers.


Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc.(BOL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Transit Police Get Funds To Put Officers on Buses
With great political fanfare, President Clinton announced today the first Federal grants under new crime legislation that he said would be used to help hire almost 3,000 police officers around the nation.
In the New York region, the biggest grant is $2.1 million for the New York City Transit Authority, which will use it to hire 28 officers for patrol duty on city buses.
A total of $8 million was awarded to New York State law-enforcement agencies; $4.1 million to New Jersey, and $2.55 million to Connecticut.


In Italy, They Talk Again of Fascism as a Cure
To the Editor:
The news that a 7-year-old boy had been killed by bandits in Italy left me saddened and concerned.
My family and I spent our summer vacation at San Fili in Calabria, home of our forebears.
While there, I had the chance to speak to many inhabitants about the country's political situation.
Many residents favored the return of Fascism, even though they realized the consequences.
The feeling was that the country desperately needed to have law and order restored, and Fascism seemed the only avenue available, though the price would be high.


Mole, Badger and Mr. Toad, Redux
THE WILLOWS IN WINTER By William Horwood Illustrated. 295 pages.
A Thomas Dunne Book/St.
Martin's Press. $18.95.
Of course William Horwood's new novel, "The Willows in Winter," couldn't possibly match the genius of the book to which it is a sequel, Kenneth Grahame's classic paean to the English countryside, "The Wind in the Willows."


Southtrust Corp.(SOTR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reviews/Fashion; Acquired Tastes: Lacroix and Montana
Christian Lacroix took two bows after his show this morning as the audience cheered a collection that looked more like couture than ready-to-wear.
The workmanship and details, the interplay of fabrics and patterns, the sheer luxuriousness of it all left some people breathless.


Federal Caller-ID Rule Sparks Privacy Debate
IT'S already routine for people who have caller identification: The phone rings and before you pick it up, you can glance at a screen that tells you the telephone number of the person calling.
But if the party placing the call does not want to be identified in advance, he or she can enter a special code before dialing your number, three extra strokes that mask the caller's identity.
If you are annoyed by not being able to tell who is calling before you say "hello," you can retaliate.
You can tell the phone company that you refuse all such calls; then, the anonymous caller will hear a recording stating that your phone won't ring for unidentifiable callers.


In Their Own Words
SENATOR GEORGE E. PATAKI
ALBANY.
Oct. 12 - As he spread the word on his crime plan today in Syracuse, Rochester, Cheektowaga and Colonie, State Senator George E. Pataki was asked about his ability as a speaker compared with that of his opponent, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
"I am not a natural performer. I am very comfortable with people. I am very comfortable with crowds. I love going out meeting people. I even love walking into places where people think very differently from me....It's not like I have a great fear of going up in front of cameras. It doesn't bother me. It's just that I've never had any training in it. And I'm not a natural performer..." GOV.
MARIO M. CUOMO
In releasing his crime plan yesterday, Mr.
Cuomo talked about the kind of criminal the justice system faces today.
"What law enforcement deals with is the failure of the rest of the social system. And if that system continues to fail, you'll never be able to do all your work. You can't stop them with a gun. A lot of them don't even care about your gun. You know what it is. You lock them up. You look at them. You say,'You just killed somebody,' and they look right through you, some of these kids. Like they don't know what your are talking about. Like, 'What's the big deal?' "


Why We're Seeing a Persian Gulf War Rerun; Clinton's Warning
To the Editor:
With much criticism being heaped upon the news media because of a growing tendency to project their personal viewpoint, I cannot understand why "Clinton's Line in the Sand" (front page, Oct. 10) uses the word "bellicose" to describe the President's warning to Iraq.
Bellicose means "aggressive, warlike." I think the President was being deliberate and calm in making the United States position clear.
Should he, as you point out, have repeated George Bush's mistake in not making his position known and in allowing Iraq to make another stupid miscalculation?


3 Plays Of Authors Under 19
While 14-year-old tennis champs are not uncommon these days, playwrights usually don't begin to flower until they're in their 20's and have acquired the ability to see life from multiple points of view.
So it would be foolhardy to head off to the annual Young Playwrights Festival, which develops and then showcases the work of incipient dramatists up to the age of 18, looking for miniature masterpieces.
What you can expect to discover are individual scenes bristling with conviction, speeches that ring with earnestness, and feelings passionately stated (and sometimes overstated).
This year's three winners, on display at the Joseph Papp Public Theater through Oct. 29, are nothing if not serious indeed.
There isn't an escapist impulse in the bunch, which ought to reassure those who lament the deleterious influence of television on the culture.


Rudolf Kiviranna, Lutheran Pastor, 82
The Very Rev.
Rudolf Kiviranna, pastor of the Estonian Evangelical Lutheran Church in Manhattan for the last 46 years, died on Sunday at Hackensack Medical Center.
He was 82 and lived in Fort Lee, N.J.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Economic Scene; After years of trying to fix education, why isn't it fixed?
WHY can't Johnny read?
Well, actually, he usually can.
After 13 years of public education, most Johnnies (and Joanies) can keep up with Oprah's latest travails in People magazine and even make change for a $20 bill.
So rephrase the question.
After decades of breast-beating and trumpeted education reforms, why are most high school graduates only marginally fit for the world of work or college?


Fourth Financial Corp.(FRTH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CLASSICAL MUSIC
'Peter and the Wolf' On Shakuhachi Flutes  Avery Fisher Hall
For their first Young People's Concert of the season on Saturday afternoon at Avery Fisher Hall, Kurt Masur and the New York Philharmonic undertook the difficult task of introducing Minoru Miki's "Symphony of Two Worlds," a complex score involving both European and Japanese instruments.
There were successes in the presentation but also some problems, most revolving around language.
Mr.
Masur's English is good but not perfect; when he made reference to the "duck" in Prokofiev's "Peter and the Wolf," several children sitting near me thought he said "dog," and consequently were not impressed by the oboe's efforts at imitation.
Mr.
Miki had a more basic struggle with the language; he would have communicated better through a translator.


Walkout at Harvard Club Is Settled After 6 Months
The rancorous strike against the Harvard Club that rattled Manhattan's Clubhouse Row for six months came quietly to an end yesterday in an agreement that seemed to fall well short of triumph for the club.
Both the club and the union representing 118 of its workers claimed it was a "win-win" agreement -- a 64-month contract under which the club says it can save $300,000 and most of the workers can stay on with increased pay.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Wondering What Carmen Might Have Seen in Don Jose  New York State Theater
When an audience is left wondering, after two acts of Bizet's "Carmen," why the Gypsy heroine did not just dump the stiff corporal Don Jose and save herself and everyone else a lot of bother, the production is in trouble.
And Michael Hayes, vocally and dramatically overwrought from the start as he took over the role of Jose at the New York City Opera on Friday evening, far from displaying any real charisma, offered little plausible reason for Carmen even to take notice.


At a Crossroads, MCA Executives Plan to Confront Their Japanese Bosses
When the chairman of MCA Inc., Lew R. Wasserman, and its president, Sidney J. Sheinberg, board the company's jet next Tuesday for Hawaii, the idea is to meet their Japanese bosses halfway.
But the meeting, with the top executives of MCA's owner, the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, is likely to be bitter, as the American executives seek to resolve an increasingly fractious relationship with the Japanese giant that acquired MCA for $6.1 billion in 1990.


Synoptics Communications Inc.(SNPX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Campaign Briefs; Poll Indicates Voters Are Leaning Republican
In the latest sign of a rising Republican tide in November, a poll made public today found that most Americans were inclined to vote for a Republican candidate for Congress this fall.
The poll, by the Times Mirror Center for the People and the Press, found that 52 percent of registered voters nationwide said they would vote for a Republican and 40 percent said they would choose a Democrat.
"These findings represent a dramatic shift to the G.O.P. over the past few months," the center's analysis said.
"Over the longer term, they stand out as a historical high-water mark for the party."


Abduction Snarls Palestinian Talks
With a young man's life and the future of peace talks on the line, Israel and the new Palestinian self-rule authority were locked today in their most severe crisis to date after the abduction of an Israeli soldier by Islamic radicals from the Hamas group.
Tensions were greatly heightened today after the kidnappers released a harrowing videotape in which the soldier, Cpl.
Nahshon Waxman, said he would be killed unless Israel met a Hamas demand for the release of more than 200 Palestinian prisoners.
In a videotape that was made public on Tuesday, the captors set a deadline of 9 P.M.
Friday.


Ford Official Is Retiring
The Ford Motor Company said today that Allan D. Gilmour, 60, a vice chairman of the company and corporate finance expert, would retire at the end of the year.
A Ford employee since 1960, Mr.
Gilmour was twice discussed as a candidate to become Ford's chairman and chief executive.
The first time, the board instead asked Harold A. Poling to stay beyond normal retirement age, succeeding Donald E. Petersen in 1990.
The second time, in 1992, the board tapped Alexander J. Trotman instead of Mr.
Gilmour because directors believed Mr.
Trotman had more experience in automotive operations.


U.S. Backs Mexico Law, Vexing Labor
The United States refused today to pursue complaints that Mexico had failed to enforce union organizing rights at two plants owned by American corporations.
The rulings, by Secretary of Labor Robert B. Reich, were the first test of how far the Clinton Administration would go, under a labor side accord to the North American Free Trade Agreement, in taking up the cause of Mexican workers against their Government and employers.


John Grozier, 60, Bank Vice President
John Grozier, a vice president in the private banking division of Citibank, died last Friday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 60 and lived in Manhattan and Williamstown, Mass.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Auburn Goes to Florida With a Chance to Bowl the Nation Over
A cold rain pounds on the huge windows that frame Terry Bowden's office at Auburn University, but it can't dampen the head coach's mood.
This is one happy man.
From where he sits, he can scan the horizon, from the practice fields below to the outline of Jordan-Hare Stadium towering over the campus a few blocks away, and both sights make him smile.
Because Bowden, 38, can see beyond them.
In his mind's eye, he can see his team coming out of the darkness, out of the cold and into the light.
Auburn, the best team the nation has almost never seen on national television, winner of 17 straight games, 6-0 and ranked No. 6 in the country by the Associated Press and No. 12 by the New York Times computer, is about to come out of hiding against A.P.'s top-ranked team, the Florida Gators, on Saturday.


In a 'Damn Yankees' revival, the Devil works on Madison Avenue.
THE relationship between sports and advertising has been discussed, debated, even argued over.
And it's being sung about, too.
"Damn Yankees," the revival of the 1955 musical playing on Broadway, makes that relationship an integral element of the story it tells about a baseball fan who sells his soul to the Devil to help the hapless Washington Senators humiliate the hated New York Yankees.


No Headline
I ask you to do what you can so I come out of here alive. - CPL.
NAHSHON WAXMAN, a captured Israeli soldier.  [ A1:5. ]


New Shop Formed By Three Executives
Three advertising, marketing and media executives have opened CMG Communications Inc. with billings estimated at $10 million from clients like Time Warner Cable, Bulova watches and Schieffelin &amp; Somerset.
The three, all partners at CMG, are: Christopher Culver, 38, previously president at the Culver Media Group in New York; Don Moriarty, 37, previously president at Moriarty Communications in Bronxville, N.Y., and Michael Glavin, 38, previously a senior vice president and group account director at Korey, Kay &amp; Partners in New York.
CMG has 24 employees at 79 Fifth Avenue in Manhattan and at a satellite office in Bronxville.


People-Centered Danish Designs
ONCE again, Danish design is marrying function with idealism.
"Since the early 20th century, Danish design has always been people-centered -- about the way people will use these designs -- and not superfluous," said David McFadden, the curator of decorative arts at the Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum in Manhattan and editor of "Scandinavian Modern Design 1880-1980" (Abrams, 1982).
"In Denmark, there are humanistic ideals, that the world can indeed be improved through conscientious effort."


Owners Cling to Idea of a Salary Cap
As the National Hockey League prepares to cancel games as a result of a labor dispute for the first time in its history, some of its club owners have raised the specter of a salary cap, as in, "if we're going to have a war, let's have a war over a salary cap."
That view was expressed during a wide-ranging discussion at the Board of Governors meeting Tuesday, two owners said yesterday, the 12th day of the league's lockout of the players.
The owners said talk of a salary cap was not by any means the prevailing view and stressed that the league was not about to abandon its bargaining position on a payroll tax and revert to a cap.
But the sentiment exists, and if it does not yet suggest any fundamental change in position, it reflects the bleakness of the negotiating situation for the near future.


Why We're Seeing a Persian Gulf War Rerun; Are They Casualties?
To the Editor:
After three tours of duty in Vietnam and one in the Persian Gulf, I am convinced that every war breeds discontent among a small percentage of its survivors.
The soldier believes he or she is scarred emotionally, as well as physically, and deserves recognition.
If so acknowledged, the soldier has, in his or her mind, earned the right to be considered one of Anna Quindlen's "Casualties of War" (column, Oct. 5).
What fuels the search for recognition, and now compensation, are unsubstantiated claims by presumed victims that whatever ails them now was due to exposure to something then and there.
In Vietnam it was Agent Orange; in Desert Storm it is "gulf war syndrome." Anecdotal reports of "toxic semen" defy imagination, let alone science.
Likewise, birth defects, unless compared for incidence to other populations, cannot be blamed on the gulf war.


Dismantling of the Shoreham Nuclear Plant Is Completed
A two-year project to decommission the $5.5 billion Shoreham Nuclear Power Plant is finished and all radioactive material has been removed, Richard M. Kessel, the chairman of the Long Island Power Authority, said today.
The project, the first in the nation to dismantle a licensed commercial nuclear reactor, cost several million dollars less than the $186 million projected.
Mr.
Kessel said the authority "got away cheaply" performing a task that would eventually confront operators of more than 100 commercial reactors now in operation.
"This is an historic day, not just for the people of Long Island, but for the country," he said at a news conference inside the former reactor building.
The plant, proposed in the mid-1960's, never went into commercial operation.
Because of fears that safe evacuation of the surrounding area would be impossible in the event of an accident, the former owner, the Long Island Lighting Company, sold Shoreham to the state for $1 in 1992 in an agreement intended to block its operation.
Mr.
Kessel said removing the radioactive waste that was produced during testing required 353 truck shipments of more than 5 million pounds of waste to burial and reprocessing sites in South Carolina and Tennessee.
The authority also shipped 560 irradiated fuel assemblies by barge from the plant, which is on Long Island Sound about 60 miles east of Manhattan, to the Philadelphia Electric Company's power plant in Limerick, Pa.
The last of 33 barge shipments was made in June.
The pool where fuel rods were stored was drained and irradiated surfaces were ground away, officials said.
They said no radiation above normal background levels remained inside the reactor building.
Mr.
Kessel today signed a letter informing the Nuclear Regulatory Commission that all radioactive material had been removed and other steps taken to comply with decommissioning regulations.
He said he expected final approval from the agency by next year to lift all restrictions on use of the plant.
The authority has been studying a possible conversion of Shoreham to a gas-fired power plant.
Construction of Shoreham began in 1973.
The plant was nearly completed by 1984, but public opposition to its opening and a lengthy dispute between the company and state and Suffolk County officials over emergency evacuation plans delayed issuance of a Federal operating license until April 1989.
By then the company had agreed with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to abandon the plant in exchange for rate increases and other financial compensation.
A Lilco spokeswoman, Elaine Davis, said today: "It's been five years since we signed the settlement agreement. We are glad they have completed the decommissioning."
Mr.
Kessel, who is also the executive director of the State Consumer Protection Board, said Governor Cuomo deserved credit for closing the plant.
He said operating the plant would have cost Lilco customers, who pay among the highest electric rates in the nation, an additional $1 billion.


Marshall &amp; Ilsley (MRIS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Blue Jays Release Righetti
Reliever DAVE RIGHETTI was released yesterday by the Toronto Blue Jays.
Righetti, 35, was 0-1 with a 6.75 earned run average in 13 games with Toronto in 1994.
The left-hander began the year the Oakland Athletics, posting a 16.71 e.r.a. in 7 games, before being released April 27.
Righetti, the former Yankee, signed a minor-league contract with Toronto on May 15.
Righetti is 79-77 in his career with 252 saves and a 3.40 e.r.a.


Meridian Bancorp (MRDN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Pop Life
A Limit for the Dead?
Where have all the Deadheads gone?
Concert industry executives are scratching their heads over slow ticket sales for the Grateful Dead's six-night Madison Square Garden stand, which is to begin tonight.
As of yesterday, only three concerts had sold out and there were some 5,000 tickets left for each of the other three concerts at the 19,000-seat arena.


Glitter On the Square
The theater at 17th Street and Union Square East has had at least three different personas.
In 1929, it started out as Tammany Hall's auditorium.
In 1984, it became the Roundabout Theater, and in June, it was taken over by the Union Square Theater.
When the Union Square's move was announced, its managers, Alan J. Schuster and Mitchell Maxwell, were dismayed to find a gloomy green dome that "sat on you like a weight," Mr.
Schuster said.
"The walls were liver-colored," he added, "and the molding was the color of unshaken milk of magnesia."


U.S. Chemist Is Awarded Nobel Prize
Nobel Prizes in Physics and Chemistry were awarded yesterday to two Americans and a Canadian for adapting beams of neutrons as probes to explore the atomic structure of matter, and for discovering new ways to break apart and rebuild compounds of carbon and hydrogen.
The physics prize, $930,000 and a pair of gold medals worth $1,600 each, will be shared by Dr.
Clifford G. Shull, 78, a former professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who lives in retirement in Lexington, Mass., and Dr.
Bertram N. Brockhouse, 76, a professor at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario.


Raveling in Stable Condition
Southern Cal Coach GEORGE RAVELING, injured in an automobile accident on Sept. 25, has been released from the intensive care unit and is listed in stable condition at University Hospital in Los Angeles, the school said yesterday.
Raveling, 57, suffered nine broken ribs, a fractured pelvis and clavicle and a collapsed lung.
He was moved into the intensive care unit Oct. 2 after bleeding was discovered in his chest cavity because of a bruised lung.


E.P.A. Settles Suit and Agrees to Move Against 36 Pesticides
In a step that could eventually halt the use of dozens of common pesticides on major crops, the Environmental Protection Agency has settled a lawsuit demanding that it eliminate possible cancer-causing residues from processed foods.
Under a tentative agreement announced today, the agency proposed to move against as many as 36 pesticides within two years.
These pesticides have previously been found to cause cancer in animals, but have nonetheless been allowed as residues in foods like juices and canned vegetables, where the pesticides can concentrate at higher levels than on raw crops.
Even more pesticides could be prohibited after further study.


Some Jokes And, Yes, Dance
The two most interesting things about Smuin Ballets/SF and its "Dances With Songs," which opened on Tuesday night in a weeklong season at the Joyce Theater, have almost nothing to do with dance.
One of them is the joke that gets the evening off to a cheerful start, when a blast of Beethoven's Fifth is followed by the popular music to which the evening's dances are set.
Unfortunately, however, the joke is repeated at the start of the second act, this time with Carl Orff's "Carmina Burana."
Michael Smuin, the director and choreographer of this San Francisco-based company, also had the funny notion of inserting the balcony scene from "Romeo and Juliet," danced to Prokofiev, into this program of jazz ballet and popular music, with a dash of Spanish dance.
As it happens, his company's first performance occurred the night before the opening of an expensive new production of "Romeo and Juliet" by the San Francisco Ballet, from which Mr.
Smuin was dismissed in 1985 after a bitter public battle.


Irving A. Tittler, Biology Professor, 86
Irving Albert Tittler, who taught biology at Brooklyn College for more than 40 years, died Oct. 6 at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 86 and lived in Valley Stream, L.I.
The cause was complications from cancer, said his wife, Sylvia Isseks Tittler.


CHRONICLE
There will be reminiscing and noshing, but no formal speeches, says STANLEY G. KARSON, a former legislative assistant to the late Senator Herbert H. Lehman, when 23 of the 28 surviving members of the legendary Democrat's Senate staff gather in Washington tomorrow for their first reunion in 38 years.
Among those who have accepted the invitation from such diverse points as Arizona, Florida and Ohio are Julius C. C. Edelstein, vice chairman emeritus of the City University of New York, who served as Senator Lehman's administrative assistant, and Elizabeth Leonard Masback, his personal secretary during his seven years in the Senate.


GSD&amp;M Given an Account
The Doubletree Hotels Corporation in Phoenix said yesterday that it had selected GSD&amp;M Advertising in Austin, Tex., to handle its consolidated Doubletree Hotels and Guest Quarters Suite Hotels account, with billings estimated at $15 million.
The decision had been expected.
The account was previously divided between McCann-Erickson Los Angeles, which handled Doubletree, and RY&amp;P Moss Advertising in New York, which handled Guest Quarters.


Statistics Don't Say It All
In a quiet part of his office minutes after last season ended, Bill Parcells smiled his victory smile and said: "So what do you think of this kid? Is he something, or what?"
The kid, Drew Bledsoe, had tossed his fourth touchdown pass of the game, this one in overtime, to propel the Patriots to their fourth straight victory and keep the Dolphins from making the playoffs.
For the Patriots, it was merely a knock on the door.
They won all of five games.


Pact at Harvard Club
The rancorous strike against the Harvard Club that rattled Manhattan's Clubhouse Row for six months quietly ended in an agreement that seemed to fall well short of triumph for the club.
Article, page B3.


BUSINESS DIGEST
A New Alliance in Hollywood
Three of Hollywood's biggest power brokers plan a new studio.
Steven Spielberg, David Geffen and Jeffrey Katzenberg, the former Walt Disney executive, announced plans for a new entertainment company whose creation could involve reclaiming ownership of Universal Pictures.  [ Page A1. ]  Executives of MCA, which owns Universal, are seeking to resolve an increasingly fractious relationship with Matsushita, its parent.  [ D20. ] Companies
Prudential Securities will be compelled to acknowledge wrongdoing to avoid indictment on fraud charges stemming from the sale of limited partnerships, people involved in the case say.  [ D1. ]


Bond Prices Down a Bit as Buying Lags
Bond prices sagged a bit yesterday.
Investors and dealers found little reason to buy ahead of today's report on producer prices.
Speculation that the September Producer Price Index may provide a mixed message for the market discouraged buying yesterday, after gains in two consecutive sessions.
The market consensus is that the index will come in flat or up just one-tenth of 1 percent over all, with the core rate rising four-tenths of 1 percent.
Economists surveyed by Bloomberg Business News said they expect the overall Producer Price Index number to be unchanged in September, compared with a six-tenths of 1 percent gain for August.


The Sex Orientation Card, And How Not to Play It
The efforts by some old-guard Republicans to make a campaign issue of the homosexuality of the Democratic candidate for New York State Attorney General ran smack into a wall this week: the younger, hungry Republicans who sense their chance to build a new Empire State empire with moderate crossover voters.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and George E. Pataki have hardly seen eye-to-eye in Mr.
Pataki's campaign for governor, but they were united in their swift dismissal of the assertion by Mr.
Pataki's campaign chairman for the city, Guy V. Molinari, that Karen S. Burstein should not win because she is "an admitted lesbian."


High-Level Dispute On Who Will Redo Health Care Policy
As the White House regroups to devise health care proposals for the next Congress, a dispute has broken out within the Administration over the future role of Ira C. Magaziner, the chief architect of President Clinton's ill-fated health plan.
Leon E. Panetta, the White House chief of staff, has been discussing ideas for a new policy-making process in which Mr.
Magaziner's responsibilities would be reduced.
But Administration officials said Mr.
Magaziner was lobbying to keep a major role, with some support from one extremely influential patron, Hillary Rodham Clinton.


Macy Officials to Dominate A Planned Federated Unit
Federated Department Stores Inc. and R. H. Macy &amp; Company yesterday announced the lineup of merchants who will lead an expanded Macy's East operation when the two companies complete their merger.
Three of the four most senior merchants at Macy's East, called general merchandise managers, are Macy's veterans.
Also, both senior executives in charge of planning and distributing merchandise assortments are Macy's managers.


Travelers, Beware
To The Home Section:
The article "How to Keep a Warm House from Turning Dangerous" (Sept. 22) provided valuable information.
But the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning may be even greater in hotels, particularly in third world countries.
Written in reaction to the death of Vitas Gerulaitis, the article was a painful reminder of the unnecessary death of Warren Dean, a history professor at New York University and my former husband, who died on May 21 in Santiago, Chile.


Bridge
The deal shown in the diagram has a long history.
If you have not seen it before, plan the play in seven hearts on a "sure trick" basis: After winning the opening club lead with the ace, South can succeed against any distribution of the East-West cards.
It has been included as part of a warm-up for an entirely new event: a par contest, testing playing skill without reference to the opponents, to be played at home on a computer.
This is the first major par contest in North America in three decades.


A Battle Of Dollars And Scents
THE battle is on.
By Nov. 1, the Gap and Bed Bath &amp; Beyond will begin selling their own lines of soaps, lotions and shower gels.
On Oct. 23, Bed Bath &amp; Beyond will introduce Beyond Indulgence -- including body scrub, bath salts, potpourri and sponges like the one below -- in 29 of its 51 stores, including Manhattan.
Prices will range from $2.49 to $7.99.
That same day, the Manhattan store at 620 Avenue of the Americas (19th Street) will expand from 50,000 to 82,000 square feet.


Market Place; Up in smoke? Many pass on huge initial offering of Japan Tobacco.
THIS was one of those good news, bad news days on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, and it spoke volumes about the fragile health of Japan's markets.
The bad news was that one of the most ambitious stock offerings ever attempted here, the initial public offering of the huge, Government-owned Japan Tobacco, is turning into a humiliating flop for the Finance Ministry.
Brokerage houses reported yesterday that 65 percent of the investors who won the right to purchase shares after an initial frenzy decided to pass up the opportunity.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Senate race in Delaware misstated the child custody arrangement of the Democratic candidate, State Attorney General Charles M. Oberly 3d.
Mr.
Oberly holds joint custody with his former wife, not primary custody.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Announced that Chris Sabo, infielder-outfielder, refused outright assignment and elected free agency.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Announced that Carl Willis, pitcher, refused outright assignment and elected free agency.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Fired Kevin Kennedy, manager, and Marty Scott, director of player development.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Placed Dave Righetti, pitcher, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Announced that Mike Bielecki, pitcher, and Bill Pecota, infielder, refused outright assignments and elected free agency.
NEW YORK METS -- Purchased the contract of Alberto Castillo, catcher, from Binghamton of the Eastern League.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  CHICAGO BULLS -- Signed Dickey Simpkins, forward, to a multiyear contract.
Waived Walter Palmer, center.
Football  National Football League  CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Waived Terry Richardson, running back.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Announced they will not renew their lease on Milwaukee County Stadium, which expires at the end of the 1994-95 season.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Mark Caesar, defensive tackle, from the practice squad.
Signed Scott Tyner, punter, to the practice squad.
Hockey  National Hockey League  SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Assigned Jeff Friesen, center, to Regina of the Western Hockey League and Valstimil Kroupa, defenseman, to Kansas City of the International Hockey League.


Two Senior C.I.A. Officials Lose Jobs in Spy Case Fallout
In another embarrassing epilogue to the Aldrich Ames espionage case, the Central Intelligence Agency's director, R. James Woolsey, has removed two senior officials for giving an award to a colleague only hours after Mr.
Woolsey had reprimanded the man for failing to oversee Mr.
Ames.
The two officials were the C.I.A.'s associate deputy director of operations, John McGaffin, and the Near East operations chief, Frank Anderson.
They retired after Mr.
Woolsey reassigned them last week.


Relatives Watch A Plea for Life


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY HIGH SCHOOL STUDENT DIES AFTER COLLAPSE
A 14-year-old student at Louis D. Brandeis High School collapsed at his desk and, despite efforts of the school staff and the police to revive him, was pronounced dead on arrival at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
The 10th grader was identified by the police as Nelson A. Cepeda of 507 West 134th Street in Manhattanville.
A player on the varsity baseball team at his Upper West Side school, he was described by a staff member as "the kind of student you wish you could clone." B3.


Calendar: Shows, Talks And a Garden Symposium
Bonsai and Chrysanthemums  New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx; (718) 817-8700.
Yuji Yoshimura, a master bonsai gardener, will present two programs during the garden's bonsai exhibition, open today through Sunday.
On Saturday, from 12:30 to 3 P.M., he will conduct a plant clinic; a demonstration follows on Sunday at 1 P.M.


Reviews/Fashion; Two Magical Mystery Tours
On opposite ends of the fashion planet reside Vivienne Westwood and Helmut Lang.
Yet, all roads seem to be leading to either one pole or the other.
If there is no hint of Ms.
Westwood's sculptured jacket and corset-tight fit in a collection this season, then there is likely to be a version of Mr.
Lang'ssleeveless, bias-cut, knee-length dress in shiny fabric.
Even in the stark show spaces beneath the Louvre, Ms.
Westwood managed to create the ambiance of a decadent salon.
Her show was entitled "Erotic Zones," and her mission was to emphasize the sexuality that she senses women have forgotten amid their dressing for success.
Here, power is in the bony birdcage bustles heaving up languid gowns; in the arched calf of a leg boosted a foot from the ground on stiletto heels; in the low-cut decollete of a fitted jacket, and in the pinched waist clasped by a wide, thick corselet.


Yeltsin Moves Quickly to Calm Fears Over the Ruble
President Boris N. Yeltsin moved quickly today to try to calm Russians and restore confidence in his Government after Tuesday's extraordinary and embarrassing run on the ruble, which lost more than 25 percent of its value against the dollar.
While the financial elements to stop the plunge were put into place Tuesday night -- helping the ruble to recover today to 3,736 against the dollar from Tuesday's close of 3,926 -- Mr.
Yeltsin also moved politically.
He dismissed the acting Finance Minister, Sergei Dubinin, who had little responsiblity for the run on the ruble; called the Prime Minister, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, home from vacation, and asked Parliament to dismiss the head of the central bank, Viktor V. Gerashchenko, a long-time target of market-oriented reformers.
Parliament postponed any vote on the fate of Mr.
Gerashchenko, who was silent on the ruble's collapse today, but lawmakers called for a vote of confidence in the Government for Oct. 21.
In time-honored Moscow fashion, Mr.
Yeltsin also ascribed what is being called "Black Tuesday" to sabotage by unidentified enemies and speculators, and he ordered his National Security Council to work with the secret police to investigate.
One Government official even called for an "unmasking trial," the phrase used for the show trials that defined the purges of the Stalin era.
But rather than the work of some secret conspiracy, Tuesday's events seemed to result from a confluence of factors, and traders who saw an opportunity took it.
Western diplomats, brokers and business executives said today that a correction in the value of the ruble had been inevitable, if badly controlled.
They said the Russian inflation rate remained tolerable and that the panic would not have a lasting effect on investor confidence.
"I hope there won't be any re-evaluations on the part of investors," said Maksim Boyko, director of the Russian Privatization Center.
"But this whole episode underscores the fragility of the stabilization achieved in 1994. The Central Bank should share at least part of the blame."
Reasons cited to help explain Tuesday's panic included currency speculation, inflationary expectations and a failure of the Government and central bank to act quickly enough to control the market.
After this summer's injection of credits into agriculture and industry, the Government and the central bank have made a coordinated effort to allow the ruble to adjust to higher inflation by slipping gradually from the 2,000 or so to the dollar of early this summer to about 3,000 or even 3,500 to the dollar, the rate at which the 1995 budget is figured.
Although Russians have enjoyed a relatively low inflation rate since August 1993, when inflation stood at 26 percent a month, the monthly rate has increased from about 4 percent in June to about 8 percent in September. (The monthly rate in the United States in August was three-tenths of a percent, about average for recent months.)
Since there is normally a three-month lag here between the release of new credits and an increase in the inflation rate, the estimated 7 trillion rubles of credits issued in July and August, and perhaps 3 trillion more issued in September, will continue to keep inflation running higher.
In response to this expectation of continuing price increases, traders have been buying dollars, which has pushed the ruble down for three weeks now.
During the last three months, the Russian Central Bank has spent $2 billion of its reserves of Western currency to support and stabilize the ruble.
Wary of spending too much, the bank announced last month that it would lessen its support of the ruble in the foreign exchange markets.
On Monday and Tuesday, the bank bought few rubles, doing so only late on Tuesday to prevent the ruble from crashing past the 4,000 to the dollar.
With Mr.
Chernomyrdin on vacation, the Government seemed paralyzed and said nothing.
Only after trading ended on Tuesday -- followed by a reportedly stormy Government meeting -- did Mr.
Gerashchenko of the central bank announce a sharp rise in short-term interest rates to make ruble holdings more attractive and declare that the bank would support the ruble at the start of trading today.
But with outstanding credits, unpaid salaries and a significant budget deficit to finance, economists and diplomats say, the Government had wanted a weaker ruble so that it would take fewer dollars to pay for it all.
A weaker ruble also helps protect Russia's domestic industry by making imports more expensive, a demand that is frequently made by farm and industrial lobbies.
During a parliamentary debate today, Mr.
Dubinin said that the panic was directly linked to recent subsidies to agriculture and defense industries.
"Now we have to decide what we want -- either stabilization of finances with lower inflation or further subsidies to bankrupt enterprises," he said.
If the latter, "the ruble will continue to fall."
Adding to the panic on Tuesday, bankers said, was a successful effort by a group of commercial banks, hurting from bad loans made when inflation was much higher, to manipulate the rules of the Moscow Interbank Currency Exchange, or Micex, where the ruble is traded.
As one board member explained it, banks have been allowed to buy dollars and put up the rubles to cover their purchase two days later, a common international practice.
But numerous banks, he said, bought dollars and then delayed payment up to four days, waiting until Tuesday night, when the ruble was at its lowest, to cover their purchases.
Now the exchange will return to the old method of requiring money to be deposited before any trade is approved, he said, to discourage currency speculation.
Jannik Lindbaek, executive vice president of the International Finance Corporation, a part of the World Bank, said today that the last few days would not change the fundamental attractiveness of Russia as a place for foreign investment.
"Interest in investing here is definitely a new trend, and it's not a blip on the radar screen," Mr.
Lindbaek said.
"In this kind of environment, one should expect the currency market to be volatile. If we should go to hyperinflation, that would be different. But the stabilization policy of the Government is correct and necessary, and it is in fact taking hold."
Average Russians, who saw prices for imported goods and even some domestic items zoom up during the course of a day, offered opinions ranging from imminent ruin to bemused shrugs.
Olga, a world-weary 24-year-old who works at the Voyazh kiosk in central Moscow, where a pack of Marlboros went from 1,900 rubles to 2,500 rubles and a Snickers bar from 1,000 rubles to 1,500 in hours, said: "Of course we've hiked our prices. But no one's complaining except the grannies."
Leonid Abalkin, a well-known reform economist of the Gorbachev period, said people trusted the dollar more than their leaders.
"In contrast to the Russian Government," he said, "the U.S. dollar will not let you down or deceive you."
Irina, who sells soaps and cosmetics at the Kabul department store nearby, said they had nearly doubled prices overnight, and there were fewer customers than usual.
"We understand what has happened better than anyone," she said.
"We understand it with our pockets."


Corrections
An article yesterday about the mood of Haiti's elite misstated the percentage won by the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide in the 1990 presidential election there.
It was 67 percent, not 80.


When Opting to Insult Is Really No Surprise
AT that now-infamous police rally at City Hall two years ago, the one that got out of hand over the issue of civilianizing the complaint review board, some speakers attacked Mayor David N. Dinkins.
One of those people was the Borough President of Staten Island, Guy V. Molinari.
Shouting into the microphone, his face animated with anger and his voice hot with scorn, he cast aspersions on Mr.
Dinkins.
He even spit out a barnyard epithet.
At the time, few cared.
Few read about Mr.
Molinari's performance the next day, or saw it on television that night because he was just a local Republican from New York City's least-populated borough, well known in political circles for his volatile temper.
The public focused instead on the behavior at that rally of Rudolph W. Giuliani, who was then preparing to run for mayor.
Mr.
Molinari might as well not have been at City Hall at all that day.


Ousted Ruler Delays Flight From Haiti
Haiti's deposed military dictator, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, arrived at the airport shortly after 2 A.M. today in preparation for his departure from Haiti.
He had spent most of the night haggling over how much the Americans would pay him for his property here, United States officials said, delaying his scheduled flight into exile.
Anxious American officials eager to hustle the general away before the scheduled return on Saturday of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide negotiated the real estate deal.


Green Party On Upswing In Germany
Germany's environmentalist Green party, which has languished for years on the fringes of power, is riding a wave of success, and its leaders hope to become kingmakers in Bonn after Sunday's elections.
For years the Greens relished their role as the joker in German politics, provocative and entertaining but rarely taken seriously.
They believed there was something inherently immoral in seeking or holding power, and viewed themselves strictly as an opposition party.


School's Open! A Mother's Tale
WE survived it, the beginning of school.
It's a living nightmare for three weeks running, going flat out every minute, every day.
Parents' nights.
Separation anxiety.
Shoes.
Haircuts.
Dentist.
Pediatrician's forms.
Name tags.
Oh, and by the way, work.
Sleep?
Exercise?
Forgetaboutit.
And we're talking preschool here.


CBS Shares Fall Before Its Report
Investors bailed out of shares of CBS Inc. early yesterday, well before the broadcasting company reported a drop of 51 percent in its third-quarter earnings.
Analysts said the decline in earnings was not necessarily a surprise for Wall Street, but investors were reacting to increasing concerns about the television network's ratings.


Student Dies After Collapsing At Desk in Brandeis High School
A 14-year-old student at Louis D. Brandeis High School collapsed at his desk yesterday morning and, despite efforts of the school staff and the police to revive him, was pronounced dead on arrival at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
The 10th grader was identified by the police as Nelson A. Cepeda of 524 West 134th Street in Manhattanville.
A player on the varsity baseball team at his Upper West Side school, he was described by a staff member as "the kind of student you wish you could clone."


American Jews Focus on Preserving Their Identity; A New Gift of $15 Million for Graduate Studies in Jewish Education Should Help
For American Jews, the most unsettling news these days doesn't always come from the Middle East.
It's a lot closer to home.
One of two Jews now marry outside the faith.
Less than half of all American Jews belong to synagogues.
And even if the children of Jewish parents do take classes in Judaism, they are likely to be taught by teachers whose own training stopped when they were bar mitzvahed.


Barnett Banks Inc.(BBI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Research on an Operation to Cure Myopia Finds Mixed Results
A 10-year study of an increasingly popular surgical technique to correct poor distance vision shows that the method is reasonably safe and effective but that it may lead to an accelerated decline in the ability to see things up close, researchers said today.
The study, the longest and most detailed on the aftermath of the surgical procedure, radial keratotomy, concludes that it can have long-term benefits in correcting myopia, a common condition in which light from a distant object focuses in front of the retina to produce blurred images.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
The Coiner of Minimalism Brings His Band From Britain  Brooklyn Academy of Music
In Jane Campion's movie "The Piano," the mute heroine expresses her inner life in musical improvisations.
She evokes her melancholia in cascades of chords, echoing Chopin mazurkas and Scottish folk songs.
But the music hardly seems the outpouring of an impassioned 19th-century heroine.
It sounds like the music of Michael Nyman, the English composer who gave Minimalism its name and wrote the film's score.


Sex, Lies And Virginia's Voters
Oliver North in a close race for a Senate seat -- is a moral hero to many of my neighbors here in Virginia.
Although he has encountered criticism in recent days for intemperate remarks about American preparedness in the Persian Gulf, those remarks are no more likely to hurt him than are his frequent, well-documented lies.
The local paper gets lots of letters praising him for uprightness, for a sense of honor, for exemplary character.
When his opponent, Senator Charles Robb, called him a liar, he easily brushed aside the charge.
Mr.
North got away with this because Mr.
Robb has pretty much admitted to being an adulterer.
For Mr.
North's admirers, the crucial test of moral character is sexual behavior.
In their eyes, Mr.
Robb's infidelities are enough to show his unfitness for office.
It is also enough to show that he is, at bottom, weak: he yielded to temptation.


In Touch on the Trail


Little Rest and Far Outside Post Facing the Favorite in Meadowlands Cup
The road to the Breeders' Cup will turn through New Jersey tomorrow night when 12 horses go to the post for the $500,000 Meadowlands Cup, with a trip to Kentucky at stake for at least two of the contenders.
When the entries were drawn yesterday, the 4-year-old gelding Taking Risks was made the early favorite to win the race and stretch his recent winning streak to four.
One year ago, the horse was claimed for $20,000 by the storied trainer King Leatherbury of Maryland.
Since then, Taking Risks has gone from rags to riches, winning 9 of 11 starts and running second the 2 other times.


Journal; Manchurian Candidate II
Even empty suits have feelings.
In the otherwise unenlightening debate between Michael Huffington and the defensive incumbent, Dianne Feinstein, on "Larry King Live" last Thursday, two revelations emerged from the mystery man who may spend a third of his $75 million fortune to buy one of California's seats in the U.S.
Senate.
First, Mr.
Huffington, who has no known achievements while working for either his father's oil business or the Government, will stop at nothing to avoid disclosing the one paper trail he has generated: his income tax returns.
So eager was he to avoid questions about his suspect 1990 taxes during the debate that he immediately switched the subject to his wife's 1986 miscarriage.


Leslie Fay to Be Revamped and Drop Career Clothing Line
Leslie Fay announced yesterday that it would discontinue its money-losing Theo Miles line of career clothing for women, which the company touted just a year ago as the vehicle that would drive its business out of bankruptcy.
The company said it would also split its dress and sportswear businesses into two divisions with separate managements.
John Ward, who has been running the combined businesses, will be president of the dress division, and Richard Kramer, a former Liz Claiborne executive who joined the company in June as president of Theo Miles, will head the sportswear division.


A Marathon Touch in the Tribute to Lebow
They came in running shoes, high heels, flats and wingtips; in brightly colored warm-up jackets, dark gray business suits and T-shirts and shorts.
By the time they had all walked hand in hand across the marathon finish line on a glorious fall day in Central Park, the police estimated that from 3,000 to 4,000 people had taken part in yesterday's noontime tribute to Fred Lebow, the founder of the New York City Marathon, who died of brain cancer on Sunday at the age of 62.
There were well-known runners like Grete Waitz and Eamonn Coghlan, familiar political names like Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, Parks Commissioner Henry Stern and Manhattan Borough President Ruth W. Messinger, and business executives like Lew Rudin, the real estate magnate, and Charles McCabe, the executive vice president of Chemical Bank, a major marathon sponsor.


Cuomo Unveils His Crime Plan: Longer Terms And Treatment
Warning against simple solutions to the problem of violence, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo released a crime plan yesterday in which he agreed with his Republican opponent that some violent felons should be locked up longer, even if that resulted in a need for more prisons.
But in a speech before the state's top law-enforcement officials one day after State Senator George E. Pataki announced his own prescriptions for crime, Mr.
Cuomo differed with his rival by continuing to insist that many other, nonviolent felons need not be incarcerated.
If they were placed in treatment programs instead of cells, he said, prison populations might be reduced to the extent that few or even no new cells would be needed.


Simpson's Lawyers Are Questioning the First Prospective Jurors About Hung Juries
Eighty-four people, a cross-section of polyglot Los Angeles, were ushered before Judge Lance A. Ito of Superior Court here today, 27 of them into the blue swivel chairs of the jury box and the row of seats in front of it.
The first four jury aspirants then began their auditions for the O. J. Simpson murder trial.
"This is the matter of the People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson," Judge Ito told the 84, which probably included at least some of the 12 people who will sit in judgment of the former football star.
The judge read the charges against the defendant in the formal language of the law: murdering, "willfully and unlawfully and with malice aforethought," Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman, each of whom he referred to as a "human being."


INSIDE
Less Sweeping Smoking Bill
The City Council has decided to weaken a bill that would have imposed strict new restrictions on smoking in New York.
Page B1. 3 Win Nobel Prizes
Nobel Prizes in Physics and Chemistry went to two Americans and a Canadian for work on atomic structure and hydrocarbons.
Page A12.
Yeltsin Tries to Buoy Ruble
Urging calm, President Yeltsin dismissed the Russian Finance Minister after a fall in the ruble.
Page A3.
Old vs.
New Guard
The brouhaha over a candidate's lesbianism points up different schools of Republican thought.
Page B8.


Executive Changes
AMERITECH CORP., Chicago, appointed Oren Shaffer chief financial officer.
DRYPERS CORP., Houston, a maker of disposable diapers, appointed Walter Klemp, managing director of finance, to the additional positions of chairman and co-chief executive.


Same Karolyi, Different Tune
A heat wave is locked in high-pressure gridlock over southeast Texas, summer's furnace stoked into autumn.
Inside Bela Karolyi's refurbished gym, dripping shirts mop up sweat like napkins.
The room is stale, as fetid as gymnastics itself, according to Karolyi.
He calls for the air-conditioner.
Then he explains how to breathe a fresh breath into his beleaguered sport, a plan that will toss gymnastics for a philosophical somersault.
It is time for women's gymnastics to reclaim its womanhood, Karolyi is saying.
To stem the takeover of tiny tots.
To include athletes of college age at the Olympics.
To add missing grace and maturity and expressiveness.
To dismiss the unwritten "17-year-old rule" that says a girl must abandon the sport when she becomes a woman.


Folkestone Journal; The Tunnel Trip: Smooth, Dry and Done Quickly
For a project that has stirred the imagination of daydreaming engineers and other armchair visionaries for almost two centuries, the opening of the Channel Tunnel has been something of an anticlimax.
It has happened so gradually, in phases, that it may be hard for future historians to pinpoint the exact moment when Britain became joined, psychologically, to the mainland.
Significantly, the mainland is still called Europe here, as if Britain exists as a continent apart, which of course in many ways it is.


Not Playing Is Graves's Biggest Pain
Adam Graves is the sort of optimist who takes life's lemons and makes sweet lemonade.
Graves, though, found it hard to see the bright side of life in a hospital bed during a National Hockey League lockout.
At least, someone suggested, he's not missing any games.
"I guess, in a selfish way, you could say you never want to miss any games and I've always tried to take pride in playing every game," said Graves, the Rangers' player representative, who had a disk removed from his lower back Tuesday in Los Angeles.


A Painful Year of Higher Rates
A year after interest rates stopped falling, Wall Street still is not sure what caused the party to end.
But the hangover endures, in the form of slower economic growth and intense pain for many investors, who have seen the bond market suffer bigger losses than in any previous 12-month period.
Since Oct. 15, 1993, when the yield on 30-year Treasury bonds sank to a low of 5.78 percent, investors in Treasury securities have sustained hundreds of billions of dollars in capital losses.
The 30-year bond yield last week neared 8 percent, and even after a small rally this week, is at 7.89 percent.


Japanese Publisher Shows An Interest in Ziff Division
A Japanese magazine publisher and software distributor has emerged as a potential bidder for the magazine division of the Ziff Communications Company.
The company, the Softbank Corporation, is "interested" in Ziff's magazine business and has had some contact with the American company, the president of Softbank, Masayoshi Son, said at a news conference today.
But he added that Softbank had not entered into specific negotiations on price or conditions with Ziff and had not yet decided whether to make a formal bid.


What About Dismissals As Shows Must Go On?
In a what may be a harbinger of tougher theatrical labor negotiations, the producers of several Broadway shows have pressured the stagehands union into cutting small numbers of backstage workers in recent months, and then have changed their shows slightly to cover the cuts.
Thus far, the changes are probably invisible to audiences -- a spotlight here, a prop there -- but the pattern of cuts that seems to be emerging is angering stagehands.


Herman Glaser, 78, Malpractice Lawyer
Herman B. Glaser, a former president of the New York State Trial Lawyers Association, died on Tuesday at his home on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He was 78.
The cause was a heart attack, said his family.


POP
A Night of Bouncy Fun From Barenaked Ladies
Town Hall
In its jolly, crowd-pleasing song "If I Had a Million Dollars," the Canadian male pop quintet that calls itself Barenaked Ladies lists all the wonderful gifts the money could buy for a special friend.
Among them are a fur coat (not real fur, it is stressed), an exotic pet and ultimately love itself.
And on Friday evening, when the group played to a packed house, the song became a deliriously happy sing-along shouted by an audience dancing in the aisles.


Race for Governor: Cuomo Says D'Amato Pulls the Strings
CANDIDATE Mario M. Cuomo PRODUCER The Garth Group, New York City VISUAL With Paul Simon's song "You Can Call Me Al" playing in the background, this 30-second ad opens with a photo of State Senator George E. Pataki followed by a shot of United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato to his right.
Yellow letters below spell out Mr.
Pataki's ties with Mr.
D'Amato.
The scene changes to a newspaper photograph of Mr.
D'Amato leading Mr.
Pataki by the hand.
The tagline then appears: "George Pataki? Maybe we should just call him Al."
SCRIPT Announcer: "George Pataki. He was handpicked by Senator Al D'Amato. His campaign staff was picked by Senator Al D'Amato. His own running mate called him a puppet of Senator Al D'Amato. Nearly a quarter of a million dollars of Pataki's campaign bills were paid for by Senator Al D'Amato, until a judge ruled it was illegal and made Pataki give it back. Everywhere Pataki goes, Senator Al D'Amato leads him by the hand."


Massimino's Status Unsettled
ROLLIE MASSIMINO will apparently open practice Saturday as the basketball coach at Nevada-Las Vegas, despite efforts by the university to get him to leave.
An attempt to buy out Massimino's contract collapsed yesterday after the coach met for one minute with KENNY GUINN, the interim U.N.L.V. president, before storming out.
Both sides refused to budge on ways to settle the remaining five years of Massimino's contract.


Plutonium Is Found Greater Than Norm In a California Park
The Environmental Protection Agency has found elevated levels of plutonium in a public park adjacent to an elementary school in Livermore, Calif., near the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.
The amount of plutonium is only about 5 percent of the maximum allowed by the E.P.A. in residential settings but is 16 to 160 times as high as normal background, according to the agency.


Bulls Sign Their Top Pick
The Chicago Bulls signed their first-round draft pick DICKEY SIMPKINS to a multiyear contract yesterday.
Terms were not revealed by the Bulls, but The Chicago Sun-Times quoted sources as saying that Simpkins received a six-year, $7 million deal.
The 6-foot-10-inch, 257-pound Simpkins was drafted out of Providence, where he averaged nearly 10 points and 6 rebounds a game.
To make room on their roster for Simpkins, the Bulls waived 7-1 center WALTER PALMER. (AP)


Molex Inc.(MOLX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Want a Good Time? Just Look Up Eagles
It is lunchtime in the Eagles' locker room and the players float in and out with ease and confidence.
Between bites of sandwiches and interviews with the news media, the banter among the players themselves is light and jovial.
Looking around, it's hard to tell that this used to be one of the most fractious and contentious places in the National Football League.


Arts Groups Should Avoid Lobbying for Corporate Sponsors; Yet More Jobs Lost
To the Editor:
For several days I've watched a parade of civic leaders stepping over themselves, huffing and puffing over Philip Morris's threat to leave New York if the City Council passes new smoking restrictions.
Is the company's attitude so hard to understand?
What Philip Morris is saying is that if the Council uses flawed science to justify legislative grandstanding, the company might just take the hint and go elsewhere.


William Kraus, 72, Dallas Cardiologist
Dr.
William L. Kraus, a leading cardiologist in Dallas, died on Friday at Parkland Memorial Hospital there.
He was 72 and lived in Dallas.
He died of cardiac arrest during emergency surgery for a broken leg he suffered in a fall the previous day, his family said.


CHRONICLE
LEE A. IACOCCA'S wife, DARRIEN EARLE, filed for divorce last Friday, but the former chairman of the Chrysler Corporation had already moved to end the marriage several weeks earlier.
Mr.
Iacocca's lawyer, PHILIP VESTEVICH of Bloomfield Hills, Mich., confirmed yesterday that his client had filed a divorce petition in Oakland County Circuit Court on Sept. 1, and then had it sealed.


The Library Provides
To the Editor:
"Another Approach" (letter, Oct. 9) refers to an out-of-print book, "The XO Factor," which maintains that homogenized milk causes lesions that trigger heart disease.
Not to worry.
Readers can request this book at their local public libraries.
Libraries that don't own the book can borrow from another library.


Special Education Panel Named
Five months after postponing a plan to reorganize New York City's vast special education program amid protests from school officials and parents, Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines has appointed a panel to review the special education system and suggest ways to reform it.
The five-member panel will submit its recommendations on June 30, with the goal of introducing the changes next September, school officials said yesterday.


Hibernia Corp.(HIB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gay Candidates: Could Attacks Backfire?
Although some Republicans have tried to make a campaign issue of the homosexuality of the Democratic candidate for New York State Attorney General, Karen S. Burstein, others were quick to condemn the idea and suggested it could hurt the party, in a recent poll, most voters said a candidate's homosexuality would not change their vote.
Article, page B8


Music Students Gather in Poland To Bridge a European Cultural Gap
Amid the unpacking of instruments and first practice sessions at the piano, gifted music students from throughout the world gathered here for the opening of the academic year, intent on the lofty ideal of bridging the cultural gap between Eastern and Western Europe.
The nearly 50 students, chosen by a jury of grand masters for their virtuosity as well as their intellectual curiosity, opened a new campus of the European Mozart Foundation.
Last year, the foundation was housed in the 18th-century Dobris Castle near Prague.
Its permanent home will be the grand Esterhaza Castle in western Hungary, which should be restored by the fall of 1996.


Editorial Notebook; Beastly Manners in Cyberspace
Affairs of the heart can produce lots of venom as they die.
Once, the beastly things that lovers said at the end disappeared into the ether.
They were also pardonable on grounds of momentary insanity.
Less so since 25 million people tied themselves into the Internet, the international computer network through which participants send electronic mail (E-mail) and commune for group discussions via thousands of forums known as computer billboards.


Alcan Aluminium Ltd.(AL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Drought, Floods and Now . . . Bumper Crops?


A House Can Soar To Heal the Heart
DR.
ROSEMARY JOYCE was perched on the edge of a red-and-green plaid sofa, looking the model of a Midwestern matron as she offered to pour tea.
But when she glanced toward the three-story wall of windows in her new family-room addition, persona gave way to person.
Beyond the windows, patches of hardscrabble pasture and scruffy hayfield rolled across the Hocking River Valley in southeastern Ohio, 38 miles from Columbus.
And somehow the years rolled away, and the 64-year-old woman was young again.


Arts Groups Should Avoid Lobbying for Corporate Sponsors
To the Editor:
There's a lesson for all arts administrators in Anna Quindlen's Oct. 8 column on an anonymous salvo from New York City arts groups to their sponsor Philip Morris, under siege from a City Council that is looking into a ban on smoking in most public places: We're not puppets for the piper.
The quid pro quo for arts groups accepting corporate sponsorship is old hat: we're grateful for their marketing (and philanthropic) dollars in exchange for giving them access to our cachet and promoting visibility for their image and products.


Stocks End Day Mixed as Economic Data Is Awaited
The stock market was mixed yesterday, as traders awaited two major inflation-related economic reports today and tomorrow
After a three-day winning streak in which the Dow Jones industrial average soared more than 100 points, profit taking took its toll.
Over all, the blue chips were outperformed by the secondary stocks.


Challenged Bank Defends Its Derivatives Actions
The Bankers Trust New York Corporation gave its first detailed rebuttal yesterday to the $73 million lawsuit by Gibson Greetings Inc. in connection with losses that the greeting card company took on transactions known as derivatives.
In a reply filed in Federal court in Cincinnati, Bankers Trust argued that Gibson undertook a series of transactions that entailed risk based on the company's opinion that interest rates would remain stable or decline.


Knicks' Smith Seeks Season in Sun
Charles Smith's first two seasons with the Knicks have hardly been easy.
He has been injured frequently.
He has been criticized by the news media and even booed at times by home fans.
Smith admits that he has not always performed up to expectations -- not his own, not the fans', not Coach Pat Riley's.


A New Labor Design at Levi Strauss
Two issues stand out in labor-management relations today.
One is whether unions help or hinder efforts by many companies to give workers more control over their jobs.
The other is whether the nation's labor laws should be amended to make union organizing easier.
Not surprisingly, surveys show that most corporations vote against unions on both counts.
But now Levi Strauss &amp; Company, the nation's largest apparel manufacturer, has parted ways with the majority of its business brethren.
Levi will allow the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union, which represents one-third of its 18,000 workers at 30 American plants, to sign up thousands more as long as the union helps the company revamp its production system.


Joyner Awarded Damages
A federal jury awarded the 1984 triple jump Olympic gold medalist AL JOYNER $51,501 in compensatory and punitive damages yesterday in his civil lawsuit against four officers of the Los Angeles Police Department.
Joyner's lawyer, JOHN BURTON, had asked the five-man, three-woman jury to award his client $4.5 million in compensatory damages, plus punitive damages against the officers involved in the 1992 incident.


Essay; What's With Assad?
I spotted Shimon Peres, the Israeli Foreign Minister, on a flight to L.A. last week and plunked myself down in the seat next to him.
How did he explain the latest polls in Israel that show the opposition leader, Benjamin Netanyahu, running neck-and-neck with Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin?
A fast man with an aphorism, Peres replied: "Polls are like perfume -- nice to smell, dangerous to swallow."


How to Register to Vote
New York
The deadline for registering to vote in New York State for the Nov. 8 general election is midnight on Friday.


Firecracker Suicide Fails
A Brooklyn man put a large firecracker in his mouth yesterday and lit it, in an attempt at suicide that left him badly maimed, the police said.
The man, Timothy Spaulding, 22 years old, of 4657 Bedford Avenue in Sheepshead Bay, was in critical condition last night at Kings County Hospital Center.
At 3:50 P.M. yesterday, Mr.
Spaulding got in a car in the driveway of his home, where he lives with an aunt and uncle, put an M-80 firecracker in his mouth and lit the fuse, said Detective Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


Campaign Briefs; Democrats' New Ads Attack G.O.P. 'Contract'
The Democratic National Committee today announced a $2 million advertising campaign that portrays Republican candidates as intent on tax cuts for the rich, huge new spending for the Pentagon and "devastating cuts in Medicare."
The campaign reflects an effort by Democrats to turn the "contract with America," a list of promises embraced by Republican candidates for Congress this month, into a liability in the final weeks of the fall election campaign.
"A trillion dollars in promises," an announcer in the advertisements declares.
"How will they make up the spending gap? Explode the deficit again? Make devastating cuts in Medicare?"


3 Hollywood Giants Team Up To Create Major Movie Studio
In a seismic shift within Hollywood's traditional studio system, Steven Spielberg, David Geffen and Jeffrey Katzenberg announced plans today for a new motion picture, animation, television and entertainment company whose creation could involve buying Universal Pictures from its Japanese owner.
The union of three of the most powerful brokers in Hollywood to own and run their own studio marks the biggest merger of talent since Charlie Chaplin, Mary Pickford, Douglas Fairbanks and D. W. Griffith founded the United Artists movie empire in 1919.
It also underscores the financial and creative turmoil rocking Hollywood studios, including Sony Pictures, which also has Japanese owners that have lavished hundreds of millions of dollars on salaries, buildings, buyouts and, in many cases, failed movies.


Officials in Germany Denounce Sect as a Menace to Democracy
Leading members of the German Government and opposition parties have attacked the American-based Scientology movement as a danger to democracy, and called on the next government to ban it.
The interior ministers of the 16 German states last spring called Scientology "an organization that combines elements of business crime and psychological terror against its own members with economic activities and sectarian traits, under the protective cover of a religious group."


Sports of The Times; Antidote For Lockout: Go Outdoors
THIS was going to be one of those gloom-and-doom sports labor columns about those dreadful owners and those selfish athletes who won't entertain us when we need it so badly.
Then I went for a walk in the park.
There was a memorial ceremony for Fred Lebow in Central Park yesterday, to honor the force of nature who made marathon racing so popular all over the world.
On this gorgeous afternoon, everybody held hands as we walked past the finish line, and I wound up holding hands with a good friend of mine on my left and a stranger on my right, and that was the point.


Nora Jaffe, Artist, 66
Nora Jaffe, a painter and sculptor, died on Friday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 66 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was lung cancer, said her daughter, Lee.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 5 about the Oklahoma Senate election referred incorrectly to the state's vote in the 1992 Presidential election.
George Bush, not Bill Clinton, carried the state.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Nietzsche as Composer: A Musical Argument  Goethe House
"Without music, life would be a mistake," Friedrich Nietzsche famously wrote in "The Twilight of the Idols." Is it a mistake that Nietzsche's own youthful compositions have been almost completely disregarded?
A concert on Friday night by the Nietzsche Music Project delivered a complex answer to that question, boiling down to yes and no.


U.S. and Haitians Differ on Entourage For Aristide Return
Three days before the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide is to reclaim the presidency of Haiti, his advisers and the Clinton Administration have yet to agree about the size and shape of the official delegation that will celebrate his homecoming.
At issue is how many American officials, members of Congress, private citizens and aircraft should be sent to a country where security remains uncertain -- despite the presence of nearly 20,000 United States troops who arrived on Sept. 19 to enforce the change in power.


Review/Fashion; The Galliano Influence: Clothes That Amaze
When street fashion took over the runways of Paris for a few years, fashion became disposable.
The game of hemlines up and hemlines down was just the most obvious of the methods used to make women feel that clothes, once an investment, were more like a purchase of a jar of jelly, to be thrown away after six months.
This season, clothes are looking like investments again, to be studied, turned inside out and marveled at.
Much of that change is due to the influence of John Galliano.
Mr.
Galliano, who looks like a rock star on an MTV video, is one designer who doesn't draw from that cooled-off source of fashion inspiration.


Trottier Files for Bankruptcy
BRYAN TROTTIER, the former Islander who is now an assistant coach with the Pittsburgh Penguins, has filed for Chapter 7 protection under the federal bankruptcy code.
In court documents, Trottier listed assets of $141,629 and debts of $9,498,897 to 23 creditors.
Some of those owed invested in Trottier's ice-rink business in Port Washington, L.I.
The business, BT Skating Corp., went into foreclosure this year by a New York bank and is in receivership.
Under Chapter 7, a filer's assets are sold by the court to pay off creditors.


CHRONICLE
Senator HOWARD M. METZENBAUM, Democrat of Ohio, couldn't refuse the offer made by the Consumer Federation of America, which created a title and a job for him.
Senator Metzenbaum, 77, who is stepping down after serving 19 years in the Senate, will become the unpaid chairman of the nonprofit association of 240 consumer groups.


Cuomo Suggests State Buy Lilco, And Utility Is Considering Offer
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, locked in a fierce re-election battle, proposed yesterday to have the state buy the Long Island Lighting Company.
The company said it would seriously consider the offer, which would cost the state about $9 billion.
Mr.
Cuomo, speaking at a news conference in Mineola, L.I., asserted that a state takeover would lower electric rates for Lilco customers -- who pay among the highest rates in the country -- by about 10 percent, or $250 million a year.
He said the savings would come through elimination of shareholder dividends and Federal taxes and through lower capital costs.


Haiti Generals Regain Access To $79 Million
Hours after forcing Haiti's military leaders into exile in Panama, the White House announced rewards today for them and their associates.
The rewards included safe passage to the United States for family members, an agreement to rent three houses in Haiti from them and access to at least $79 million in frozen accounts in the United States.
The money is held in individual accounts by 600 military officers and supporters whose assets were frozen by the United States last spring, Treasury Department officials said.
They said bank secrecy laws made it impossible to say how much belongs to the former military leader, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, or to his top deputy, Brig.
Gen.
Philippe Biamby.


Knicks Hope Christie Adds Some Swing
Adding a young but unproven player, the Knicks acquired Doug Christie, a 6-foot-6-inch versatile swingman, from the Los Angeles Lakers today, for second-round draft choices in 1997 and 1998.
The 24-year-old Christie is not the final piece of New York's championship puzzle.
He will be hard-pressed to earn consistent playing time, with the Knicks already deep at small forward and in the backcourt.


Sounds Around Town
Alto Sax
Donald Harrison, Iridium Room, 44 West 63d Street, Manhattan, (212) 956-4676.
Donald Harrison is one of the better alto saxophonists around, someone who brings great dollops of blues to his playing.
He was one of the first of the important young musicians to arrive in the early 1980's, and he's still good.
He is joined by the exuberant pianist Cyrus Chestnut, Duane Burno on bass and Dion Parsons on drums.
Sets are tonight and Saturday at 9:30 and 11 P.M. and 12:30 A.M.
There is a $10 cover and a $10 minimum.
PETER WATROUS Comedy Band
Jazz Passengers, Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, (212) 362-8719.
Downtown's great comedy band returns, with a new record, "In Love" (High Street).
It features the singers Jeff Buckley, Debbie Harry, Little Jimmy Scott and others; they will be on hand at Merkin Concert Hall.
And if the jokes get stale, there are always the musicians, including a precise rhythm section, an astute and adventurous Bill Ware on vibes, and the solid work of Roy Nathanson on saxophones and Curtis Fowlkes on trombones.
The concert is tomorrow night at 8; tickets are $15.
P.
W. 10 Hours
Smalls, 183 West 10th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 929-7565.
The concept is fairly simple: 10 hours of jazz for $10.
On Friday and Saturday, the fine pianist Sam Yahel will be there, along with the important young alto saxophonist Jesse Davis, the bassist Tyler Mitchell and others.
On Sunday, the pianists Brad Meldau and Herman Foster will be there, along with many others, all supporting one of the more intimate and exciting jazz rooms in New York.
Shows start at 10 P.M.
There is a $10 cover charge for each show; free beverages will be served.
P.
W.


A Bronx Charmer With Problems and All the Answers
When Lisette Linares (Lauren Velez), one very smart spitfire from the Bronx, wants to land a job at a record company, she doesn't exactly sit down and fill out an application.
She bluffs, coaxes and just plain charms her way to success, sweeping away any obstacles with the same kind of assurance shown by Darnell Martin, the talented new director telling Lisette's story.
"I Like It Like That," Ms.
Martin's terrifically buoyant debut feature, is as scrappy and alluring as its heroine.
With an obvious debt to Spike Lee but a sure knowledge of her very different terrain, Ms.
Martin shows what life is like for a feisty young woman with no money, three children and a husband who cheats on her and has just landed himself in the Bronx House of Detention.
Not to mention a transvestite brother who sweetly helps her with day care.


Russia's Ills: Ruble and . . .
With higher short-term interest rates and intervention by the Russian Central Bank, the ruble bounced back strongly today, ending at 2,994 to the dollar, slightly higher than it was before the collapse on Tuesday.
But the crisis leaves scars and points to deeper insecurities within the Russian economy and political leadership.
While there is considerably more stability than a year ago, when tanks were firing at the Parliament and monthly inflation was over 20 percent a month, there is continuing fragility as well.





Art in Review
Andres Serrano  Paula Cooper Gallery 155 Wooster Street (near Houston Street) SoHo Through Oct. 26
Sex and spirituality continue to preoccupy Andres Serrano.
This show of photographs made during a recent stay in Budapest includes images of a naked middle-aged couple, a naked old woman puffing serenely on a cigarette and a woman performing fellatio, along with shots of women praying in church and a close-up of a priest's ornate gown.


An Immigrant's Lifelong Journey
Luis Cruz Azaceta left Cuba for New York in 1960 when he was 18, just after the revolution that brought Castro to power.
To judge by the lively but uneven mini-retrospective at the Alternative Museum, the move was as traumatic as it was productive.
And it helped to form an art in which personal and political identities mesh.
The show begins on an unpromising note with Mr.
Azaceta's cartoonish paintings from the late 70's.
Among them are the harsh-colored "Window Display" (1979) -- a comic-paranoic view of Manhattan as a bad-dream assemblage of weapons, severed limbs and the Empire State Building stabbed through with a knife -- and a 1981 rainbow-colored self-portrait suggestive of 60's psychedelic poster art.
In later work, Mr.
Azaceta manages to unite the decorative and the grotesque to persuasive effect, but the combination looks pretty crude early on.


Ft. Lee Warns It May Close Bridge Roads
Fort Lee's mayor declared war on the Port Authority today, threatening to take morning commuters hostage by throwing up rush-hour roadblocks on local streets leading to the George Washington Bridge.
Life with the bridge, Mayor Jack Alter proclaimed, is a litany of unreimbursed costs and misery -- streets clogged in the morning with bumper-to-bumper traffic, motorists darting around side streets looking for quick entry to toll booths, risky crossings for school children, inordinate expense for the police, the courts and road upkeep, and not a cent in return from the authority, the bridge's tax-exempt owner.


Microsoft in $1.5 Billion Deal to Acquire Intuit
The Microsoft Corporation, in the software industry's largest acquisition ever, agreed today to acquire Intuit Inc., the producer of the leading personal finance program, Quicken, in a stock swap valued at about $1.5 billion.
For Microsoft, the world's largest software company, the ownership of Quicken would put the company in a position to dominate the emerging market for writing checks, paying bills and shopping electronically from home.
Moreover, the acquisition highlights that Microsoft will expand its dominance through acquisition when its ability to do so with its own products fails.


Producer Prices Fell Last Month
The widely watched Government gauge of producer inflation dropped sharply in September, suggesting that price pressures were markedly less intense last month than economists had predicted.
But closer examination of the Labor Department report showed little, if any, overall lessening of inflation pressure.
The news touched off fresh rallies in the bond and stock markets in the morning.
But these rallies subsided as the data were examined and investors looked ahead to the release of the September Consumer Price Index and other important economic data on Friday.  [ Pages D5 and D6. ]


Militant Protestants In Truce, Lifting Peace Hopes in Ulster
Hope for peace in Northern Ireland took a giant stride ahead today as Protestant gunmen responded to the six-week-old cease-fire of the Irish Republican Army by declaring their own cease-fire.
The Protestant terrorist groups pledged to "universally cease all operational hostilities" as of midnight tonight.
The duration of the cease-fire, a communique said, "will be completely dependent" upon how long the I.R.A. cease-fire lasts.


A $300 Million Plan for Continental Corp.
The Continental Corporation, seeking to improve its financial condition and profits, announced a plan yesterday to raise $300 million of additional capital from outside investors and hired a new chief executive.
The new chief executive, Richard M. Haverland, is expected to take office by the end of the year, and replace John P. Mascotte, who will resign.
Mr.
Haverland, 53, was previously a senior executive at American Premier Underwriters Inc. of Cincinnati and the Progressive Corporation of Cleveland, both insurance companies with a history of operating much more profitably than Continental.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Romanian Government's refusal to admit its exiled King misstated the whereabouts of President Ion Iliescu when he commented on the issue on Tuesday.
He was in Bucharest, not New York.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball National Basketball Association  CHARLOTTE HORNETS -- Waived Terry Boyd, guard.
LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Traded Doug Christie, guard-forward, to the New York Knicks for two future second-round draft choices.
PHOENIX SUNS -- Waived Duane Cooper, guard.
SEATTLE SUPERSONICS -- Waived Carl Thomas and Sam Crawford, guards.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section yesterday about renovations to the Russian Consulate in New York misstated the status of diplomatic relations between the United States and the Soviet Union following the invasion of Afghanistan in 1979.
President Jimmy Carter barred the opening of the consulate then; he did not sever diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union.


Nets to Keep Anderson Out
They are a bit banged up and sore.
And their All-Star guard again did not practice.
Nonetheless, the Nets broke training camp today at Princeton University and headed for Detroit and their first preseason challenge.
"Over all, it was a pretty good camp," Coach Butch Beard said.
"We'll get graded tomorrow."
Beard has been working hard to install an up-tempo offense; Friday night, he will see whether the Nets have grasped his principles in the club's first of seven preseason games against the Pistons at the Palace of Auburn Hills.
Kenny Anderson ran on a tight left hamstring for the first time in three days, but did not take part in the final workout.
Beard is keeping him out of Friday's game and Anderson might also miss Sunday's game against Cleveland in Dayton, Ohio.
Beard, concerned with having Anderson ready for the season opener Nov. 4 at Houston, said he did not want to take any unnecessary chances with Anderson's health.


Not Looking Back, Cedras Flies to Panama Exile
Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, Haiti's deposed military ruler, along with his family and top associates flew to exile in Panama in the predawn darkness today, clearing the way for the return, under American military protection, of the elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
General Cedras did not look back as, wearing a dark blue suit instead of his customary khaki uniform and gold-emblazoned cap, he walked to the America Trans Air charter whose blue-painted nose carried the name, "Spirit of Indianapolis." He was accompanied by his chief of staff, Brig.
Gen.
Philippe Biamby.


Arrest in Slayings of 2 Gay Men
A 16-year-old high school student in Laurel, Miss., was charged yesterday with murder in the slayings of two homosexuals, a case that gay rights groups fear constitutes a hate crime.
Officials in Laurel say robbery was the motive in the killings of Robert Walters, 34, and Joseph Shoemake, 24, on Oct. 7.
The case has received considerable attention because Laurel is 30 miles from Camp Sister Spirit, a feminist-lesbian retreat whose residents say they have been harassed by their neighbors.


Senate Race in California: A Television Battle
REPRESENTATIVE MICHAEL HUFFINGTON
The Huffington campaign began broadcasting a commercial this week that uses excerpts from newspapers like The San Francisco Chronicle and The Orange County Register and television broadcasts to attack Senator Dianne Feinstein.
The advertisement runs for 30 seconds and is being seen statewide.
On the Screen: Reproductions of headlines and news organization mastheads, with announcer's voice in background.
Producer: Gannon, McCarthy, Mason Ltd.
The suit over financial irregularities involved sloppy, but not criminal, keeping of financial records in an earlier Feinstein campaign and resulted in a $190,000 fine by Federal election officials.
Ms.
Feinstein did change positions on the death penalty, but the change came long before she ran for the Senate, and Ms.
Brown publicly corrected herself on that long before the Huffington advertisement went on the air.
Scorecard: The advertisement is one of a several by Mr.
Huffington that try to use what others have said to paint Ms.
Feinstein as an opportunistic career politician who slings mud and goes out of her way to take care of special interests.
From the start, that characterization has been the crux of the Huffington campaign.
Feinstein:
The Feinstein campaign also began broadcasting a commercial this week that uses excerpts from newspapers and television broadcasts to attack Representative Huffington.
The advertisement runs for 30 seconds and is being seen statewide.
On the Screen: Reproductions of headlines and unflattering words about Mr.
Huffington, along with an unflattering photograph of Mr.
Huffington that shrinks to a single dot.
Announcer's voice in background.
Huffington but instead were opinions offered by Huffington business competitors in lawsuits.
Huffington family companies have been fined by the Government for violating international trade regulations prohibiting overseas sales of law enforcement equipment, and some have encountered financial difficulties that resulted in disputes over tax liability.
Mr.
Huffington, a wealthy former Texan, refuses to release his tax returns.
Scorecard: The advertisement is one of several by Ms.
Feinstein that try to use what others have said to paint Mr.
Huffington as a wealthy carpetbagger from Texas who refuses to come clean with his personal and business dealings, many inept and possibly shady, and thus cannot be trusted to serve in the Senate.
That characterization has been the crux of the Feinstein campaign in the latter phases of the race.


At Hostos, A New World Of Culture
In 1982, Eugenio Maria de Hostos Community College started its culture and arts program, a series of concerts and exhibitions on a portable stage in a gymnasium on the Grand Concourse.
It was an experiment in image-building for the college, which is the first bilingual school in the City University of New York system.
Hostos serves a primarily poor, Hispanic community in the South Bronx, where it trains health-care workers.
"Nobody had much hope for the cultural program," said Wallace I. Edgecombe, who has directed the program since it began.
"They didn't expect people would come to the South Bronx for cultural fare." But the audiences arrived and grew; so did the offerings, which ranged from salsa music to theater to classical music to art exhibitions.
And this weekend, where the gym once stood, Hostos is to open its new Center for the Arts and Culture, New York City's first full-scale arts center to focus on Hispanic culture.


Giuliani Says Connecticut Broke Truce
Still smarting from the Swiss Bank Corporation's decision to accept incentives to move from New York City to Connecticut, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the city would begin aggressively trying to woo businesses out of Connecticut.
Mr.
Giuliani and his Deputy Mayor for finance and economic development, John S. Dyson, said the city would no longer abide by a 1991 agreement reached between Connecticut, New Jersey and New York State to avoid bidding wars over one another's businesses and jobs.


A Troubled Family Facing Collapse


For MCA's Japanese Parent, No Signs Yet of Letting Go
Matsushita's responses to the prospect of selling its Hollywood film and entertainment company, MCA Inc., have ranged from the poetic to the cryptic, but they have always conveyed the same meaning.
"Matsushita has purchased a beautiful and tasty apple," Tsuzo Murase, the executive in Osaka, Japan, who oversees the movie operation, said in March, when rumors were circulating that the parent company, the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, was considering selling a stake in MCA to John C. Malone, the powerful cable television executive.
"If half the apple is cut and sold, the remaining half would not be as tasty."


Chipcom Corp.(CHPM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


On My Mind; Shrinking Saddam
Saddam Hussein stands a pretty good chance of carrying it off again.
Once again he has created a military crisis and been forced by American power to back off.
And yes, once again he could end up with a deal that allows him to remain in total control at home, grow in prestige abroad as a leader of Islam and rebuild for a new attack against the U.S. and its Mideastern allies.
Nice?
President Clinton suddenly has arrived at the same decision point President Bush reached after he led the allied coalition to a stunning military victory over Saddam.
Would he push on toward ending Saddam and his tyranny?


Restaurants
If you haven't been able to get reservations at white-hot Gramercy Tavern, don't despair: time is on your side.
From the moment it first flung its massive doors open to the public in July, Gramercy Tavern has been turning customers away.
But while the trend-conscious are being tortured in reservation hell, the rest of us can console ourselves with this thought: the restaurant is improving every day.
Each meal I have eaten has been better than the one before; a year from now, Gramercy Tavern may well have turned into the restaurant of its owners' dreams.


Honoring a Memorable New York Governor


Consolidated Papers Inc.(CDP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Court Ruling Delays Merger of Police Units
A five-member panel of the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court in Manhattan upheld a restraining order yesterday that effectively freezes Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to merge the housing police with the New York City Police Department for at least a few more weeks.
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton expressed disappointment with the decision, but he said his force and the 2,500-member housing police department were already beginning to work together in anticipation of an eventual consolidation.


Board Chairman of N.A.A.C.P. Is Focus of Dispute on Finances
Two months after firing its executive director, the N.A.A.C.P. is embroiled in another dispute involving one of its top officers, William F. Gibson, the chairman of the board.
In three columns written over the last week, Carl T. Rowan, the syndicated columnist, has asserted that Dr.
Gibson has used his position as chairman for personal gain.


Sidney Kamino, 73, Discount Retailer
Sidney E. Kamino, a leader in the discount retail industry, died on Monday at Boca Raton Community Hospital in Florida.
He was 73 and lived in Delray Beach, Fla.
The cause was cancer, said his son, Eric.





Brett Lindros Sent Down
The Islanders and the Ottawa Senators took steps yesterday to keep a pair of blue-chip investments liquid.
With the start of the National Hockey League season delayed indefinitely, the Islanders assigned 18-year-old Brett Lindros to his junior team in Kingston, Ontario, and the Senators sent 19-year-old Alexandre Daigle back to his junior team in Victoriaville, Quebec.


CHRONICLE
When YOKO ONO cleans out her closets, here's what comes out: the black electric Rickenbacker 325 guitar played by John Lennon in the mid-1960's; his annotated lyrics for "Lucy in the Sky With Diamonds"; five of his report cards from the Quarry Bank School in Liverpool, England, and the lime-green uniform he wore for the "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band" album cover.
Those were among the possessions Ms.
Ono brought to a news conference yesterday at the Sony Building in Manhattan, where she announced that she would lend a collection of Lennon memorabilia to the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame and Museum in Cleveland.
The museum, a $92 million project designed by I. M. Pei, is to open next September.


Cardinals Expected to Hire Jocketty
The St.
Louis Cardinals were expected to name WALT JOCKETTY, a Colorado Rockies front-office executive, as the club's general manager at a news conference today.
Several news media outlets announced the naming of Jocketty, 42, last night soon after the Cardinals said they would hold a news conference to make a "major announcement."


Western Digital Corp.(WDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Brown's Growing Pains Tugging at His Heart
There is no question about Dave Brown's skills.
He is good.
Really good.
In a couple of years he will be even better.
He is a leader and well respected by his teammates even though this is his first season as a starter.
Another part of Brown's continuing growth as a National Football League quarterback will be tested this week, and it is something that cannot be measured by any statistic.
It is his heart.


International Paper
The New York Times Shares of the International Paper Company, which posted a 47 percent rise in quarterly earnings on Tuesday, climbed again yesterday.
The company has benefited this year from price increases and a recovery in global markets.


F.S.U. Athletic Director Is Censured
Florida State Athletic Director BOB GOIN was censured yesterday by the Florida Ethics Commission, which recommended he be fined and made to reimburse the state for a low-cost roof on his home.
The full panel reversed the recommendation of its hearing officer, JOEL GUSTAFSON.
He ruled last month that Goin didn't violate state law when he got a new roof from Southeast Enterprise Group Inc., which was also working on the school's $96 million stadium expansion.


New York City Marathon Runs Longer on WPIX
Last November, after ABC Sports broadcast its final New York City Marathon after 13 years, Fred Lebow, the race director, vowed, "We will be on a network." At the time, he regretted having rejected a two-year ABC deal for a one-year contract.
Lebow died last Sunday, knowing that his beloved creation had stayed on television.


Stocks Up on Inflation Report, Then Ease
At the opening bell yesterday, stock prices surged so quickly that traders braced for a major rally.
But by the close, stocks had pared most of their gains and ended the session with a relatively modest increase.
The reason for the initial frenzy was obvious: the morning release of the Producer Price Index for September, which fell five-tenths of 1 percent, the largest decline in more than a year.
This dampening of inflationary expectations strongly signaled that the Federal Reserve is unlikely to raise interest rates soon, a move that would cut into corporate earnings.


Pataki Misconstrues Anti-Bias Laws Affecting Gay People; For Tax Cuts, and Soon
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 6 news analysis on the tax cut plan of George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for New York governor, perpetuates the myth that tax cuts lead to decreased government revenues and that tax increases lead to increased government revenue, a myth disproved by New York's fiscal reality.


Whirlpool Corp.(WHR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
The continuation of a front-page article yesterday about the creation of a major Hollywood studio included scrambled passages in some copies.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


White House Takes Cut at Ending Baseball Strike
The Clinton Administration, perhaps the last entity in Washington to refrain from taking a swing at ending the baseball strike, appears poised to change policy.
Secretary of Labor Robert Reich will announce this afternoon that the White House will enter the two-month-old dispute by enlisting the aid of Bill Usery Jr., regarded by many as the nation's No. 1 mediator.


Kemper Deal Is Bolstered By Conseco
Conseco Inc. confirmed yesterday that it was buying shares of the Kemper Corporation, which it agreed in early June to acquire for $3.25 billion.
The stock purchases come at a time when the share prices of Kemper and Conseco have been declining, reducing the value of Conseco's offer by $75 million to about $3.18 billion.
By purchasing Kemper shares, and telling Kemper's network of more than 1,000 brokers on Monday that it was doing so, Conseco's chairman, Stephen Hilbert, is seeking to demonstrate his confidence that the acquisition will be completed.


METRO DIGEST
CUOMO CALLS FOR STATE TO BUY LILCO
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, locked in a fierce re-election battle, proposed to have the state buy the Long Island Lighting Company.
The company said it would seriously consider the offer, which would cost the state about $9 billion.
A1.


Russia and Iraq Work Out Plan to Ease Gulf Tension
As the United States lobbied hard for a new Security Council resolution to deter Iraq from repeating its recent threatening military moves, Iraq and Russia announced tonight in Baghdad that they had reached an agreement that would lead to Iraqi recognition of Kuwait.
The Iraqi concession, which would also recognize Kuwait's borders as demarcated by the United Nations, would be linked to the lifting of some of the international sanctions now imposed on Iraq within six months.


Corrections
An article yesterday about preparations in Panama to receive the Haitian military leader, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, misidentified a Panamanian island where the Shah of Iran lived in exile.
It is Contadora, not Contra Dora.


Where Antiques Reflect The Latest Fashions
WHEN the International Fine Art and Antique Dealers Show first opened in Manhattan six years ago, droves of Europe's top dealers leaped at the chance to exhibit at the Seventh Regiment Armory.
Since most of their best customers were Americans, the chance to give them shop-at-home service seemed irresistible.
And it was.
For the first time, America had a showplace that rivaled Grosvenor House in London, Maastrict in the Netherlands and the Biennale in Paris.
This year's fair, which opens today and runs through Thursday, still ranks with those extravaganzas.
Viewers have a chance to see objects as varied as a third-century A.D.
Roman glass bottle for $120, a 1944 Picasso oil for $435,000 and a $3.5 million Chinese bronze.
It's also a place to follow current fashions in collecting. (Asian art is hot right now; so are Continental furniture and animal jewelry.)


Student Death Sparks Unrest And Walkout at High School
An autopsy was conducted yesterday on the body of a 14-year-old Manhattan high school student who collapsed in a classroom and died on Wednesday, but the cause of death will probably not be known for at least a week, the New York City Medical Examiner's office said.
The Medical Examiner was still awaiting the results of blood and tissue tests, said Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman.


Members of Simpson Jury Pool Paint Self-Portraits, Mostly Glowing, of Themselves
The first 31 juror questionnaires to be released in the O. J. Simpson murder trial offer an intriguing, though not entirely convincing, whisper of the vox populi.
And there was plenty of time to study them today as jury selection halted abruptly when the assistant prosecutor in the case, William W. Hodgman, took ill with a stomach ailment.
Though more than half of the initial 94 potential jurors called to court are either black or Hispanic, few of the first 31 awaiting interviews said in their questionnaires that racial discrimination in Los Angeles was serious.
They stood stalwartly by the presumption of innocence.
They said they had an open mind about most things, including DNA testing.
They said they did not use knives for anything but cooking or boning fish.


Republican Strives Against Brutal Odds in Her Quest Against Marion Barry
Carol Schwartz, the Republican candidate for mayor, stood before a boarded-up public-housing apartment in a decaying neighborhood today to announce a 15-point plan to fight crime and drugs.
She arrived in a red convertible with no fanfare, was surrounded by no campaign signs or banners and drew only two neighbors to the clutch of supporters and campaign workers who met her there.
One of the neighbors, Hope Hall, asked Mrs.
Schwartz why she had not let residents know she was coming.
"Marion Barry's been here the last two, three days, all over the place," Ms.
Hall said.
"He had people going around in cars, letting us know he was coming."


U.S. Is Pressing Arafat Over Kidnapped Israeli Soldier
The United States joined Israel today in applying pressure on Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, to make sure that a kidnapped Israeli soldier is delivered safely from Islamic radicals who threaten to kill him anytime after Friday night.
Underlining the soldier's dual American and Israeli citizenship, United States officials, led by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, phoned Mr.
Arafat several times and warned him that he is responsible for ending the crisis since he is in charge of the autonomous Gaza Strip.


Mozambique Struggling to Cope With Raging Crime Wave
For four days in July any traveler who had the bad luck to drive through the village of Dombe was ordered off the road at gunpoint and taken hostage, becoming a prisoner not of war but of a fractious peace.
The captors, demobilized guerrillas sent home after a 16-year civil war, demanded food and blankets from the United Nations, and when the first offerings proved inadequate the United Nations officials were added to the crowd of captives.


Pennies for Thoughts, Billions and Billions
The Orlando Magic point guard, known as Penny, decided he was worth 13 billion, 400 million of his namesake coins.
Or $134 million, for those without pocket calculators.


Art in Review
'Mapping'  Museum of Modern Art 11 West 53d Street Through Dec. 20
On first glance, "Mapping" seems to suffer from what might be called the "dog in art" problem.
It's a theme show so specific as to make obviousness inevitable, a show better suited to a commercial gallery, and one that most museum curators should be able to organize in their sleep.
This exhibition of 28 contemporary artists, which is the work of Robert Storr, a curator in the museum's department of painting and sculpture, just squeaks by.
It's something of a no-brainer, although a carefully chosen no-brainer.


Home Video
Last December, video-game makers were urged by Congress to adopt a rating system within a year or have Congress do it for them.
By this December, the game industry's new designations are to begin to appear on packaging, and those involved are eager to make clear what they think the system does and doesn't accomplish.
"We're in the business of labeling content, not to censor or ban products," said Dr.
Arthur I. Pober, a consultant who supervised development of the ratings.


Five Years Later: Eastern Europe, Post Communism -- A special report.; A Wall of Resentment Now Divides Germany
If the peaceful revolution against East German Communism had a birthplace, it may well have been the Nikolai Church in Leipzig, where the Rev.
Christian Fuhrer organized weekly "prayers for peace" that grew into vast street demonstrations in which tens of thousands of protesters took part.
Today, Mr.
Fuhrer looks back with justifiable pride on the movement he helped lead, but like many of his neighbors he also laments some of what German unification has brought.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Close Call for Navratilova  Second-seeded Martina Navratilova avoided an early exit in her last European tournament by staving off a match point and rallying past Lori McNeil, 5-7, 7-6 (9-7), 6-4, yesterday at the Porsche Grand Prix in Filderstadt, Germany.
Martina Hingis, the 14-year-old Swiss player in her second pro tournament, advanced to the quarterfinals by rolling past Christina Singer, 6-1, 6-4.
McNeil appeared headed for a second-round victory when she fired two strong serves to set up match point at 7-6 in the tie breaker.
But Navratilova slammed a backhand volley on the next point and won the set behind two McNeil errors. (AP) Ivanisevic Wins: Top-seeded Goran Ivanisevic barely defeated Greg Rusedski, 5-7, 7-6 (7-5), 6-4, in the third round of the Super Seiko tournament in Tokyo.
Ivanisevic ended the meeting of two lanky left-handers by breaking the Canadian in the final game.
Third-seeded Stefan Edberg beat No. 13 Mark Woodforde, 6-4, 6-4.
Fourth-seeded Todd Martin defeated No. 14 Aaron Krickstein, 7-6 (7-0), 0-6, 6-4, and sixth-seeded Michael Chang outlasted Todd Woodbridge, 3-6, 6-4, 6-3.
Also yesterday, Jeff Tarango was fined $3,000 for dropping his shorts during a loss to Chang on Wednesday. (AP) GOLF &gt;Revenge for Ballesteros  A rejuvenated Seve Ballesteros avenged one of his most painful defeats when he defeated David Frost yesterday in the first round of the world match-play championship in Virginia Water, England.
Ballesteros, who was routed by Frost, 7 and 6, in the opening round last year, had 13 birdies and shot bogey-free golf to beat the sixth-seeded South African, 8 and 7.
Ballesteros, who is seeking his sixth world match-play title, shot nine under par 63 over the first 18 holes.
Frost was five under when the match ended at the 29th.
Vijay Singh was a 4-and-3 winner over Jesper Parnevik, who squandered a three-hole lead.
Ballesteros will play third-seeded Ernie Els in today's second round.
Singh will play top-seeded Corey Pavin, the defending champion. (AP) Estes Shoots a 62: Bob Estes, yet to win in seven seasons on the PGA Tour, birdied the last hole for a nine-under-par 62 and a one-stroke lead after one round of the Texas Open in San Antonio.
Estes, who had no bogeys, hit a 5-iron to within 3 feet for the closing birdie that broke a tie with Bob Tway.
Paul Azinger didn't even get started.
Azinger, attempting a comeback after successful treatment for a lymphoma in his right shoulder, withdrew before the start of play after he was stricken with back spasms on Wednesday while warming up. (AP) BOXING Vasquez Keeps His Title  Wilfredo Vasquez of Puerto Rico retained his World Boxing Association superbantamweight title last night with a unanimous decision over Juan Polo-Perez of Colombia in the Paris suburb of Levellois-Perret.
The judges scored it 115-113, 116-111 and 116-112. (AP) YACHT RACING It's Almost a French 1-2-3
French solo sailors were close to locking up the three top positions yesterday in the first stage of the BOC round-the-world yacht race.
At the head of the 19-boat fleet was Isabelle Autissier, 550 miles ahead of her countryman Jean Luc Van Den Heede in their ocean passage to South Africa.
Scrambling for third was another Frenchman, Christophe Auguin, the race's defending champion, with only 40 miles to go to pass J. J. Provoyeur of South Africa.


Philip Morris Ads Get More Aggressive
Philip Morris U.S.A. in New York said yesterday that it would introduce another advocacy campaign on smoking-related issues.
Print advertising, created by Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York, addresses topics like secondhand smoke, smoking by minors and restrictions on smoking.


Freddy Krueger Enters The Real World. Yikes!
Ten years after "A Nightmare on Elm Street" first scared the daylights out of audiences, Wes Craven returns to his now classic horror premise and takes it to a new dimension.
With equal debts to Pirandello and P. T. Barnum, Mr.
Craven brings his prize creation, Freddy Krueger, out of the realm of Halloween masks and into the so-called real world.
Realism is fundamental to the "Nightmare" series.
Mr.
Craven does not deal chiefly in phantasmagoric demons; he deals in terrifying extensions of everyday experience, the stuff of which true nightmares are made.
The Northridge earthquake in California coincidentally occurred during the shooting of "Wes Craven's New Nightmare," and has been cleverly incorporated into this film's strange story.
But if that earthquake hadn't happened (far exceeding one prophetic tremor that the film maker had already staged at a cemetery), it could easily have been something Mr.
Craven invented.


Nobel in Literature Goes to Kenzaburo Oe of Japan
The Swedish Academy announced today in Stockholm that Kenzaburo Oe, a Japanese writer known for his powerful accounts of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and his struggle to come to terms with a mentally handicapped son, had won the 1994 Nobel Prize in Literature.
Mr.
Oe, 59, is just the second Japanese writer to capture the award.
Yasunari Kawabata won it in 1968.
But while Mr.
Kawabata generally explored traditional Japanese themes with a delicate writing style, Mr.
Oe has written politically charged tales filled with anger and a sense of betrayal, like the postwar generation he has come to represent.


CALIFORNIA ENERGY THREATENS TO SUE MAGMA POWER
The California Energy Company said yesterday that it would sue the Magma Power Company of San Diego to obtain a shareholder list that it says it needs to call a special shareholders meeting to force a vote on the proposed $840 million merger of the two geothermal power companies.
Magma, which has been attempting to block the merger, has refused a request to release the list to a California Energy director who is also a longtime Magma shareholder.
The request was made yesterday after California Energy filed materials with the Securities and Exchange Commission seeking permission to hold a meeting.
Jon Peele, executive vice president of Magma, said California Energy, based in Omaha, was not legally entitled to the list.


CHRONICLE
All Franklin Delano Roosevelt wanted in the way of a memorial was a slab of stone the size of a desk, Interior Secretary BRUCE BABBITT said yesterday at a news conference at the start of construction of the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial at the Tidal Basin in Washington.
Mr.
Roosevelt did get his wish, in the form of a memorial in front of the National Archives building in Washington.
But the new memorial is on a far grander scale.


Ad Nauseam: Campaigns Take Over California TV
Warning: Watching political advertising in California this fall can be hazardous to your outlook on politics.
A Murphy Brown belly laugh is suddenly cut short by an apocalyptic announcer who characterizes Senator Dianne Feinstein's re-election campaign as "slimy," then calls on voters to elect her Republican challenger, Representative Michael Huffington of Santa Barbara.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "NUNSENSE," Douglas Fairbanks Theater, 432 West 42d Street, Clinton.
Through Sunday.
The musical by Danny Goggin.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $35 and $37.50.
"Nunsense 2: The Sequel" is to begin next Friday.
Information: (212) 239-4321.
Closing Next Weekend  "ARTHUR AND LEILA," Playhouse 46, St.
Clement's Church, 423 West 46th Street, Clinton.
A comedy by Charlene Lee about mature Chinese-American siblings with differing values.
Presented by the Pan Asian Repertory; directed by Ron Nakahara.
Through Oct. 22.
Performances: Thursdays and Fridays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.
Admission: $25; $18 for students.
Information: (212) 245-2660.


Sybase's Net and Revenues Continue Upward Course
Sybase Inc. yesterday reported a second consecutive quarter of strong profits and earnings.
But the software maker is hoping that Wall Street will react more positively than it did in July, when the second-quarter results displeased analysts and its stock plunged 18 percent.
Sybase, based in Emeryville, Calif., waited until the close of trading yesterday to announce the results for the third quarter, which ended on Sept. 30.
Earnings surged 76 percent, to $19.4 million, or 36 cents a share, from $11 million, or 21 cents a share, in the quarter a year earlier.
Sales leaped 63 percent, to $183.4 million, from $113 million a year earlier.
The results exceeded Wall Street's estimates of 33 cents a share.


Pataki Misconstrues Anti-Bias Laws Affecting Gay People
To the Editor:
When George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for New York governor, suggests in your Oct. 10 interview with him that laws prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orientation provide "special rights" to lesbians and gay men, he displays misunderstanding of civil rights law.
Such laws promote equality and help eliminate bias that causes quantifiable economic and personal harm.


Whitman Corp.(WH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Valmont Industries(VALM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


A Novelist Sharing Her Lover
Diane Kurys's best films carry a resonance beyond the lives of their distinctive characters: "Peppermint Soda" is the sweetly comic tale of adolescent girls coming of age, and "Entre Nous" the incisive story of female friendship set against World War II and its aftermath.
Her lesser films are smaller but still engrossing pictures of tangled relationships, like "A Man in Love" and her new work, "Love After Love," the fine, quirky story of a novelist named Lola (Isabelle Huppert).
Lola doesn't make that grand artistic leap into the universal, even though her love life sounds like a case study out of "Smart Women, Foolish Choices."
Lola has tried to be reasonable about love, but at 35 the complications are piling up like dirty laundry.
She lives with an architect named David, with whom she has a long-term relationship.
Along the way, David also became openly involved with Marianne, with whom he has two sons and a continuing connection.
Lola accepts this as part of the modern world of grown-ups.
Yet she has recently begun a secret affair with Tom, a married songwriter who has two small daughters.
"The two men I love have children," she writes in her journal, moaning about the inconvenience of this rather than questioning her own judgment.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
American General Corp., Houston, is selling $100 million of notes due in 1999 through Salomon Brothers Inc.
The notes are priced at par to yield 7.7 percent and are rated A1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and AA by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Bowe to Fight Undefeated Donald
RIDDICK BOWE, whose last fight ended in a no-contest decision against BUSTER MATHIS JR. on Aug. 13, will return to the ring on Dec. 3 against LARRY DONALD (16-0 with 12 knockouts).


At the Bar; What's in a name? That which we call a law firm, by any other name would be -- just a moniker.
Before a client learns firsthand whether the reception area is aglitter in chrome and glass or cloaked in dark wood and leather, whether the lawyers wear gray flannel or loud plaids, whether the handshakes are firm or fishy, there is the name.
A law firm's name may be nothing more than a chance conjunction borrowed from long-dead partners.
It may not reveal any great truth about the business.
But to the soul in search of legal succor, it can conjure an impression drawn in both broad strokes and fine detail.


The Wonders of France Through an 1850's Lens
A remarkable aspect of the early history of photography is how quickly the first practitioners of the new medium reached heights of technical and artistic accomplishment that have rarely been equaled.
Within only a few years of the announcement of the first workable photographic processes in 1839, photographers had shaped demanding and often crude techniques into subtle tools for recording the world in pictures of great detail and emotional power.
Ample support for this notion is offered by "The Photographs of Edouard Baldus: Landscapes and Monuments of France," now at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Baldus was renowned in his own time for the technical command and formal beauty of his photographs; with the passage of time, his pictures have taken on interest of another sort, as a reflection of the conflicting concerns of French society poised on the brink of the modern era.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.56
2.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.89
4.97
2.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.30
5.33
3.08
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.63
7.69
5.21
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.85
7.89
5.85
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.70
8.75
6.93
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.62
6.66
5.37
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Marlins Give Lachemann an Extension
Florida Manager RENE LACHEMANN received a two-year contract extension yesterday and also hired a new hitting coach, JOSE MORALES.
Morales, 49, was hitting coach with San Francisco in 1986-88 and with Cleveland in 1990-93.
In three of his four years with the Indians, they finished among the top three teams in batting in the American League.


Catching Rays, or a Nibble, or Just a Breather


Getting Right Picture The Wrong Way
It started out prosaically enough.
Engine Company No. 47, the nearby firehouse, had a new fire truck, and when an editor noticed it, that seemed reason enough to order up an article and a picture for the next day's paper.
But time ticked away. The truck sat unsummoned in its berth. A deadline had to be met.


Merrinelle Sullivan; Ex-Leader of Group For Women Was 63
Merrinelle Sullivan, a past president and longtime officer of the National Council of Women of the United States, died on Sunday in her Manhattan home.
She was 63.
The cause was cancer, said Robert Sonderskov, a family friend.


EMC Corp.(EMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Firms Wake Up to the Problem of Sex Harassment
In the week after a San Francisco jury ordered the world's largest law firm and one of its former partners to pay $7.1 million in punitive damages to a former secretary who said she had been sexually harassed, a consultant in Boston, Anne Litwin, said there was a surge of calls from other firms eager for advice on how to head off similar complaints.
"There's nothing like a $7.1 million verdict to wake people up," said Ms.
Litwin, who advises employers on sex-discrimination issues.


New Valley in Vote Dispute
The New Valley Corporation, the parent company of Western Union, asked the Federal judge presiding over its bankruptcy case yesterday to disqualify any votes by shareholders rejecting its reorganization plan.
The company said the committee representing the shareholders in the Chapter 11 bankruptcy case had misrepresented several elements of the plan in a letter to its clients.
It also accused the committee of waging a disinformation campaign.


CIT Group Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinic 'Shell Game' Is a Winner
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's plan to turn over 45 New York City health clinics to the Health and Hospitals Corporation has been labeled a budgetary shell game by some critics and an assault on children's health by others.
The first criticism appears true; the city wants to transfer health workers off the city budget in order to create the appearance of deep personnel cuts.
But the plan also makes good health-care sense.
Merging city clinics with those the H.H.C. already runs is a smart way to bring quality health care within easy reach of the city's poor.
City clinics focus on immunization and other children's preventive services.
H.H.C. clinics provide comprehensive primary care for the entire family.
In some neighborhoods, city and H.H.C. clinics are near each other and underutilized.
A merger would cut the waste.
The merger allows the H.H.C. to do what the city cannot: create a network of primary-care clinics throughout the city that are backed up by hospital facilities for patients who need specialists.


Sports of The Times; Socialism Keeps Pack In Green Bay
EVERY time I hear the name "Green Bay," I conjure up the image of blocky men in clumpy helmets flailing around in a snowstorm, green and yellow uniforms barely visible in some Arctic whiteout, the ugly smell of paper factories overpowered by the pungent aroma of homemade bratwurst.
Green Bay is one place where football feels right.
The tiny city in northern Wisconsin had a professional team long before the National Football League was taken over by card-carrying, idealistic socialists who believed in dividing the wealth equally.


Topics of The Times; The Practice of Power
They meet for breakfast every workday morning in the sumptuously appointed restaurant of a sumptuously appointed hotel on Park Avenue in New York City.
Welcome to the Hotel Regency, home of the "power breakfast," where the powerful people of politics, finance and just about everything else are seen -- but not overheard, they hope -- as they wheel and deal.
The "power breakfast" got its start during the 1970's fiscal crisis, when the city's nervous movers and shakers huddled over coffee to figure a way out.
Robert Tisch, head of the company that owns the hotel, unwittingly created an institution when he called it a "power breakfast." This year is its 20th anniversary, and still they come.


Patriots Rebuilt In Giants Image
In 1983, Bill Parcells's first season as head coach, the Giants struggled to a 3-12-1 record, had a good time off the field and seldom gave clues that they might become a good team.
Whereupon, Parcells sent a few icons into retirement and taught the willing players how to win, and three seasons later the Giants became Super Bowl champions.
Now, an older and wiser Parcells is trying to do the same with the New England Patriots, like the pre-Parcells Giants a team that long seemed comfortable with losing.
His handiwork will be on display Sunday when the Patriots (3-3) play the Jets (3-3) at Giants Stadium.


INSIDE
Microsoft's Big Takeover
Microsoft is poised to dominate personal finance software by agreeing to acquire the producer of the Quicken program for $1.5 billion, in the largest software deal ever.
Page D1.
Kennedy Terminal Overhaul
The Port Authority announced an $800 million plan to rebuild the International Arrivals Building at Kennedy International Airport.
Page B1.
U.S. and Israel Prod Arafat
The United States joined Israel in pressing the P.L.O. chairman to make sure that a kidnapped Israeli soldier is delivered safely from Islamic radicals.
Page A3.


2 Healthful Bacteria Are Proved To Ward Off Diarrhea in Infants
Bacteria common to breast milk and yogurt can greatly reduce the risk of infants' developing diarrhea, indicating that such "good germs" can be added to foods to attack this worldwide health problem, researchers said today.
Scientists at Johns Hopkins Children's Center in Baltimore said they had conducted the first controlled study to prove that adding certain common bacteria to infant formula could cut the risk of developing diarrhea in youngsters; in this study, the risk was cut by almost 80 percent.


Goodrich (B.F.) Co.(GR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Frederick Smith, 75; Computer Executive
Frederick Gordon Smith, a specialist in advanced computer applications, died on Tuesday at Holy Name Hospital in Teaneck, N.J.
The cause of death was congestive heart failure, said his wife, Ann.
A resident of Sneden's Landing, N.Y., he was 75.
The son of missionary parents, Mr.
Smith was born in Chefoo, China, and moved to the United States at age 10.
He graduated from Swarthmore College in 1940 and began a computer marketing career that year at the International Business Machines Corporation.


Lamoriello Makes Big-Money Save
Lou Lamoriello's swiftness beat the National Hockey League to the punch today.
Expecting to receive a directive from the league to refrain from recalling players from the minor leagues to avoid paying them, the president and general manager of the Devils had already done it.
"I heard something was coming from the league," Lamoriello said, "but I haven't seen anything yet so I recalled a player."


Managed Care Does Real Harm to Mentally Ill; What Psychiatrists Do
To the Editor:
A few years ago, while addressing an audience of about 300 psychiatrists in Manhattan, I asked how many had a practice that included "only psychotherapy." Only two or three raised their hands.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Campbell Soup and Chrysler support a day of volunteerism.
SEEKING to demonstrate that advertiser altruism is no oxymoron, two of America's largest marketers will participate in an ambitious program to promote a national day of volunteerism.
The Campbell Soup Company and the Chrysler Corporation's line of Plymouth automobiles and mini-vans are the first corporate sponsors of Make A Difference Day, paying a total of $2.5 million to become associated with the event.
This year's day, the fourth, is scheduled for Oct. 22.


A Daughter Revisits Sexton's Bedlam
SEARCHING FOR MERCY STREET My Journey Back to My Mother, Anne Sexton  By Linda Gray Sexton  307 pages.
Little, Brown. $22.95.
Few writers' lives have been as relentlessly dissected as Anne Sexton's.
The poet's great subject, of course, was herself.
Her poems feverishly anatomized her moods, her breakdowns, her anxieties, her marriage and her divorce, and they created a continuing self-portrait: Sexton the rebellious teen-ager, obsessed with boys "and cigarettes and cars"; Sexton the middle-aged suburban housewife who "wore rubies and bought tomatoes"; Sexton the stressed-out mother haunted by "ugly angels"; Sexton the emotional invalid, "queen of this summer hotel" known as Bedlam.


Managed Care Does Real Harm to Mentally Ill
To the Editor:
"Managed Care Changing Practice of Psychotherapy" (front page, Oct. 9) emphasizes the impact managed care is having on the practice of psychotherapy, but glosses over the problems that people with severe and chronic mental illness have under a managed care system.


Treasuries Advance but Ease at End
Prices of government securities posted a strong advance yesterday after an unexpected drop in September producer prices but Treasuries gave up some of their gains by the end of the day.
All maturities rallied sharply on the producer price report, as the data eased investor concern about accelerating inflation.
The report convinced most market participants that the Federal Reserve would not raise interest rates immediately and would probably wait until its next policy meeting on Nov. 15 to act.
Early declines in gold and oil prices helped bolster the bond market.


Willamette Industries(WMTT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Arlene Carmen, Who Ministered To Society's Castoffs, Dies at 58
Arlene Carmen, a church administrator whose ministry sought out society's castoffs in the streets of Greenwich Village and midtown Manhattan, died on Sunday in Columbia-Presbyterian Hospital.
A Village resident, she was 58.
The cause was complications from congestive heart failure, according to Judson Memorial Church, where she was program associate and church administrator.


Region News Briefs; Candidate Arrested In Prostitution Sweep
A Yonkers man who tried to run for Congress but failed to win a spot on the ballot was arrested in Manhattan on Wednesday and charged with patronizing a prostitute.
John Casaburro, 43, was carrying a flier that identified him as a candidate in the 18th Congressional District race when he was arrested as part of a police sweep in the area around West 24th Street and 11th Avenue, said Sgt.
Joe Gallagher.
Five other men were arrested at the same time.


Haitians Return With Hopeful Hearts
Sitting in the American Airlines terminal at Kennedy International Airport, Joseph Casseus, a taxi driver from Brooklyn, anxiously cradled a package full of canned ham and peanut butter as he waited to fly back to Haiti.
In 14 years in the United States, he has been back to Haiti on vacation before.
But this time, he is making a special trip to be home when President Jean-Bertrand Aristide returns after three years in exile and experience first hand a sense of hope that he hasn't felt in years.


Politicking By Proxy, The Wives Weigh In
In a gubernatorial campaign notable for its nastiness, yesterday was a day not unlike others.
Except for one thing: The barbed attack from the Democratic camp and the swift Republican retort came from the candidates' wives, not the candidates.
The fight began with an article in The Daily News in which Matilda Raffa Cuomo, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's wife, called the Republican challenger, George E. Pataki, a "lightweight" supported by "ultra conservatives." If Mr.
Pataki were elected, the article quoted Mrs.
Cuomo as saying, "We could have race riots."


17 Are Honored In Arts Fields
The National Medal of Arts and the Charles Frankel Prize were awarded yesterday to 16 people and an organization.
The 12 winners of the arts medal, which has been awarded annually to distinguished artists and patrons since 1984, were chosen by President Clinton in collaboration with the National Endowment for the Arts.
The Frankel Prize, awarded annually by the National Endowment for the Humanities, went to five Americans who have brought the humanities to a wide public audience.
The prize, established six years ago, is named in honor of Charles Frankel (1917-1979), a professor of philosophy at Columbia University who was Assistant Secretary of State for Cultural Affairs and the first director of the Humanities Center in Research Triangle Park, N.C.


On the Graying of Japanese Consumers
To the Editor:
Peter Passell expresses concern in his Oct. 6 Economic Scene column over White House failure to have a Japanese trade agenda.
Mr.
Passell says the few Clinton Administration members who understand the "importance of fiscal and monetary measures in balancing trade" have "given up trying to explain the point to Congress or the public."


3 Teen-Agers Are Charged in Rape on a Brooklyn Pier
Three Brooklyn teen-agers were arrested yesterday in the rape of a woman who was attacked on an abandoned pier last weekend as she and a friend observed sweeping nighttime views of Manhattan.
The youths -- who are 16, 17 and 18 years old -- were captured through an anonymous tip, a stakeout in Williamsburg and dogged police work, Deputy Inspector Martin Johnson of the Brooklyn North Detective Unit said at a news conference yesterday at the 90th Precinct station house in Williamsburg.


Sounds Around Town
Deconstructing Pop
Built to Spill, Under Acme, 9 Great Jones Place, near Broadway, East Village, (212) 420-4755.
On its new album, "There's Nothing Wrong With Love" (Up), Built to Spill, a rock band from Boise, Idaho, looks at social conventions through piles of thick, staccato guitar lines.
The band's leader, Doug Martsch, who used to be in the Treepeople, deconstructs pop songs from the top down.
In a crackling, tuneful voice that sounds as if it's close to falling apart (as his pop songs do), Mr.
Martsch sings about everything from the erotic thrill of touching a girl's thumb during an elementary-school game of seven-up to the hip appeal of David Bowie.
The concert is Sunday at 11 P.M.; admittance are $6.
NEIL STRAUSS With Nonchalance
Pavement and Guided by Voices, Roseland, 239 West 52d Street, Manhattan, (212) 247-0200.
Pavement, a college-educated, music-industry-jaded group notorious for its nonchalant live shows, writes alternative-rock songs about being in an alternative-rock band.
Guided by Voices, from Dayton, Ohio, travels to the inner recesses of the band leader Robert Pollard's mind, where British invasion-inspired songs are written in five minutes and recorded even more quickly.
Live, both bands usually find the perfect balance between melody and clutter.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M.; admission is $16.
N.
S.


Irony Cast a German In 'Ship of Fools'
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 6 obituary for the German actor Heinz Ruehmann fails to mention his only American film appearance, the 1965 drama "Ship of Fools," and the irony of his role in that production.


No Headline
"If you start a border war, you don't really give us much choice but to fight back. New Yorkers are not widely considered to be patty-cakes.' DEPUTY MAYOR JOHN S. DYSON, referring to Connecticut.  [ B1:5. ]


Anthem Electronics Inc.(ATM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Laureate From Japan


Bank of New York Co.(BK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lopez, a Prince Charming for St. John's
BY midnight tonight, St.
John's University will probably have recouped its disclosed investment in Felipe Lopez's tuition, apartment, food and basketball clothes.
Right after midnight, it will begin earning profits -- ticket sales, television revenues, national happy news -- and Lopez will begin work in earnest, refining his game and his image.
"Image is real important," he said yesterday.
"You don't want to look like a bad guy. You can't let people make you out to be conceited, like get me to say: 'Yeah, I'm the greatest. I'm going to break all Chris Mullins's records.' Newspaper people turn questions around, keep coming back and go around the topic. It's important I don't change what I say. I been around the media since I was a freshman in high school."


Topics of The Times; Voter Registration Alert
It is only mid-October and the political season is just now heating up.
But New Yorkers who wish to have their opinions count in the tight race for governor, and this year's other election contests, had better get busy.
Today is the last day to register to vote in the Nov. 8 election.
Registration applications, which are available at most public libraries, post offices and state and city offices, must be postmarked by midnight.
In New York City, eligible citizens can also register in person from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. at the local Board of Elections offices in the five boroughs, or at the board's main office at 32 Broadway in Manhattan from 9 A.M. to midnight.


Teen-Age Homicide Rate Has Soared
At a time when the national homicide rate has not increased in several years, adolescent men are being killed in sharply rising numbers that have reached epidemic proportions, according to a study released today by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The study shows that from 1985 to 1991, the annual rate at which men 15 to 19 years old were being killed jumped 154 percent, far surpassing the rate changes in any other age group.
Virtually all of the increase in homicide, 97 percent, was attributable to the use of guns, the study found.
"This shows clearly and comprehensively that we have an epidemic of firearms death among young men," said Dr.
Mark Rosenberg, director of the National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, a division of the centers, which did the study.


No Fires But Smoke In the N.H.L.
Hockey's labor confrontation flared on at least four fronts yesterday on Day 13 of the National Hockey League's lockout of the players:
*The league ordered a stop to a controversial policy of placing minor leaguers on the major league rosters in order to withhold their salaries.


Dalhart Comeback Fails
Dalhart, one of the prime contenders for the 1993 Kentucky Derby, failed again in his bid for a comeback under trainer Wayne Lukas when he ran fifth in a field of six in the feature race at Belmont Park yesterday.
The 4-year-old son of Forty Niner, with Mike Smith riding, faded out of the race nearing the turn for home while Senor Cielo was going wire to wire to win for the sixth time in 12 races this year.
At the finish, Senor Cielo was widening his lead to 9 1/2 lengths over Famous Fan, with Aztec Empire third and Won Song fourth.


Old Gum, No Bones, A Bunch of Happy Feet
Take some once popular songs like "Does Your Chewing Gum Lose Its Flavor (on the Bedpost Overnight)?" or "I Like Bananas Because They Have No Bones," give them to the Paul Taylor Dance Company and what do you get?
A mega-hit called "Funny Papers."
The recordings are side-splitting, the choreography is hilarious, the dancers are terrific, the lighting and costumes are witty and the composite choreographer is a relative of the Nutcracker's seven-headed Mouse King.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Federal grants to cities to hire police officers misstated the amount going to Connecticut in some editions.
It is $2.55 million, not $291,000.


S.E.C. Chief Wants Funds To Summarize Their Risks
In a reversal, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission proposed today that mutual fund prospectuses include a single-page summary of the risks and expenses that investors face.
In a separate action, the commission approved new disclosure rules for the annual proxy statements that mutual funds issue to investors.


Palestra: It May Be Greek, But it Means Round Ball
The Palestra.
Simply the name of the storied structure that stands alongside ancient Franklin Field on 33d Street evokes images of college basketball as it once was.


A Chance for Peace in Ireland
Northern Ireland's Protestant militias took a dramatic step toward resolving the province's intractable civil war yesterday, by renouncing violence and calling for a new era in which "our children . . . will know the meaning of true peace." This follows the Sept. 1 cease-fire by Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army.
The two main combatants have stepped back from the battlefield; now it is Britain's turn.
Prime Minister John Major needs to do his part to keep the process going, by convening peace talks with all parties.


Porter Journal; Down East, With Good Neighbors
At 5:21 P.M. on Tuesday, Gail Thibideau arrived at Elmer Walker's trailer with dinner.
Mr.
Walker kissed her on the cheek and thanked her four times.
Mrs.
Thibideau hurried home to her family.
At 5:47, Mr.
Walker was still eating Mrs.
Thibideau's five-bean soup with ham when Lee Hamlin came in the door carrying a large brown bag.
"What's going on?" Mr.
Hamlin demanded.
"Tuesday night's my night. I've got beef stew with peas."


Lilly Delays Purchase Of PCS Health Systems
Eli Lilly &amp; Company said yesterday it was postponing its $4 billion purchase of PCS Health Systems, one of the nation's biggest managed care drug distributors, amid indications that the Federal Trade Commission was preparing to challenge the deal on antitrust grounds.
Lilly said it needed at least two weeks to continue discussions with the commission.
People familiar with the case said the agency was weighing possible antitrust and restraint-of-trade implications in the deal, which would meld Lilly, a leading drug maker, with PCS.


At the Pump, Cash Bows to Credit
Twelve years ago, ARCO shocked the gasoline business by canceling all the credit cards it had issued -- even blowing one up in a television commercial -- and stressing prices instead.
That ushered in an age of discounts for cash at the pump.
But now the pendulum is swinging the other way.
Oil companies have not only eliminated their discounts for cash, they have also begun to offer a new type of credit card that offers rebates on future gasoline purchases.
It's a kind of frequent-flier program for people whose "flying" is limited to brief jolts on bumpy roads.


Art in Review
Donald Judd 'New York'  Pace Gallery 32 East 57th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
This exhibition makes the suddenness of Donald Judd's death last February, at the age of 65, all the sadder.
It shows this artist doing better than ever what he always did exceptionally well, which was to extract new ideas from earlier pieces so simple as to seemingly preclude further development.


New Mutual Fund Deal: Liberty to Buy Colonial
The consolidation of the mutual fund industry took another step forward yesterday when the Liberty Financial Companies agreed to buy the Colonial Group for about $310 million.
The combination of the two Boston-based companies will create the 25th-largest mutual fund company as part of a broadly diversified asset-management firm, with $43 billion under its control.


White House at Bat
Entering the baseball labor dispute for the first time, the White House will enlist the aid of Bill Usery Jr., a former Secretary of Labor and prominent mediator.
He faces a daunting task in trying to promote movement in the longest strike in professional sports history.
Article, page B11.


SAKS FIFTH AVENUE PLANNING STORE IN MEXICO CITY
Saks Fifth Avenue has teamed up with an unnamed partner and plans to open a store in Mexico City.
Saks, the specialty store company, has not set a date for the opening.
Neiman Marcus, another specialty store chain, began testing the market last spring through its mail-order division and may also be considering opening a store there.
Both companies draw many Latin American customers to their stores in Texas, Florida and Southern California.
Several more moderate-priced stores are also exploring opportunities there, including J. C. Penney and Dillard Department Stores.


On Stage, and Off
2 Kinds of Sensation
A play that critics who saw it in London think has the power to be the literary avenging angel of the season is definitely headed for Broadway.
And a performance artist who is the newest demon of the theater-oriented religious right is headed for P.S. 122 in the East Village soon.
The first is the current London staging of Jean Cocteau's 1938 play "Les Parents Terribles." It was described by Vincent Canby in June as "a seamlessly constructed marvel of contradictions, a boulevard farce about incest, about a family of dangerous innocents living in hermetically sealed upper-bourgeois squalor." This very dysfunctional family is forced out into the light when the son, effectively jilting his lie-a-bed mother, announces plans to marry an artist.
His father, who spends his time in a closet designing an underwater machine gun, realizes that his son's intended is his own mistress.


Smuggling as Afterthought to S-and-M
For times when a 900 number isn't enough, there's always "Exit to Eden," a sadomasochistic porno-comedy with a lingerie fetish as big as all outdoors.
Here's a film that insists on scrambling eroticism with humor, even if most people think sex is better when nobody's laughing.
Having made prostitution look good in "Pretty Woman," Garry Marshall takes on the greater challenge of a 1985 novel by Anne Rice, who wrote under pseudonyms (in this case, Anne Rampling) when dealing with subjects like naked slave auctions, bondage and bisexuality.


Swiss Say They've Identified Body of Solar Temple Leader
One week after 48 members of a doomsday sect were found dead in two Swiss villages, Swiss investigators said today that they had identified the group's spiritual leader among the victims, reinforcing first impressions that he may have organized a ritualistic collective suicide.
Only 24 hours earlier, the police said they were still hunting the leader, Luc Jouret, who founded the Order of the Solar Temple in 1984, on suspicion of premeditated homicide and arson.
Last Friday, the police also issued an arrest warrant for Mr.
Jouret's chief associate, Joseph di Mambro, but his body was found on Sunday.


MCI Appears Near Wireless Pact
The pace of shotgun weddings in the telecommunications industry accelerated today as the MCI Communications Corporation moved closer to joining a wireless telephone alliance with Bell Atlantic and Nynex.
With only 15 days left before an important regulatory deadline expires, any company with aspirations in wireless communications is scrambling to form partnerships that make it possible to establish nationwide wireless networks.


Market Place; There may be more hospital mergers before the dust clears.
THE merger of National Medical Enterprises and American Medical Holdings that was announced on Tuesday would create a chain of 84 hospitals.
One week earlier, Columbia/HCA Healthcare and Healthtrust said they would combine into a chain of 311 hospitals.
Analysts now say that Columbia, the largest for-profit hospital chain in the United States by far, may make a run at the No. 2 chain, the combined National Medical and American Medical, within the next year.
Or, analysts say, Columbia may try to break up the deal by making an offer for either of the companies before the merger is completed.


Hakuhodo Opens Office With TBWA
TBWA International in New York and Hakuhodo Inc. in Toyko said yesterday that they had further expanded their relationship by teaming up to open an agency in the Netherlands to handle their Canon Europe and Nissan Europe accounts with billings estimated at $200 million.
Hakuhodo (Nederland) B.V. in Amstelveen, which handles the Canon Europe account, will merge with TBWA/NETH-work, a joint venture that TBWA and Hakuhodo founded in 1989 to handle Nissan Europe.
The new shop, not yet named, will seek other clients besides Canon and Nissan; it will be based in the TBWA/NETH-work offices in Amstelveen.


Fast Break A Charm In Opener For Knicks
It was exactly the kind of preseason debut that the Knicks wanted tonight.
They won impressively by 112-83 over the Philadelphia 76ers at the North Charleston Coliseum.
A host of Knicks played as if they were in mid-season form.
John Starks led the team with 19 points while Derek Harper added 15, Anthony Mason 15 and Charles Smith 11.
And after talking about fast breaking more this season, the Knicks played as if they intend to do just that.


Mother, Son and Others On the Bolshoi Express
Produced by the BBC, "Great Railway Journeys" is returning to public television with six new travel documentaries, each filtered through the distinctive personality of a hired guide.
On one level, the programs are straightforward travelogues, stopping here and there to look at the more prominent sights.
But the guides can be refreshingly unpredictable.
"Great Railway Journeys II" starts up tonight on Channel 13 with "St. Petersburg to Tashkent." Overseeing the two-week, 3,000-mile trip on the Bolshoi Express is Natalia Makarova, the Kirov Ballet star who defected to the West in 1970.
She and her teen-age son, Andrusha, born in America and now living in San Francisco, join a group of British tourists for the journey.


Charles A. Frye, 48; Taught Black Studies
Charles A. Frye, a professor who taught African and African-American studies courses in philosophy, religion and literature, died last Saturday at the Ochsner Foundation Hospital in New Orleans.
He was 48 and lived in New Orleans.
The cause was lymphoma, his family said.


Celanese Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Diner's Journal; A Theatrical Setting
Walking into L'Udo, just across the street from the Joseph Papp Public Theater, you teeter on the edge of reality.
Is this a Roman ruin, or are you walking right through the covers of some strange and wonderful children's book?
The walls have been stripped to the stone foundation and have the air of a crumbling ancient church.
Every surface has been painted with colorful mystical figures that hover overhead and crouch underfoot.
Add to this the darkness of the dining room, and the result is a distinct air of mystery.
Leaving, it is odd to walk through the modern bar and see the brightly lighted, glass-enclosed kitchen in the back.
This quirky new restaurant with its rustic Mediterranean food seems as if it will be a boon to theatergoers.
I especially liked an appetizer of white beans served on Parmesan-covered crostini with a little salad on the side.
The wild mushroom flan, garnished with a small forest of herbs, was also appealing.


Democracy Triumphs in Colorado
Gay-bashing groups have pushed referendums in several states and cities in recent years to head off laws that ban discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation.
Most of these measures would not only repeal existing gay rights laws but also amend state constitutions and charters to forbid their enactment.
In Colorado, where one such amendment passed in 1992, the state's Supreme Court has struck it down as unconstitutional.
The justices found that the amendment singled out one form of discrimination, bias against homosexuals, and removed attempts to redress it from the normal political process.
Their 6-to-1 decision brilliantly affirms the right of all citizens, whatever their life-style preferences, to participate in lawmaking that affects their interests.


Con Man's Daughter Finds Love Is Compensation Enough
On a chilly night at the start of "Imaginary Crimes," a little girl and her father walk through the snowy streets to a store.
The father buys Wild Turkey and tries to talk the liquor store owner into investing in his latest scheme, a chemical to restore the nap on old serge suits.
The little girl gets ice cream, and as they walk home a young woman's voice recalls this scene as one of the enduring memories of her childhood, "me with a father who has the audacity to buy ice cream on the coldest night of the year." As audacious actions go, it's not much, but soon it becomes clear that the exaggerated claim is intended.
The voice belongs to 17-year-old Sonya, a talented but untrained writer describing her unsettled family life in her journal.
Her slightly overwrought style is just one of the perfectly pitched elements in this exquisite little film.
There is nothing precious or overdone about "Imaginary Crimes" itself, the story of how Sonya and her younger sister try to build a normal life with their con-man father.


Shuttered at the Met
To the Editor:
Re your Oct. 6 news article on the Metropolitan Museum of Art's $300 million capital fund-raising campaign: On any weekday a paying visitor from near or far who is eager to see the wonderful collections is shut out from half the museum -- old, new or rebuilt wings.
Why?
No money for guards!
So why another expansion fund for more rooms that cannot be seen for lack of guards?
MARIAN FROEHLICH  Larchmont, N.Y., Oct. 8, 1994


A Final Farewell to McGuire


ALC Communications Corp.(ALC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lumet to Introduce Rosi at Retrospective
The director Sidney Lumet is to appear at a screening of Francesco Rosi's film "Salvatore Giuliano" tonight at 8:15 at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, Manhattan.
The event is part of a retrospective of the Italian director's works, sponsored by the Film Society of Lincoln Center, that is to run through Nov. 3.
All 16 films in the series are in Italian with English subtitles.


No Offer From Milken
To the Editor:
An Oct. 5 Business Day article errs regarding Patricia Ostrander and Michael R. Milken, formerly of Drexel Burnham Lambert, by stating Mrs.
Ostrander "was convicted in 1992 of taking bribes from Mr. Milken in return for buying some particularly risky junk bonds."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies Microsoft is poised to dominate personal finance software, the only niche of the software market it does not already lead, by agreeing to acquire Intuit Inc., the producer of the Quicken program, in a stock swap valued at $1.5 billion.
The deal would be the largest software acquisition ever.  [ Page D1. ]


Ex-Student Sues Vassar Over Accusation
Maintaining that he had become a pariah on campus after being falsely accused of leaving a vicious message on another student's answering machine, a former Vassar College student, sued the college yesterday in Federal court in Manhattan.
Max Fraad-Wolff, 21, of New Haven contends in his suit that Vassar officials denied him due process during a disciplinary hearing last November.
A junior at the time, he had been accused of leaving anti-gay slurs and threats of mutilation on the answering machine of a leader of the college's Gay and Lesbian Alliance.
Although the panel wrote him in November that it had ended deliberations because it could not establish his guilt or innocence, Mr.
Fraad-Wolff withdrew from the college later that year, and has transferred to the University of Massachusetts.


Castro Heir Is Endorsed By Giuliani For Senate
In a move that underscored his continuing ambivalence toward the Republican candidate for governor, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday endorsed Bernadette Castro, the Republican challenger to United States Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
With Mr.
Giuliani by her side in the rotunda of City Hall, Ms.
Castro, the heir to her family's convertible-sofa business, praised New York City and said, "It needs better representation." She attacked Senator Moynihan, the Democratic incumbent, as "out of touch, out of sight and in some cases, out of mind."


Market Place; There may be more hospital mergers before the dust clears.
THE merger of National Medical Enterprises and American Medical Holdings that was announced on Tuesday would create a chain of 84 hospitals.
One week earlier, Columbia/HCA Healthcare and Healthtrust said they would combine into a chain of 311 hospitals.
Analysts now say that Columbia, the largest for-profit hospital chain in the United States by far, may make a run at the No. 2 chain, the combined National Medical and American Medical, within the next year.
Or, analysts say, Columbia may try to break up the deal by making an offer for either of the companies before the merger is completed.


Brazil's President-Elect Had a Little Help From Press Barons
During Brazil's presidential campaign, a newspaper cartoonist drew Fernando Henrique Cardoso in a military foxhole, safely shielded by stacks of newspapers, happily machine-gunning his opponents with a television camera.
Today, Mr.
Cardoso is Brazil's President-elect, basking in a lopsided 2-to-1 victory.
Only six months ago, opinion polls indicated, half the population did not know his name.
Helping to bridge the gap, Mr.
Cardoso, the Government-supported candidate, won the endorsement of every major newspaper, newsmagazine and television station in Brazil.


The Hotel In Chelsea That Art Calls Home
THE premise for the adventure was simple enough.
My wife and I would check into the Chelsea Hotel for a weekend of hobnobbing and gawking among the creatives we assumed to be living and staying at New York's Montparnasse on West 23d Street.
We also hoped to encounter artistic ghosts and a muse or two.
Our entry was promising, with the plaques by the door noting that Mark Twain had stayed there and that Thomas Wolfe had lived in a corner suite.
Another celebrated the stay of Brendan Behan, who, for a while, stopped drinking at the Chelsea, which was not the case with Dylan Thomas.
Indeed, the tablet dedicated to the Welsh poet tells of how he "sailed forth" from his rooms to the White Horse Tavern to gulp the whisky that killed him.
There is also a sign saying that Arthur Miller had lived at the hotel, now a national landmark, for six years.


Pataki Misconstrues Anti-Bias Laws Affecting Gay People; Let the Voter Beware
To the Editor:
George E. Pataki's campaign promises of tax cutting and economy in government deliberately imitate the successful campaign tactics Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman used in New Jersey.
Note that a few days ago Governor Whitman cautioned reporters that the promised tax cuts would have to wait for some opportune moment in the future.


A Founder Leaves Berlin Wright
Tony Wright, president at Berlin Wright Cameron Doyle in New York, is unexpectedly leaving the agency he helped found in August 1993.
His departure is effective immediately, as is an agency name change to Berlin Cameron Doyle.
"There were some disagreements about how we should go forward and the kind of agency we should run," Mr.
Wright, 34, said yesterday.
The agency, in a statement, said the differences leading to his departure "were about the structure and organization of the company" after a merger five weeks ago with the Doyle Advertising and Design Group, a Boston shop whose principals have relocated to New York.


Arlene Carmen, Who Ministered To Society's Castoffs, Dies at 58
Arlene Carmen, a church administrator whose ministry sought out society's castoffs in the streets of Greenwich Village and midtown Manhattan, died on Sunday in Columbia-Presbyterian Hospital.
A Village resident, she was 58.
The cause was complications from congestive heart failure, according to Judson Memorial Church, where she was program associate and church administrator.


Enron Corp.(ENE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


How to Register to Vote
New York
The deadline for registering to vote in New York State for the Nov. 8 general election is midnight today.


The Spoken Word
LILY TOMLIN, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
The actress will speak about her new book, "My Life, So Far." Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
WALTER MOSLEY, Brooklyn Public Library, Grand Army Plaza, Park Slope.
The author will read from his latest novel, "Black Betty." Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 780-7700.


Massimino Meets With U.N.L.V. Players
With the start of basketball practice only two days away, Nevada-Las Vegas Coach ROLLIE MASSIMINO met privately with his players but refused to comment publicly on the turmoil surrounding his job.
Massimino met with his players for about 20 minutes at the Thomas &amp; Mack Arena.


John Mack Carter to Head New Hearst Magazine Unit
After 19 years as editor in chief of Good Housekeeping magazine, John Mack Carter is stepping down to become president of Hearst Magazines Enterprises, a newly created division for the development of new magazines.
The company said yesterday that a successor to Mr.
Carter, who is 66, would be named shortly.
The top job at Good Housekeeping is considered a plum because the magazine, with its circulation of five million, is not only one of the most venerable of the company's magazines, but probably its leading money-maker as well.


U.S. Woman Hunts for Guerrilla She Married in Guatemala
For a while Jennifer Harbury, a Harvard Law School graduate, led a life right out of a romance novel: she crisscrossed Guatemala's jungles and mountains to gather material for a book and she married a commander in the leftist guerrilla movement.
But the improbable romance of this soft-spoken New Hampshire woman and the dirt-poor guerrilla has turned into a heartbreaking mystery.


U.S. PLANS TO KEEP PLANES AND TANKS IN THE GULF AREA
The United States made public a plan on Thursday to counter any future Iraqi military threats to Kuwait and to increase the American military presence in the Persian Gulf region.
Defense Secretary William J. Perry disclosed the plan, which would place American warplanes and a division's worth of tanks and armor in the region even if Iraqi troops were withdrawn from the border with Kuwait.


Accounts
*
Kraft General Foods Inc., Northfield, Ill., to Mendoza, Dillon &amp; Asociados, Newport Beach, Calif., to handle the consolidated Spanish-language television media buying account in the United States, previously divided between that agency and the Bravo Group, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


For Children
Golden Books Showcase
630 Fifth Avenue (at 50th Street)  (212) 582-4323  Recommended for all ages  Daily
You can still buy Little Golden Books, with their black-and-gold bindings and lightweight covers, in the supermarket.
But it's likely you can't watch a video of the character Tootle the Train on a screen in the floor while you're shopping at the supermarket.
In the windows of this new bookstore are Golden Books, games, large moving stuffed animals and a working train set; inside are half a dozen audio and video interactive displays, some in the floor.
Were you expecting something ordinary in a store calling itself a showcase?


Extra Points For Trying
Anyone who was ever rejected or picked last for a team can relate to the concept behind "Little Giants," a slickly contrived family movie about an inept junior football team that succeeds in spite of spectacular liabilities.
"Football is 80 percent mental and 40 percent physical," a strapping pro-football player tells the children on the Little Giants team in a pre-game pep talk.
The team's ascent is about as unlikely as 80 and 40 adding up to 100.
The film follows the struggle between the Little Giants and the Cowboys to determine which will represent Urbania, Ohio, a fictional town, in the peewee football league.
The Little Giants, who are largely made up of Cowboys' rejects, are the brainchild of Becky O'Shea (Shawna Waldron), an 11-year-old tomboy who was rejected by the Cowboys simply for being a girl.
Fueling the contest is the lifelong sibling rivalry of the team's two coaches.
Becky's father, Danny (Rick Moranis), who has lived in the shadow of his football-star elder brother, Kevin (Ed O'Neill), leads the Little Giants, while Kevin coaches the Cowboys.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BENSON EYECARE CORP., Rye, N.Y., has completed the acquisition of Optical Radiation Corp., Azusa, Calif., a maker of specialty optical products, in a deal valued at $143 million.
CPAC INC., Leicester, N.Y., a manufacturer of chemicals and environmental compliance equipment, has completed its acquisition of Fuller Brush Co., Great Bend, Kan., a manufacturer of chemicals and home and industrial products, in a stock and cash transaction valued at $16 million.


Iris Adrian Is Dead; Film Actress Was 81
Iris Adrian, an actress who played the brassy blonde in scores of films from the 1930's and 40's, died on Sept. 17 at her home in Hollywood.
She was 81.
The cause was complications from injuries in the Northridge, Calif., earthquake in January, said her friend Lester Glassner.


Louvre's Top Curator Becomes Its Director
Pierre Rosenberg, the chief curator of paintings at the Louvre Museum since 1987 and a well-known figure in international art circles, has been named president and director of the Louvre, succeeding Michel Laclotte, who is retiring.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-20  U.S.
PLANS ARSENAL IN GULF  The United States described a plan to counter any future Iraqi military threats to Kuwait and to increase the American military presence in the Persian Gulf.
Additional warplanes and a division's worth of tanks and armor would be deployed, even if Iraqi troops are withdrawn from the border with Kuwait.
A1  IRAQ WANTS A DEAL ON KUWAIT  Iraq said it favored a Russian proposal under which it would recognize Kuwait in return for the lifting of some economic sanctions within six months.
A16


Art in Review
'Three Berlin Artists of the Weimar Era' Hannah Hoch, Kathe Kollwitz and Jeanne Mammen  Galerie St.
Etienne 24 West 57th Street Manhattan Through Nov. 5
The artists in this show, which was organized by the Des Moines Art Center, shared a time and a place, but not a style.
Kathe Kollwitz was the oldest of the three, and by the Weimar period (1918 to 1933), her reputation was secure.
Her brand of social commentary -- dark, melodramatic, shamelessly tugging at any heartstring in sight -- spawned many imitators.
But it is almost impossible to see with fresh eyes today, and the prints and drawings on view here do nothing to change that.


Drug-Addicted Infant Boy Returned to Bronx Hospital
Three days after vanishing from a Bronx hospital, swapped for a doll in his bassinet, a drug-addicted baby boy was back safe yesterday, his five siblings were in the hands of child-welfare authorities and their parents were under arrest in a case that threatened to dissolve a troubled, frustrated family.
The parents, Oscar Valentin, 32, and his wife, Venus, 31, who admitted taking the infant, Joshua, from Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center last Monday and removing the other five children from a relative's custody without permission last month, were found with all six children Wednesday night at a house in Hyde Park, N.Y., 75 miles up the Hudson, by local police officers acting on a tip.


Haytaian Praised From Other Side of the Aisle
Assemblyman Willie B. Brown, a Democrat from Newark who is the dean of the New Jersey State Assembly, today endorsed Chuck Haytaian, the Republican candidate for the United States Senate, calling him "concerned and compassionate" about the problems of minority voters around the state.
While accepting Mr.
Brown's support on the steps of the State House, Mr.
Haytaian, who is the Assembly Speaker, told reporters that he would not seek re-election to the Assembly next year even if he loses the Senate race.


Wallmanstal Journal; Can a Post-Apartheid Army Ever Get in Step?
From the day in April when disgruntled troops set their commander's car on fire, it was clear that South Africa's plan to forge a new army out of old enemies was not going to unfold without a few glitches.
Since then, the former anti-apartheid guerrillas, assembled here in a dusty tent city while they await integration with the former apartheid army, have staged a 30-mile protest hike to President Nelson Mandela's office, and been tear-gassed during a mess hall mutiny that began when soldiers complained their chicken dinner was overcooked.


Marines Stage Desert Exercise in Show of Force
Lugging rifles, anti-tank missiles and 40-pound rucksacks, several squads of United States marines landed in the desert north of here today, skimming across the beach in a fleet of thundering helicopters in an exercise that officers said was intended both as a show of force and as a means of tuning up fighting skills after weeks at sea.
Though evidence of an Iraqi retreat from the Kuwait border has been growing, the Marine officers acknowledged that their mission in the desert might have as much political value back home for President Clinton as actual military value, but they said no one consults them on politics.


From Heisman Candidate to a Walk-On at Helm?
The players say they can't remember anything like it.
Tom Osborne says he has never seen anything like it in 22 years of coaching at Nebraska.
As undefeated Nebraska goes into a critical Big Eight game against Kansas State, the Cornhuskers find themselves with a quarterback quandary of major proportions.
After starting the season with a Heisman Trophy candidate, the Huskers may be down to a walk-on when they take the field in Manhattan, Kan., Saturday against what is certain to be a fired-up Kansas State team and crowd.


Abroad at Home; Time to Grow Up
Since when are Americans such tender plants?
More and more of us seem to find our sensibilities so offended by someone's words that we rush to the law to demand punishment of the speaker.
Worse yet, authorities -- university administrators, government officials -- often agree with the thin-skinned complainants.
What ever happened to the American idea of freedom for unpleasant speech?
And to our sense of the absurd?


U.S. Pushes Mideast Talks
Secretary of State Warren Christopher called on Israel and Syria today to press ahead with their indirect peace talks despite terrorist incidents that have caused many Israelis to urge their Government to slow negotiations with its neighbors.


Art in Review
Burk Uzzle 'Three Decades of Photography'  Leica Gallery  670 Broadway (near Bond Street) SoHo Through Nov. 2
Burk Uzzle made his reputation in the 1960's and 70's as a photojournalist with a wry sense of humor.
For its opening exhibition, this new gallery, sponsored by Leica Camera, offers a survey of Mr.
Uzzle's long and varied career.


Corrections
The Pulse chart in The Metro Section yesterday, about health insurance coverage, ordered the data incorrectly.
The percentage of people without health insurance coverage in New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and the United States has generally increased, not decreased.
A corrected version appears today on page B1.


Plan Is to Revamp New York's Family Courts
New York State's top judge yesterday announced a broad plan to improve the overburdened, crisis-ridden Family Court system, including placing all cases on a strict schedule to speed them to conclusion.
The Chief Judge of the Court of Appeals, Judith S. Kaye, said she would require every judge in the state to receive training on family violence topics ranging from repressed memories in incest victims to why battered women may be reluctant to leave their abusers.


Aging Terminal at Kennedy to Be Rebuilt
Transportation officials announced an $800 million plan yesterday to rebuild the largest terminal at Kennedy International Airport, the International Arrivals Building, a cramped and dreary relic of the age of propeller planes that many passengers eagerly avoid if they can.
The proposal by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is intended to bring about a sweeping renovation of the terminal, which is used by more than 40 foreign airlines and serves nearly half the international travelers at the airport.
It is to be the biggest chunk of a $4.3 billion overhaul of the airport financed by government and private money.


Jets to Put Murrell Into Line of Fire
They call it a change of pace, but what they really mean is: can the new guy do it better?
So on Sunday, Adrian Murrell -- the second-year back who has been the most impressive summer-camp runner the Jets have had in recent memory -- attempts to do it when it matters.


Race for Governor: Cuomo Focuses on Crime, and Himself
CANDIDATE Mario M. Cuomo PRODUCER The Garth Group, New York City VISUAL Mr.
Cuomo, in a casual white pullover, talks to the camera with his wife, Matilda, seated beside him, her arm draped around his shoulder.
The camera pans around the room to various Cuomo children and grandchildren listening as the patriarch talks about crime.
SCRIPT Mr.
Cuomo's first spot in recent weeks that focuses on his own record and plans.
It operates on several levels.
He lets viewers see his family -- a textbook trick for politicians seeking to seem softer or more human -- and says he has a personal reason to share their worries.
He defends his record, which he has not always found easy because of his opposition to the death penalty.
Finally, he says that fighting crime ultimately hinges on prevention, a message that sells big with his base of liberal and black Democratic voters.
Though firm, this is no war whoop on crime; the question is whether it is what most voters want to hear, especially from the incumbent who led the state during 12 violent years, despite three years of dropping crime statistics.
IAN FISHER


Pataki Seeks Initiative but Skips the Debate
The Republican campaign of State Senator George E. Pataki sought to recapture the initiative against Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today by filing a lawsuit charging Mr.
Cuomo with using state resources for political purposes, and by dismissing the Governor's proposed state takeover of the Long Island Lighting Company as a desperate campaign ploy.
But Mr.
Pataki was notable for his absence at the first debate of the 1994 campaign, which featured Mr.
Cuomo and four minor-party candidates.
And he found himself an occasional target in absentia, with various candidates deriding his position on abortion and his lack of executive experience.
Mr.
Pataki is holding out for a one-on-one debate with Mr.
Cuomo.


Hours Before Deaths, a Nobel Prize


Correction: The $79 Million
An article yesterday about the release of $79 million in Haitian assets that had been frozen by the United States misstated the ownership of the accounts and the timing of the release.
The $79 million represents accounts belonging to a wide range of wealthy Haitians, not just military officers.
The bulk of the assets were unfrozen on Oct. 6.
According to the White House, the accounts now being released -- those of military officers -- amounted to no more than several hundred thousand dollars.
Further developments, page 6.


Boy, 7, Takes Stand in Murder Trial Of Man He Says Killed His Father
Johnny Morales was all boy.
His white shirt sleeves poked from the sleeves of his uncomfortable blue suit.
He mumbled answers to questions from grown-ups.
And when they weren't looking, he squirmed in his seat and yawned.
But when he was asked to, Johnny, 7, raised his right arm and brought a crowded Bronx courtroom to a commanding stillness yesterday as he pointed to the man he said he saw shoot and kill his father two years ago.


IN PERFORMANCE -- JAZZ
Young Players Cooperate And Democracy Works  Sweet Basil
Arrangements are so important, and so overlooked, that to hear a small band using them is a reminder of what's been lost in jazz.
Native Colours, a cooperative band that includes Ralph Moore on tenor saxophone, Renee Rosnes on piano, Larry Grenadier on bass and Billy Drummond on drums, writes original material and arranges standards that maintain structure with prearranged bass lines and riffs.
On Tuesday night, the beginning of its first long engagement in New York, which runs through tomorrow at Sweet Basil (88 Seventh Avenue South, above Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village), the band, a collection of some of New York's better young players, showed promise.


Finally, Making Custodians Work
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani may at last have broken the outrageous stranglehold that school custodians have long exercised over New York City.
For decades, the more than 850 members of the custodians' union held the city's school buildings hostage.
Now, after a gutsy standoff, the Giuliani administration has reached a tentative agreement that cuts the custodians down to size and gives the Mayor another victory in his campaign to bring unions and city spending under control.
Mr.
Giuliani took office with the aim of managing the city better.
He has been fearless in trying to dismantle cozy union arrangements.
He wrung important concessions from sanitation workers and he stood up to Legal Aid lawyers who failed to adjust to the city's grim new fiscal realities.


WMX TO GET ALL OF CHEMICAL WASTE MANAGEMENT
WMX Technologies Inc. and Chemical Waste Management Inc. agreed yesterday that WMX Technologies would acquire the 21.4 percent of Chemical Waste Management it does not already own in a deal valued at just under $400 million.
WMX will issue a subordinated note convertible into WMX shares or, at WMX's option, an equivalent amount in cash.
The offer replaces a straight stock swap proposed in July and puts the implied value of Chemical Waste's share at $8.85 each, up 12.5 percent from the earlier offer.


Baseball Squabbles, Even on President's Driveway
While the Clinton Administration was moving to help find a solution to the two-month-old baseball strike, the owners and the players stayed on their contentious course today.
Fifteen minutes after Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, and Donald Fehr, the players' labor leader, joined in welcoming Bill Usery Jr., a so-called super mediator, into their dispute, Fehr stood 10 feet away from Selig on a White House driveway and said he expected the owners to impose a freeze on the signing of free agents.


Nestle's Aim: New-Market Growth
Nestle S.A., the Swiss conglomerate best known for its chocolate and coffee, is looking for further growth through finding fresh markets for its foods and beverages rather than through more costly acquisitions.
Nestle's purchase last month of Alpo, the American dog food brand, from its British competitor Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. was the latest in a string of takeovers that included the British chocolate maker Rowntree in 1988 and Source Perrier of France in 1992.
More recently, Nestle bought Buitoni of Italy, and deepened its ties with L'Oreal, the French cosmetics group that Nestle hopes to control fully some day.


Giuliani Unveils New Contract With Custodians of City Schools
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday announced a tentative contract with New York City's school custodians that he said would wrest major concessions from the union and for the first time in the city's history, link pay increases to the quality of the job performed.
Five months after rejecting a deal the Board of Education had reached with the custodians as too weak, Mr.
Giuliani said that his new agreement would break the custodians' control over the schools and the amount of work they do.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.71
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.84
4.89
2.99
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.25
5.30
3.08
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.59
7.63
5.17
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.83
7.85
5.78
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.69
8.70
6.89
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.60
6.62
5.33
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Ally of Fox Altering Plan On 4 Stations
Facing a challenge from NBC, a broadcasting company allied with the Fox network backed down yesterday from its original plan to buy four television stations and said it would restructure the financing of the company.
Richard Cotton, the senior counsel for NBC, said the decision indicated that "Fox is backing away" from pushing the limits of Federal Communications Commission regulations.
But he said NBC would examine the restructuring of the deal to determine if the changes were "just form and not substance."


U.S. IS DEMANDING A QUICK U.N. VOTE ON IRAQI PULLBACK
Risking a Russian veto, the United States pressed today for a quick vote on a Security Council resolution requiring Iraq to pull back its troops from the Kuwait border.
It warned that it might attack Iraq with or without the Council's support.
The Security Council plans to meet on Saturday to continue consultations on Iraq.
They were adjourned this evening after the Clinton Administration formally introduced its resolution.


CHRONICLE
Movie premieres are typically cheerful events: moviegoers anticipate being the first to see the film, fans look for celebrities and celebrities pose for photographers.
But the premiere on Monday of "Radioland Murders," a George Lucas comedy from Universal Pictures, will be bittersweet.
Anita Morris, one of its stars, died of cancer in March at the age of 50, shortly before the completion of the film.


Let's Look Closer at Border Control Numbers
To the Editor:
You report on a crackdown on illegal crossings at the United States-Mexico border in an Oct. 6 news article.
Gustavo de la Vina, Border Patrol chief in San Diego and the new Western Region commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, tells you that Operation Gatekeeper is a great success based on daily apprehensions.
According to the article, the Border Patrol reports that there were 825 apprehensions on the first night of the operation, a Saturday, compared with 259 on the same Saturday last year; 725 on the second night, compared with 528 in 1993, and 638 on the third night, compared with 501 a year earlier.


U.S. Warns Iraq to Complete Pullback
The United States will take military action against Iraq if it does not complete the withdrawal of Republican Guard forces from southern Iraq, Defense Secretary William J. Perry said today.
He said intelligence reports confirmed that "a major part" of a division of Republican Guard troops was digging in near Nasiriya, a southern city along the Euphrates, instead of returning to their base farther north.
An Iraqi division numbers roughly 10,000 troops.


Raytheon Co.(RTN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Joe and Mo And Bowls And Titles
Please excuse the people in maize and blue, the ones occupying the west sideline of Michigan Stadium and the more than 105,000 seats, if they might feel slightly disoriented late Saturday afternoon.
Because a moment that seemed inevitable four years ago, when Penn State joined the Big Ten conference and shook the structure of college athletics, has also changed the look and feel that has characterized Michigan football seasons since before the days of Tom Harmon.
This collision between Penn State and Michigan, highly ranked Rose Bowl aspirants with hopes of a national championship, has possessed the buildup and the stakes of games once conducted 3 yards at a time under the direction of people known simply as Woody and Bo.
Since the Ohio State game was moved to the end of Michigan's season in 1935 -- just before the arrival of Harmon and just after the departure of the most valuable player Gerald Ford -- that rivalry has helped determine 32 Big Ten championships, with 18 a direct result of the outcome, against a backdrop of ice, cold and harsh late-November winds.


Crown Hts. Figure Faces Assault Trial
Lemrick Nelson Jr., who is under Federal indictment in the 1991 death of a rabbinical student in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn, is likely to stand trial next month in an Atlanta suburb on charges of aggravated assault and carrying a concealed weapon.
Judge Daniel M. Coursey Jr. of the DeKalb County Superior Court today ordered Mr.
Nelson to stand trial on charges he slashed a high school classmate last January with a box-cutter-type knife.


In Terms of N.H.L. Talks, No One Is Saying Anything
On Day 14 of the National Hockey League's lockout of players, there were no negotiations and no plans to resume talks, which broke off last Tuesday.
"We have no preconditions about getting together," said Jeffrey Pash, the N.H.L.'s senior vice president and general counsel.
"It's not a question of whether there's anything new to say. But Mr. Goodenow says there's no point in talking until there's something new to say."


William Youngman, Insurance Lawyer, 87
William S. Youngman, a lawyer once prominent in the insurance industry, died on Monday at his home in Vero Beach, Fla.
He was 87.
The cause was leukemia, said Connie Ruland, assistant to his son Robert.


Dover Corp.(DOV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY NEWS;
The Eastman Kodak Company essentially completed yesterday its plan to dispose of operations not connected with photography and imaging, announcing that it agreed to sell the do-it-yourself sector of its former L&amp;F Products unit to Forstmann Little &amp; Company for $700 million in cash.
The products involved are mostly wood finishes and include the Thompson's, Minwax, Formby's and Red Devil brands.


Ammonia Leak Forces Office Evacuation
An ammonia leak from an ice-making system at a wholesale seafood company today forced the evacuation of more than 1,000 employees from 13 buildings in a business park here.
Authorities said 12 people were sent to hospitals and eight more were treated at the scene.
By late afternoon, only three remained hospitalized, at Brookhaven Memorial Hospital.


Now Esiason Can Move; Jets Hope to Do Same
If the Jets defeat the Patriots Sunday -- and just because it's at home doesn't guarantee a smashing performance -- Coach Pete Carroll might want to consider giving a game ball to the trainers.
Both quarterbacks, Boomer Esiason and Jack Trudeau, have made such dramatic recoveries from injuries, Carroll said today, that the team can go to its regular offense without holding back anything.


Loral Corp.(LOR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Interest-Based Options: Straight Deals on Rates
ALL investors get tossed about by interest rates, and a new type of option tries to grab this fabled bull by the horns.
But will investors make gains or get gored instead?
The answer may be as hard to predict as the rates themselves.
Sold since November on the Chicago Board Options Exchange, interest-rate options are pure "plays" on Treasury rates.
While stock options give owners the right to buy or sell the underlying equities at a specific price, interest options include no rights over Treasury bonds.
The rate is all.
If investors guess rate movements right, they win; if not, they lose.


Sports of The Times; Big Show In the Other Manhattan
THERE are a number of differences between the two Manhattans: One is an island; the other is not.
One has millions of people crammed together, the other has 37,000 citizens who live in rural spaciousness.
But the most significant difference is the insulation around the two cities' nerve center.


Pittsburgh Symphony: Study in Contradictions
Visiting orchestras always show off; it's the point of touring, and curiosity about the state of them brings in the audiences.
In the case of the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra that curiosity is focused more sharply because the orchestra is in the market for a new music director.
Lorin Maazel, its director since 1984, announced that he would leave in 1996 to devote himself to composition.
Has Mr.
Maazel done for his orchestra what Leonard Slatkin did for the St.
Louis Symphony?
Hardly.
Mr.
Maazel's concerts with his orchestra at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday and Wednesday evenings suggest that a more apt comparison is with the National Symphony Orchestra at the end of Mstislav Rostropovich's tenure.
Both orchestras offer flashes of brilliance amid pervasive problems of ensemble, tone and consistency, and for all their efforts, both remain respectable ensembles in the second rank of American orchestras.


2 Finnish Pictures, One Bleak, One Bright
Sounds draw no pictures and induce no smells, but it is difficult to listen to Joonas Kokkonen's First Symphony and not come away with a specific sense of place.
Mr.
Kokkonen is Finnish and wrote this terse three-movement piece between 1958 and 1960.
The New York Philharmonic under Paavo Berglund played it at Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday evening.
Mr.
Kokkonen's music gives off a gray light; its sky is perpetually overcast.
The one brief glimpse of sunshine comes in a measured chord progression at the very end.
Birds are everywhere in this symphony, trilling, vocalizing, sometimes singing in pairs.
Yet even they seem to speak of desolation and loneliness.
This is as much a landscape as it is a piece of music, and it is a landscape as threatening as it is impressive.


Weicker Approves Tax Breaks for Swiss Bank
One day after New York City officials vowed to retaliate against Connecticut for enticing the Swiss Bank Corporation to move its North American headquarters to Stamford from Manhattan, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker told them to quit whining.
"I think it is essential to point out that a lot of talk is really not in order," Mr.
Weicker said today.
"You didn't hear me whine when Dress Barn moved to New York, where a big ceremony was held right on my border celebrating that fact." Dress Barn, a women's clothing business and the state's 55th largest public company, recently announced a move to Suffern, N.Y.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  Reports on consumer prices, retail sales and industrial production showed an economy still expanding at a robust, but slackening pace, while price pressures remained moderate.
Consumer prices rose two-tenths of 1 percent in September.
Retail sales climbed six-tenths of 1 percent, and industrial production was flat.  [ 37. ]


When Humans and Beasts Trade Habitats
To the Editor:
Many Americans long for the rustic life and are moving into rural areas, bringing everything from fast food to habitat destruction.
Trees fall, water and air get polluted, and concrete is poured where small mammals once nested.
We can tear down in a day what has taken evolution thousands of years to build.
Animals cannot compete with architects, builders and bulldozers.
Birds leave a nest in the morning and return in the evening to find a clear-cut landscape.


Bigger Budget Gap Seen
New York City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi said the city's budget gap could grow to $1.4 billion and he called for more budget cuts.
Page 25.


Wearing Vest Spares Officer Serious Injury
A rookie police officer was shot and slightly wounded in the stomach yesterday while inquiring whether a group of men on a Brooklyn street were wielding a handgun.
He escaped greater injury because the bullet deflected off his bulletproof vest, the police said.
The officer, Pietro Ferrante, 24, of Queens, was taken to Wyckoff Heights Medical Center for treatment, but not before he managed to arrest one of the five men, the police said.
The officer was later released from the hospital.


Consumer Prices Up Modestly
Consumer prices rose modestly in September while retail sales climbed and industrial production slowed, the Government reported today.
Over all, the unusually heavy batch of figures portrayed an economy still expanding at a robust, but perhaps slackening, pace, while price pressures that have developed in various areas remained bottled up before reaching consumers.
But even if that outlook continues, the Federal Reserve is still expected to raise short-term interest rates another time this year in an attempt to hold growth and inflation in check.


California's Prop. 187
To the Editor:
William Safire's Oct. 6 column from Los Angeles criticizes Proposition 187, the California referendum that would deny illegal aliens most government services.
Mr.
Safire misstates the proposition: illegal aliens will not be jailed.
They will be deported by the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Proposition 187 is not a "nativist abomination," but a logical step toward saving California from economic ruin.
Illegal aliens collect welfare payments through post office boxes in San Ysidro, just a 15-minute walk from Mexico.
They receive free medical care and flood schools with non-English-speaking students.


Dow Up 20.52 as Data Show Modest Inflation
Blue chips led the stock market yesterday after a mixed bag of government economic reports for September indicated that inflation was under control.
The reports showed a rise of two-tenths of 1 percent in the Consumer Price Index, an increase of six-tenths of 1 percent in retail sales and unchanged industrial production.


Reynolds Metals Co.(RLM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


How Does One Derail a Runaway Train?
Giants linebacker Carlton Bailey said he planned on bringing some aspirin to the game.
Linebacker Corey Miller joked that he would wear extra padding in his helmet.
No, they are not preparing to go on the world's fastest roller coaster.
Actually, that would be easy compared to what the Giants' defense must do on Sunday.
It must stop Los Angeles Rams running back Jerome Bettis, the 250-pound bruiser who regularly runs over linebackers for breakfast.
Indeed, it might be easier tackling a roller coaster.


Clinton Administration Reports a Breakthrough in North Korea Nuclear Arms Talks
Clinton Administration officials said today that they are on the verge of a "significant breakthrough" with North Korea that would permanently freeze its threatening nuclear weapons project and provide for a resumption of international inspections.
In return, the officials said, Washington is offering a number of concessions, including an agreement to assure the Communist Government a steady supply of coal and fuel oil, and later to arrange for America's allies in Asia to construct nuclear power plants in the North worth billions of dollars.


KIDNAPPED SOLDIER IS KILLED AS ISRAELI TROOPS ATTEMPT RESCUE AT CAPTORS' HIDEOUT
The Israeli soldier abducted early this week by Islamic militants was killed on Friday night when Israeli forces stormed the kidnappers' hideout just north of Jerusalem.
Israeli leaders said the 20-year-old soldier, Cpl.
Nahshon Waxman, had been bound hand and foot and was "murdered in cold blood" by his abductors just as the rescue operation began at a house in the West Bank village of Bir Nabala.
The site was only two miles from the soldier's home in northern Jerusalem.


CHRONICLE
When LINDA SUNSHINE, an editor at Stewart, Tabori &amp; Chang, first had the idea of pairing the words of NTOZAKE SHANGE with the paintings of the late Romare Bearden in a book, she had no idea that the two had ever met, much less had a longstanding friendship.
She knew only that the artist's vivid depictions of musicians perfectly illustrated Ms.
Shange's poem "i live in music."
At a party on Thursday at the ACA Galleries on East 57th Street to celebrate the publication of the book, whose title is the same as the poem, Ms.
Shange said that Mr.
Bearden "used to write me letters with paintings in the middle, and he is my daughter Savannah's godfather."


Medals for Entertaining America (and the World)


In One Democratic Suburb, Allegiance to Cuomo Erodes
A great divide has opened up in this densely Democratic Long Island city, sundering Democrat from Democrat, and setting off a small fissure one recent afternoon in the offices of Station Realty.
Four brokers were jawing about the governor's race -- about the governor they had voted for in the past and about the Republican running against him with the help of the home-grown United States Senator from the neighboring town.


Low-Cost Checking For New York State
NEW YORKERS fed up with the deposit requirements at local banks will soon have an alternative.
The State Banking Board passed a final rule on Thursday that mandates low-cost checking accounts.
The rule stipulates that these accounts accept an initial deposit of $25 or less, permit a minimum balance of just $1, charge a monthly maintenance fee of no more than $3 and allow at least eight free withdrawals a month, by check or otherwise.


Only One Grant Hill, And He's Not a Net
As time wound down, a backcourt of anonymity took the stage for the Nets.
Ryan Lorthridge was feeding Tony Tolbert, and Larry Terry was trailing on the break.
Free-agent guards with dreams much bigger than this game, they weren't the answer for New Jersey's ailing backcourt tonight.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BENSON EYECARE CORP., New York, which distributes eyeglasses and operates wholesale laboratories that serve ophthalmologists, sold its corneal topography business to Humphrey Instruments, a division of Carl Zeiss Inc.
LOMAK PETROLEUM INC., Fort Worth, an oil and gas explorations and development concern, has ended its proposed $17.2 million plan to acquire Enex Resources Corp., Kingwood, Tex., because of disagreements over the pricing terms.


IN PERFORMANCE -- POP
Performing What They Wrote And Others Made Famous  Bottom Line
On Thursday evening, four nervous musicians sat onstage and performed the country music hits they wrote but didn't make popular.
They were shy, insecure, competitive and talented: four of country music's most in-demand songwriters, all of whom just released their first albums on Liberty Records.
The concert began tentatively in a round-robin style.
Three of the four introduced one of their pieces, thanked the country star who took it to the top and then performed it.
Pat Alger gently waded through "Unanswered Prayers," one of the four No. 1 songs he wrote for Garth Brooks.
Jill Colucci strummed "Anymore," the No. 1 ballad she wrote with Travis Tritt.
Jon Vezner picked "Whole Lotta Holes," which he wrote for his wife, Kathy Mattea.
Then came Kostas.
"I'm tired of thanking all those people," he said, referring to those who have performed his songs.
"They get all that recognition anyway." Instead, Kostas (who doesn't use his last name) thanked his dog, Sonny, and then sang "Timber I'm Falling in Love," which Patty Loveless took to -- you guessed it -- No.1 on the country charts.


How to Contain Iraq
The Clinton Administration's quick and firm response to Iraqi military maneuvers near Kuwait forced Saddam Hussein into an abrupt retreat.
Though Iraq's intentions were scarcely innocent, the crisis eased without any shots being fired or borders crossed.
With good reason, Washington would like to avoid massive mobilization every time Mr.
Hussein chooses to stir up a crisis.
It would also prefer not having to wait until Iraqi troops actually cross the Kuwaiti border before the sheikdom's defenders can strike back.
Washington is now canvassing support for a Security Council resolution that would demand that Iraq withdraw the reinforcements and special units it recently moved south.
From now on, under the resolution, Iraq would have to limit its forces in southern Iraq to those present before the latest crisis began, and even these would have to avoid threatening deployments near the Kuwaiti border.
Those demands are justified, given Baghdad's repeated threats and menacing actions.
The vote could come as soon as today.
Most other members of the international coalition that has worked together containing Iraq for the past four years support those demands.
But how to enforce them is another matter.
China, Russia and France, among others, are reluctant to follow up the resolution with an explicit threat of force against offending Iraqi troop movements so long as they are confined to Iraqi territory.
American interests in the region are strong enough to justify unilateral U.S. military action in certain circumstances.
But the Clinton Administration should be extremely cautious about driving new wedges into an already divided coalition or setting precedents for unilateral action that others might exploit -- for example, Russia in the case of former Soviet Republics.
China's main concern is sovereignty and protection of its own freedom of action from U.N. intrusion.
Russia and France are frankly interested in doing business with an internationally rehabilitated Iraq.
All three also have good reasons to discourage future Iraqi aggression.
But they insist that Saddam Hussein's behavior, including his cooperation with arms inspectors, can most effectively be influenced not merely by threats and punishments but by a careful combination of positive and negative incentives.
No doubt the U.S. and its British allies alone can manage the military defense of Kuwait.
But denying Iraq the ability to sell its oil or buy new weapons on the international market requires maintaining a consensus of all major and Mideastern powers.
That consensus was already in danger of fraying a few weeks ago on the oil sanctions issue because of Washington's overly creative interpretation of U.N. resolutions spelling out what Iraq had to do to get relief.
By rashly sending its troops southward, Baghdad reunited the allies and temporarily patched up the divisions over future oil sales.
But any new U.S. attempt to go beyond a Security Council consensus on enforcement risks doing more harm than good.
It would move the U.S. military closer to the unenviable role of global police force, even as it weakened the long-term containment of Iraq.


INSIDE
Modest Rise in Prices
Consumer prices rose 0.2 percent in September, as reports showed an economy that remains robust, although its pace is slowing.
Page 37.
Subway Repairs Delayed
With costs hundreds of millions more than anticipated, renovations at six major New York stations have been indefinitely postponed.
Page 21.
Optimism on Korea Talks
The United States was hopeful of reaching agreement with North Korea to freeze its nuclear arms program in return for fuel aid.
Page 7.


City to Delay Subway Work At 6 Stations
With subway renovations costing hundreds of millions more than they had anticipated, city transit officials said yesterday that they had decided to postpone indefinitely work on six major stations, including the overcrowded and antiquated stop at Broadway and 72d Street considered by many local residents to be a safety hazard.
The decision immediately drew criticism from transit advocates and local elected officials who maintain that the 72d Street station's crowded, narrow and curved platforms are unsafe.


METRO DIGEST
NEW LIMITS ON SCHOOL CUSTODIANS
Mayor Giuliani announced a tentative contract with school custodians that he said would wrest major concessions from the union and, for the first time, link pay increases to the quality of the job performed.
Page 1.
VOTERS' ALLEGIANCE TO CUOMO ERODES
Long Beach, L.I., is the kind of place that Governor Cuomo has been able to count on -- a longtime haven for weary urbanites slipping out of New York City with their liberal values and Democratic habits in tow.
But this year, even Long Beach voters are in turmoil.
Page 1.


No Headline
If these forces stay in the South, we will expand our current deployment plan and take appropriate action to deal with this threat. - DEFENSE SECRETARY WILLIAM J. PERRY, warning Iraq.  [ 7:3. ]


A Prize to Encourage Mideast Peace
There were three winners of this year's Nobel Peace Prize announced yesterday, but only one -- Yasir Arafat -- has generated all the controversy.
Let it not be forgotten that Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres, Israel's Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, were also honored for their contribution to the most important peacemaking development of the last year -- the framework agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Mr.
Rabin and Mr.
Peres both played key roles in securing the peace agreement, and the Nobel Committee was right to have them share the honor.
The two fought bitterly over the leadership and direction of Israel's Labor Party for many years.
But they set aside their differences, and Mr.
Rabin's well-earned skepticism about P.L.O. reliability, to seize a historic opportunity for peacemaking.
In doing so, they at first responded to, and then went on to lead, a dramatic change in Israeli public opinion.


How to Define Nazi Art Loot
To the Editor:
"Nazi Art Loot Found Its Way to New York's Modern Museum" (letter, Oct. 9) does not distinguish between the "degenerate" art the Nazi Government sold from its own museum inventories and "art loot," which it took through confiscation or forced sales from others.
"Russia's Trove Wasn't a State Secret" (letter, Oct. 12) confuses remote galleries on a high floor in the Hermitage with recently disclosed works.
The writer likely saw Post-Impressionist works from the Ivan Morosov and Sergei Shchukin collections nationalized by the Bolsheviks and divided between the Hermitage and Moscow's Pushkin Museum, not the same works the Hermitage will show in March for the first time.


Working Women Say Bias Persists
Many working women still feel that they are not getting the pay, benefits or recognition they deserve, according to a new survey conducted by the Federal Government.
The survey, based on more than 250,000 questionnaires received over four months by the Women's Bureau of the Department of Labor, also found that working women mentioned stress as the most serious problem.


Republicans Have Chance at a Governorship They Last Held in Grant's Day
The last time Georgia had a Republican in the Governor's Mansion, Ulysses S. Grant, that scourge of the South who was also a Republican, was in the White House.
Now Georgia Democrats are wondering if their 123-year string is about to be broken in an election year in which incumbency has become a handicap.
By most accounts, Georgia's Democratic Governor, Zell Miller, is struggling to overcome anti-incumbent sentiment.
A 20-year veteran of Georgia's political wars, Mr.
Miller faces a strong challenge in his bid for a second term -- a challenge that has surprised a lot of Georgians.


Art on Wheels


When the Orchestra Takes the Singers for a Ride
The most interesting voice at this season's first performance of Richard Strauss's "Arabella" at the Metropolitan Opera on Thursday night, was the voice of the composer.
The orchestra was its vehicle, making pronouncements that were compassionate and ironic, invoking waltzes and polkas, Slavic folk tunes and Mozartean allusions.
And as conducted by Christian Thielemann, the young German musician who made his impressive Met debut leading "Der Rosenkavalier" two seasons ago, the orchestra was also the dominant force of the opera, not supporting the singers so much as daring them to hang on for the lush, exotic ride.
Mr.
Thielemann often erred on the side of overly emphatic gesture, and occasionally seemed so swept up in Strauss's intoxicating flow of motif and melody that the singers seemed extraneous.
There were many times, too, partly because of the symphonic size of the orchestral sound and partly because of the generally wan character of the cast, when the singers had no choice but to remain extraneous.
10-15-94


Hevesi on the Budget Gap: It's Worse Than Expected
New York City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi said yesterday that the city's budget gap could grow to $1.4 billion -- substantially higher than Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's most dire estimate -- and he called on the Mayor to make even more budget cuts than he had been planning.
Mr.
Hevesi made his new calculation as the Giuliani administration was preparing to try to close a $1 billion gap in the $31.6 billion budget through sharp cuts in programs and services, new revenues and fees, and a new severance package seeking to entice 8,500 more workers off the payroll.


Dorothy Parker Breakfast: Tasty but Indigestible
There were two Dorothy Parkers.
One of them took brilliant, incisive flash portraits of New York life in the 20's.
The other was a sodden alcoholic with a vicious, backbiting tongue.
Both were up for consideration on Thursday morning at a breakfast panel at Mad. 61, the restaurant at the uptown Barneys New York.
Surrounded by the well dressed and the hip, Harold M. Evans, the president and publisher of Random House, presided over a panel of Parkerites -- Beverly Sills, Ann Magnuson, Charlie Rose, Lauren Hutton, Brendan Gill and Kitty Carlisle Hart -- who were herded together on the occasion of the Modern Library's publication of a new collection of Parker's short stories and verse.


For Knicks, 14 Into 12 Is Equation for Pressure
Everyone in training camp knows the situation.
The Knicks have 14 players with guaranteed contracts.
And only 12 players can make the Nov. 4 opening night roster.
So for the next few weeks, competition in practice will be intense, and some players will wonder if they are about to be traded.


Paul R. Picard, 63, TV Producer, Dies
Paul R. Picard, a television producer and executive, died on Oct. 3 at his farm in Tuscany, Italy.
He was 63.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, said a statement from Warner Brothers Television.


Paccar Inc.(PCAR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


How to Preserve Buying Power Over Time
Although inflation remains historically low, Cindy Anderson Malnati praises her lawyer for including cost-of-living adjustments in her 1984 divorce settlement.
Ms.
Malnati, who is a business development manager for American Express and a 34-year-old mother living in Saddle Brook, N.J., now collects $73 a week in child support from her former husband for her son, Mitchell.
Without the adjustment, "I'd still be getting $50 a week," she said.
"It helps with the little extras you need in raising a teen-ager."


Georgia-Pacific Corp.(GP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Issues Airwave Rules For Global Wireless Phones
Federal regulators took a significant step today toward approving global satellite systems that would relay calls to and from hand-held wireless telephones, issuing final regulations to let five rival companies share a scarce number of available radio frequencies.
The decision, by the Federal Communications Commission, settled a long-running dispute between the Motorola Corporation, which wants to launch a fleet of 66 small satellites, and four competing companies that want their own systems.


In Their Own Words
MAYOR RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI
Mayor Giuliani, who has yet to endorse a gubernatorial candidate, yesterday warmly praised Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo on the Mayor's call-in radio show on WABC-AM (770) after a caller from Brooklyn said that if Mr.
Cuomo is re-elected, "many people are going to blame you for that and therefore take it out on you later on when it comes time for your own re-election."


Some Writers' Keys to Success Are Still Manual
THE quick borwn for xjumped over the laxy dog.
Try it again.
The qyuck brown fox jumped over the lazy dgo.
One more time, get it right.
The quick bornw fx jumped over the -- sorry, just testing.
Computer age?
What computer age?
This is about typewriters: manual typewriters, mostly, but now-obsolete electrics, too.
There is still a hunt-and-peck crowd among writers in New York, which may or may not be the same as the one-, two- or three-finger crowd.
These are people who still roll in the paper and pound out page after page on near-antiques: typewriters that were made when the underline was over the 6 and you had to type a lower-case L for the number between 0 and 2 and the only way to get an exclamation point was to type an apostrophe, then backspace and hit the period key (unless, of course, you preferred doing the period first).
A + key for telling Grandmother about extra-special report cards or, later, for stitching impenetrable but oh-so-impressive equations into science-fair reports?
Forget it.


Yankees Put Faith In Howe as Closer
Manager Buck Showalter spent all of last season refusing to designate one of his relievers as the closer because he despised making the distinction.
The Yankees made the choice for Showalter yesterday by exercising Steve Howe's contract option and agreeing to pay him $2.3 million.
It was an expensive choice, but the team considered it the most reliable one.
The Yankees considered buying out Howe's contract for the prescribed $200,000 while then trying to sign him back at a cheaper price or buying him out and pursuing another left-handed reliever through a trade or a free-agent signing.
But it became apparent to them that their solution was in their own bullpen.


Russia Central Bank Chief Quits Over Ruble
Only a day after telling Parliament that the ruble's plunge was no reason for him to quit, the conservative chairman of the Russian Central Bank handed his resignation today to President Boris N. Yeltsin.
Long regarded as a foe by market reformers, the central bank chairman, Viktor V. Gerashchenko, yielded to Mr.
Yeltsin at a meeting in which the Russian President criticized the central bank's "weak control" over monetary policies.
Later Mr.
Yeltsin issued a decree relieving Mr.
Gerashchenko of his post, a presidential spokesman said.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about a retirement community in Ithaca, N.Y., that comes with a guarantee of health care at predictable cost referred incompletely to the history of such "life care" communities in the state.
The Ithaca project, established by the Kendal Communities Development Company, will be the first to open.
Another, the Glen Arden Life Care Community in Goshen, was the first approved, under legislation passed in 1989; its developers plan a groundbreaking by the end of the year.


Shootings Lead Chain to Ban Toy Guns
Six years ago, Toys "R" Us pulled realistic toy guns from its shelves after the police in Memphis shot and killed a 10-year-old boy who was carrying a toy gun they mistook for a Colt automatic.
Congress then mandated that toy makers decorate toy guns with blinding neon colors to label them as fakes.
But as real guns have flooded the streets, children in fear for their lives began painting their toys to look more realistic.


High School Student Is Mourned


The Rose, the Cross and the Analyst
Switzerland has long been a land of refuge for sects and cults of all stripes.
Since at least the Protestant Reformation, it has outshone even contemporary California as the land of milk and honey for neo-pagans and unorthodox Christians.
Most present-day cults (the useful sociological term need not conjure images of satanic evil) are of relatively recent vintage, and all claim to be descendants of an ancient lineage.
Luc Jouret and his Order of the Solar Temple claimed such special occult knowledge.
Sadly, the charismatic Mr.
Jouret combined the potent ancient symbolism of sun worship, alchemy and spiritual rebirth with his suicidal apocalyptic madness.
Fifty-three people are now dead because emotional fragility or vanity made them want to be part of a spiritual elite led by a man who apparently believed himself to be "the new Christ."


Hearing Buoys Defense in Simpson Case
The judge in the O. J. Simpson murder case said he would not allow the prosecution to elaborate on why it had waited three months to send off for testing crucial items of evidence removed from Mr.
Simpson's yard and Ford Bronco.
The decision was the latest indication that the judge, Lance A. Ito, might well rule admissible at least some of what was seized.
On Tuesday, Judge Ito pressed Lisa Kahn, the Assistant District Attorney in charge of DNA evidence, to explain why exhibits -- a bloody glove and swatches of blood removed from Mr.
Simpson's house and his Bronco -- were not sent for testing until Sept. 7 and 9, nearly three months after the bodies of Mr.
Simpson's former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend Ronald L. Goldman were found outside Mrs.
Simpson's Brentwood home.


Lamoriello on Defensive Over Call-Up From Minors
Although the National Hockey League has issued a directive instructing teams not to recall players from the minor leagues as a cost-cutting move, Lou Lamoriello said yesterday that the Devils had no intention of returning Brian Rolston to Albany, the team's top affiliate in the minor leagues.
"We have every intention for him to stay up," the president and general manager of the Devils said about Rolston, one of the more promising young centers in the organization.


Cisneros Investigation Moves Into New Phase
The Justice Department today stepped up its investigation of Housing Secretary Henry G. Cisneros and the thousands of dollars that he paid to his former mistress.
Through a statement from his lawyer, Mr.
Cisneros disclosed that the investigation had moved into a new phase but said he was confident he would be vindicated.
The Justice Department's move was a procedural step that had been expected, and it did not necessarily mean that the department would seek the appointment of an independent counsel.


Corrections
A report from The Associated Press in some editions of the Sports People column yesterday about a filing for bankruptcy protection by Bryan Trottier, the former Islander hockey star, referred incorrectly to the finances of his former ice-rink business, the BT Skating Corporation of Port Washington, L.I.
The rink has been purchased out of receivership and operates as the Adam Graves Skating Academy.


Smith Pulls a Switch and Storms Home
Mike Smith lost his ride on Brunswick in the $500,000 Meadowlands Cup tonight when the horse started coughing and was scratched.
So, Smith switched to the 24-1 long shot Conveyor, and scored one of the coups of the season by snatching the lead in the final yards and winning the race in a three-horse photo finish.
Conveyor, a 6-year-old chestnut who won the Alysheba Stakes at the Meadowlands three weeks ago, shot into contention as the 11 horses turned for home.
He drove in front at the wire by a nose over Personal Merit, who in turn had a neck on Bruce's Mill.
And one length back in fourth place came Red Tazz, followed by the favorite, King Leatherbury's Taking Risks, the winner of 9 of his 11 previous starts, including the Iselin and the Maryland Classic.


Season Finally Starts (For General Managers)
Toronto and St.
Louis hired new general managers yesterday, but the Cincinnati Reds did not.
In fact, after months of uncertainty, the Reds' owner, MARGE SCHOTT, gave her beleaguered general manager, JIM BOWDEN, a contract extension.
In Toronto, the Blue Jays named one of their former ticket sellers, GORD ASH, 42, as only the second general manager in their history.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Two Ways to Lose  Martina Navratilova, fought off five match points and Martina Hinges, 14, squandered four match points as both were eliminated yesterday in the quarterfinals of the Porsche Grand Prix in Filderstadt, Germany.
Anke Huber, 19, of Germany spoiled Navratilova's final European tournament, 6-3, 3-6, 6-4.
Hingis, the Swiss prodigy, lost in her second pro tournament as Marianne Werdel of the United States overcame 4-5 and 5-6 deficits in the third set to win, 0-6, 6-2, 7-6 (7-5).
Meanwhile, top-seeded Conchita Martinez of Spain, treated courtside for an injured ankle, was upset by unseeded Karina Habsudova of the Slovak Republic, 6-4, 6-1. (AP) GOLF 14 Birdies and a Loss The former champions Corey Pavin, Nick Faldo and Seve Ballesteros shot a combined 28 under par, but all three were beaten yesterday in the second round of the world match play championship in Virginia Water, England.
Ballesteros made 14 birdies -- including seven 2's -- but Ernie Els was even hotter as the South African won 2 and 1 in a match that ended the Spaniard's bid for a record sixth title.
Pavin, the defending champion, who carded two rounds of 67 on the par-72 West Course at Wentworth, missed a nine-foot putt for victory at the 36th hole before losing to Vijay Singh at the 37th.
Faldo, a two-time winner, had two eagles in rounds of 68 and 66, but the Englishman lost to Colin Montgomerie by one hole. (AP) Estes Just Misses Record: Bob Estes, with career earnings of $1.6 million but nary a victory on the Tour, almost established a PGA record yesterday in the second round of the $1 million Texas Open in San Antonio.
With birdies on the last two holes, Estes followed Thursday's 62 with a a 6-under-par 65.
It not only established a three-shot lead over Bob Tway, but also gave Estes a 15-under 127 for 36 holes, one stroke off the PGA Tour's record by Tommy Bolt in the first two rounds of the 1954 Virginia Beach Open. (AP) ASIAN GAMES  More Gold for China  China, which has already won the race for gold at the Asian Games in Hiroshima, Japan, with two days left in the competition, increased its gold medals to 127 by winning 7 of the 10 events in track and field yesterday, losing three field events. (AP)


Dr. Arnold Gottlieb, Dentist, 68
Dr.
Arnold Gottlieb, who practiced dentistry on Fifth Avenue for more than four decades, died on Oct. 6 at the New Canaan Racquet Club.
He was 68 and a resident of New Canaan.
The cause was cardiac arrest, his family said.


Bard (C.R.) (BCR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Italians Stage General Strike Against Cuts
Hundreds of thousands of people in cities across Italy took to the streets today in a half-day general strike called to protest cuts in pensions and health benefits but was used by some demonstrators to call for Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's ouster.
The protests in cities from Bari to Milan were among the biggest in recent years.
They were organized by labor unions to demonstrate the depth of opposition to austerity measures that would reduce pensions and health care benefits as part of a Government effort to trim Italy's huge public deficit.


Champion International Corp.(CHA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Social Security Benefit to Rise 2.8%
Monthly Social Security benefits will increase 2.8 percent starting on Jan. 3, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Donna E. Shalala, announced today.
That annual cost-of-living increase means that the average benefit for Social Security recipients will rise to $698 a month from $679.


About Religion; For Bronx Precinct, Bulletproof Prayers
When things get hot on the beat, a police officer usually barks out a quick "10-13" into his radio to summon assistance.
How about "Amen" instead?


The President and Aristide Heap Praise on Each Other
President Clinton and the Haitian President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, bade elaborate farewell at the White House today, dousing each other with praise and gratitude for the American military operation that will return Father Aristide to power Saturday after 1,111 days in exile.
"We've helped to curb the violence that threatened tens of thousands of Haitians, to secure our own borders, to bring democratically elected government to the 34th of our hemisphere's 35 nations," Mr.
Clinton said at a ceremony before diplomats, lawmakers and a military band assembled on the White House driveway.
"In so doing, we have helped to give the people of Haiti a chance to remake the democracy they earned, they deserve, and they so plainly wish."


California's Woes on Aliens Appear Largely Self-Inflicted
Gov.
Pete Wilson, condemning the failure of Federal immigration policy, is pushing the Clinton Administration to declare an "immigration emergency" and reimburse the state for what he calls a "multibillion-dollar problem."
Senator Dianne Feinstein, a California Democrat who is running for re-election, is calling for a $1 border toll to raise money for stronger border enforcement.


Trevino Is Sidelined
A bulging disk will keep LEE TREVINO out of action indefinitely, his agent said yesterday.
Trevino withdrew from the Senior Gold Rush in Rancho Murieta, Calif., citing a nerve problem in his neck. (AP)


India Fights Terrorists Linked to Pakistan
To the Editor:
What newspapers choose not to report can often be as illuminating as what they do report.
Human Rights Watch, an international monitoring group, recently released a study that unequivocally links the Government of Pakistan to a succession of terrorist attacks in the Indian state of Kashmir.
The New York Times ignored the study.


The Nobel Committee's Statement
Following is the text of the statement announcing the recipients of the 1994 Nobel Peace Prize.
The Norwegian Nobel Committee has decided to award the Nobel Peace Prize for 1994, in alphabetical order, to Yasir Arafat, Shimon Peres and Yitzhak Rabin, for their efforts to create peace in the Middle East.


Sherwin-Williams Co.(SHW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


German Rail Speeds
To the Editor:
John Lilly (letter, Oct. 5) misrepresents the German high-speed magnetically levitated train.
Thyssen's Transrapid is the first revolutionary passenger transportation system since the introduction of the railway, automobile and airplane.
The Transrapid is the world's fastest passenger-carrying train, capable of reaching speeds up to 342 miles an hour.
In June 1993 the record speed of 280 miles an hour was set under normal operating conditions at the Transrapid test facility in Emsland, Germany; no modifications were made to the vehicle, the guideway or the propulsion system.


Review/Fashion; History, but Through Gaultier's Eyes
There is always an eerie stillness to a shuttered carousel when the children have gone.
So imagine the ambiance of the Jean-Paul Gaultier show, where there were six carousels, their carved horses frozen midstride, with gilded chairs and the red-carpeted runway winding around the raised hooves.
The site of Mr.
Gaultier's show today was the Musee des Arts Forains, a museum that opened in September to house the carnival-art collection of Jean-Paul Favand, an antiques dealer.
There were marionettes, wax figures from the 1920's, a giant wooden winged pig from the 50's, organs from the 1800's and dunking booths from the 40's with figures of Hitler and Marshal Petain.


Reviews/Fashion; Spring Colors From Miyake and Ungaro
Issey Miyake entertained his audience Thursday night with more than a parade of spring clothes.
He also gave them a concert, and a rare one at that.
Music of eighth-century Asia was played on reproductions of antique instruments by 20 musicians from China and Japan.
It was the first performance in the West of the Liu Ensemble, led by Liu Hongjun.


IN PERFORMANCE -- POP
Up-to-Date Feminism: Ambition, Desire and Respect  Irving Plaza
"I might be a mess but I try to stay pure," Gabrielle Glaser rapped in "Energy Sucker," starting Luscious Jackson's set on Tuesday night.
She could be talking about her four-woman band, which makes up for messy, awkward musicianship with ambition and attitude.


Mexican Star Singing In a Universal Language
Luis Miguel, the Mexican singer who started a four-night engagement at Radio City Music Hall on Thursday night, knows the requirements for international pop stardom.
He has an ardent, limber baritone voice and the good looks of a soap-opera leading man.
He and his songwriters and producers are familiar with the American pop that blankets the world, but they haven't severed their ties with Mexico; they know to look south as well as north.
Mr.
Miguel uses lavish staging, complete with strobe lights and elevator platforms.
And he sings exclusively about the all-purpose subject: love.
The 24-year-old Mr.
Miguel, who has released 10 albums since 1982, sang in Spanish.
The titles of his songs -- "Pensar en Ti" ("Thinking of You"), "Dame Tu Amor" ("Give Me Your Love") -- told their whole stories, all about love and yearning.
Uptempo tunes draw on American funk and big-band harmonies, while ballads use gleaming keyboard tones and slow-climbing phrases.
Mr.
Miguel has taken the tender side of his persona (and his ballad style) from Julio Iglesias, and combined it with the showier, more robust approach of George Michael, full of high-powered emoting.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a dispute between France and the United States over policy toward Iraq referred incorrectly in some editions to a comment by Madeleine K. Albright, the United States delegate to the United Nations.
When she said, "I believe that the comments by the French Defense Minister are very ill informed and counterproductive," she was speaking of French charges that the Clinton Administration's policy on Iraq was motivated by domestic political interests; she was not alluding to French oil interests in Iraq.


McCall Questions Cuomo's Lilco Plan
State Comptroller H. Carl McCall, a running mate of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in his tight race for re-election, said yesterday that he had "serious questions" about the Governor's surprise proposal for a state takeover of the Long Island Lighting Company.
"I was as surprised as you were by the Governor's proposal," Mr.
McCall said in a debate with his Republican challenger, Herbert London.
"He certainly did not discuss it with me."


Egyptian Nobelist Wounded in Attack
Egypt's Nobel-prize-winning novelist Naguib Mahfouz, who had been critical of Muslim militants, was stabbed in the neck and seriously wounded yesterday in Cairo.
There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the assault, but Islamic militants have in the past condemned the 82-year-old author as an infidel and threatened to kill him for writing "blasphemous" novels.


In Aristide's Home Parish, a Sense of Conflict
A tree grows in the center aisle of the Church of St.
Jean Bosco now.
The roof is open to the wind and rain, and lizards scratch and lick their tongues on tiles where the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide once walked.
No repairs have been made since thugs broke into the building on Sept. 11, 1988, killing 13 worshipers, injuring at least 70 more and then setting fire to the pews.
No other priest has celebrated a Mass, or talked of social justice, inside the church's sun-washed building since.


IN PERFORMANCE -- PERFORMANCE ART
Comedy, Music and Talk Combined in a Fluid Art  Beacon Theater
Few performers cultivate a more complicatedly intimate relationship with an audience than Sandra Bernhard, the comedian, actress and singer with a scary Pre-Raphaelite scowl and the hostile attitude of a hip teen-age know-it-all.


Armored-Car Trial Linked to Gambling
When Robert and Susanna Scaretta went to Atlantic City, prosecutors say, they would bring bundles of hundred-dollar bills, spend hours playing the slot machines and generally lose heavily.
Between April 1991 and February 1993, according to court papers, they spent virtually every weekend gambling, and their losses on the slot machines alone were in the millions.


Conner Peripherals Inc.(CNR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Moscow Journal; Alcoholics Anonymous Begins to Lift the Curtain
As they settled into chairs in a dingy room on the city's eastern outskirts, the leader pounded on the table and brought the group to order with words that remain extraordinary in this country.
"My name is Vera," she said, "and I am an alcoholic."


Marcia Lawrence, 71, a Writer Of Planned Parenthood Material
Marcia Lawrence, who retired in January after 25 years as the director of communications for Planned Parenthood of New York City, died on Thursday at her home in the Chelsea section of Manhattan.
She was 71.
The cause was colon cancer, her family said.


Paul V. Trad, 41, Psychiatrist For Infants and Children, Dies
Dr.
Paul V. Trad, a child psychiatrist, teacher and prodigious writer in his field, died on Oct. 5 in Berkeley, Calif., where he spent his final weeks at the home of friends.
He was 41 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a brain tumor, said Dr.
Paulina F. Kernberg, director of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry at the Westchester division of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He had worked at the White Plains unit for the last 11 years.


Alumax Inc.(AMX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Houghton Stock Up 7%
Shares of the Houghton Mifflin Company rose 7.4 percent yesterday after the California Board of Education voted to include it with 11 other publishers eligible to supply $100 million worth of mathematics books for schools over the next five years.
Its shares rose $3.25, to $47.125, on the New York Stock Exchange.
The state board screens textbooks and decides which publishers will be permitted to sell at the local level


The Senate Race in Virginia: Robb and North Trade Barbs
SENATOR CHARLES S. ROBB, DEMOCRAT The Robb campaign began showing this 30-second commercial statewide on Thursday, in part as a response to a new North campaign commercial that began on Wednesday.
PRODUCER: Doak Shrum Harris Carrier Devine of Arlington, Va.
ON THE SCREEN: Alternating images of Mr.
Robb, talking to voters, and Mr.
North, in Marine uniform, with newspaper headlines from the Iran-contra scandal like "North lied to conceal gift, witness tells jury." SCRIPT: After lying about President Reagan and even lying to schoolchildren, now Oliver North is lying about Chuck Robb.
Chuck Robb has never had anything to do with illegal drugs.
Period.
But what North doesn't understand is that the real issue in this campaign is the candidate's record of public service.
Chuck Robb has a proven record of public service, while North's public record includes putting himself above the law by selling arms to terrorists and backdating documents to conceal that some of the money went for his personal use.
Oliver North.
People are starting to wonder if he knows what the truth is.
ACCURACY: Mr.
North recently told some high school students he did not lie to Congress.
He did so under the assumption, he said later, that the questioner was referring to his open Congressional testimony, which Mr.
North has always said was truthful.
Mr.
North has acknowledged misleading members of Congress in closed session.
The assertion about drugs is based on Mr.
Robb's denials of accusations that he attended parties where people were using illegal drugs.
He has acknowledged attending the parties in question.
The accusations that he knew of the drug use or was somehow involved have never been proved, but have trailed him for years.
SCORECARD: The commercial would appear to be of the preaching-to-the-converted variety, reflecting accusations against Mr.
North that are well-known to Virginia voters and, in general, do not seem to bother North supporters.
If the commercial is aimed at North supporters or even the shrinking population of undecided voters in the state, it does not look or sound incendiary enough to lure people into the Robb camp, especially because the episodes cited have been thoroughly examined before.
OLIVER L. NORTH, REPUBLICAN In his latest advertising assault, a 30-second commercial running throughout Virginia, Mr.
North uses newspaper headlines and a Playboy magazine cover to dramatize his view of Mr.
Robb as a flawed candidate.
PRODUCER: Murphy Pintak and Gautier Agency of Arlington, Va.
ON THE SCREEN: A black and white, slow-motion close-up shot of Mr.
Robb serves as background for reproductions of newspaper articles, a Playboy cover and a list of four Robb acquaintances convicted of drug charges.
SCRIPT: Why can't Chuck Robb tell the truth?
About the cocaine parties where Robb said he never saw drugs.
Then four of his party friends were sent to prison for dealing cocaine.
Or about the beauty queen in the hotel room in New York.
Robb says it was only a massage.
Chuck Robb lived a lie and violated his oath of good faith to the people, writes The Richmond Times-Dispatch.
Character counts, and North has it all over Robb.
ACCURACY: With provocative, suggestive references to issues that have dogged Mr.
Robb since the 1980's, the commercial leaves the impression Mr.
Robb has not provided a full accounting of the events, which occurred when he was Governor.
Mr.
Robb has acknowledged attending parties, and people he knew were convicted of drug offenses.
He has always said that he never saw drugs being used and that he never used them.
He has admitted having had relationship with the woman on the Playboy cover, Tai Collins, a former Miss Virginia, whom the magazine cover identifies as "the woman Senator Charles Robb couldn't resist," but Mr.
Robb said the relationship only went so far as the one night in New York, where he said she gave him a massage.
SCORECARD: In a scorching attack on Mr.
Robb's character that plays well to the conservative Republicans who support Mr.
North, the commercial relies on hot-button phrases like "cocaine parties," "dealing cocaine" and "beauty queen" and an image of a Playboy centerfold to link Mr.
Robb with questionable behavior.
Mr.
Robb has never been proved to have been involved with drugs, and he has apologized to his wife, Linda, and voters for conduct "not appropriate for a married man." Further, by asserting that Mr.
North's character is superior to Mr.
Robb's, the commercial presumes that flaws of a professional nature, like Mr.
North's involvement in the Iran-contra scandal, are less offensive than flaws of a personal nature.


TRANSACTIONS
Hockey  National Hockey League  PHILADELPHIA FLYERS -- Assigned Phil Crowe, forward, to Hershey of the American Hockey League.


Jerry Allen, Author And Journalist, 83
Jerry Allen, an author and former journalist, died on Monday at her home in Norwalk, Conn.
She was 83.
The cause was a heart attack, said Marjorie Berke, a friend.


This Pitt Backfield Is Still a Dream
The 1937 University of Pittsburgh team was distinctive.
The Panthers went 9-0-1.
They defeated Notre Dame, Nebraska, Penn State and Wisconsin.
They played a 0-0 tie against Fordham -- the third 0-0 game in a row against the Rams, who had a guard named Vince Lombardi.
Pitt had a heralded Dream Backfield of Dick Cassiano, John Chickerneo, Marshall Goldberg and Curly Stebbins.
They ran an offense called the Sutherland Scythe after Coach Jock Sutherland, a titan of his time.
It was a precision double-wing attack that ravaged opponents.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
Following is a look at this weekend's top high school football games in the Public Schools Athletic League and Catholic High Schools Football League as well as for Long Island, New Jersey, Connecticut, Westchester County and Rockland County.
Team records are in parentheses.
P.S.A.L.
South Shore (3-1) at Lafayette (3-1), Noon Key Players: Lafayette Coach Chris App says that he is concerned about South Shore linebacker Kevin Burton: "He's strong enough to make the play when it's right at him, and he's fast enough to roam the field and pull someone down. He doesn't show any weaknesses." Lafayette's standout players are Bendele Howes, slot back-lb; Neville Thorne, tb-cb; Ricardo Ruiz, guard-dt; and Fenton Graham, lb-te.
Comment: "It's like we're looking at each other in the mirror," said App, of the teams' similar styles, featuring more running than passing.
"I think that because our offenses are so similar, it's going to be a close game."


Joyous Haitians Decorate The Capital for Aristide
With the return of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the country's exiled President, just a day away, Haiti was swept by a wave of joyous anticipation and a sudden burst of energy today as people across the country poured their efforts into preparing a welcome for their leader.
Security precautions for Father Aristide's Saturday arrival were also being stepped up, with American troops taking the lead role.


Observer; A Doleful Future
Three of the Republicans' brightest hopes this year are Huffington, Romney and North, who yearn to be senators three.
"But why?" you may ask.
"And who? And what the devil? And how can I tell them apart?" Nothing is easier:
Huffington is chin deep in money, some $70 million 'tis said.


Wearing Vest Spares Officer Serious Injury
A rookie police officer was shot and slightly wounded in the stomach yesterday while inquiring whether a group of men on a Brooklyn street were wielding a handgun.
He escaped greater injury because the bullet deflected off his bulletproof vest, the police said.
The officer, Pietro Ferrante, 24, of Queens, was taken to Wyckoff Heights Medical Center for treatment, but not before he managed to arrest one of the five men, the police said.
The officer was later released from the hospital.


A Credit Card for On-Line Sprees
Think of it as a universal credit card for cyberspace.
On Monday, First Virtual Holdings Inc., a start-up company with powerful backing from the computer and financial services industries will announce a new international system intended to make shopping with a Visa card from a home computer as secure and convenient as using a credit card at a shopping mall.
The system, while initally intended for sales of electronic documents and other information, might eventually be used for selling other goods and services.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the TV Sports column yesterday about Chuck Dolan, chairman of Cablevision, rendered a comment from Forbes magazine about his finances incorrectly.
Forbes said that he was worth $715 million, not that the Internal Revenue Service owed him $715 million.


Challenge by Rostenkowski To His Indictment Is Rejected
Federal judge today rejected Representative Dan Rostenkowski's broad constitutional challenge to a 17-count indictment charging him with corruption.
Judge Norma Holloway Johnson of Federal District Court rejected arguments that Mr.
Rostenkowski should be immune from prosecution because the charges related to his official duties.
The Constitution, the Congressman's lawyers said, explicitly protects legislators from being prosecuted for acts involving those duties.


Public &amp; Private; Facts of Life Style
Let's be honest: Karen Burstein has an aberrational alternative life style.
It's a life style that would repel most decent people, a life style so beyond the pale that many of us would hate and fear it for our own children.
Karen Burstein runs for public office.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-8 ISRAELI HOSTAGE DIES IN RAID  As the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to Israeli and Palestine Liberation Organization leaders, an Israeli soldier held hostage by Muslim radicals and four other people died in a rescue attempt.  1  EGYPTIAN NOBELIST IS STABBED  The Egyptian Nobel-Prize-winning novelist, Naguib Mahfouz, who had been critical of militant Muslim groups, was stabbed in the neck and seriously wounded as he left his apartment in Cairo.  8  U.S.
PRESSES FOR VOTE ON IRAQ  The United States pressed for a Security Council resolution requiring Iraq to pull back its troops, risking a Russian veto and indicating a readiness to act alone if the measure failed.  1  IRAQ MUST BACK OFF, U.S.
SAYS  The United States said that Iraq has withdrawn its forces only part of the way back toward their base and that it must complete the move or the United States would take military action.  7  HOPES AND FEARS IN HAITI  The church that was the home base of the exiled President of Haiti, a shell since it was burned down, was a symbol of the difficulties to come as two competing groups tried to take control of it.  1  A White House farewell for the Rev.
The decision was an indication that the judge might find at least some of the evidence inadmissible.  26  About Religion: A church forges a special tie with the police.  21  Metro Digest 21 SCHOOL CUSTODIAN AGREEMENT  Mayor Giuliani announced a tentative agreement with school custodians that he said would wrest major concessions from the union.  1  VOTERS' VOICES FROM LONG ISLAND  Voters in Long Beach, long a Cuomo stronghold, are in turmoil.
After 12 years many are tired of the Governor, and they fear for the future of Long Island.  1  Business Digest 37  Arts/Entertainment 11-17  Dorothy Parker for breakfast.  11  Music: Two pictures of Finland.  11  Luis Miguel performs.  11  Richard Strauss's "Arabella." 15  The Pittsburgh Symphony.  17  Sports 29-34  Obituaries 27  Paul V. Trad, psychiatrist for infants and children.
Marcia Lawrence, writer of Planned Parenthood material.
Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  How to contain Iraq.
Finally, making custodians work.
A prize to push Mideast peace.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: Facts of life style.
Russell Baker: A doleful future.
Jeffrey Sachs: How to keep the ruble off the rollercoaster.
Richard Noll: The rose, the cross and the analyst.
Bridge 51 Chronicle 20 Crossword 28


Bridge
The rare occasions on which it is right to spurn an eight-card-or-better major-suit fit in favor of a no-trump game are difficult to diagnose.
One indication may be the prospect of a favorable lead, and the diagramed deal from a Regional Stratified Pairs event in Manhattan in May is an example.
South was Greg Reich, one of New York's most promising young players.
After a three-diamond opening from West and a double from his partner, Otto Adamec, he might well have tried four spades, which would have hinged on the opening lead.
However, he chose three no-trump and West obliged by leading the diamond jack.


Mayor Polishes His Image, but Luster Fades in Jersey City
Mayor Bret Schundler of Jersey City was campaigning the other night before some supporters of Ross Perot in the affluent suburb of Wayne.
The crowd was all white, mostly middle-age and generally cranky.
"If we win this fight, we change things forever," the Mayor said, repeating a sales pitch honed during months of barnstorming across New Jersey.
Mr.
Schundler spoke with the eloquence that has made him a much-ballyhooed figure in national Republican circles.
But had they been there, many of his constituents might have considered the talk less notable for its conservative themes than for its location: once again, the Mayor of Jersey City was not in Jersey City.
Once again, he was pushing his agenda to outsiders.


Is a Takeover Good for Lilco?
Three weeks before the vote in a tight election race, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has proposed a step no one has taken in 50 years, a government buyout of a major utility.
Is it a good idea?
It would certainly run against the current policy buzzword, privatization, as other states turn to private companies to run everything from their highway departments to their prisons.


Clinton Bids Aristide Farewell and Good Luck


Corrections
An article yesterday about the exile of the former Haitian military leader, Raoul Cedras, misspelled the surname of the United States Embassy spokesman in Haiti.
He is Stanley Schrager.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the Sprint Corporation's discussions with a group of big cable television companies on a proposed wireless telephone network misidentified the publication that disclosed the talks.
The industry trade magazine Inside Media reported them on Oct. 7, before The Wall Street Journal.


IN PERFORMANCE -- DANCE
In a Humming Factory, 'Noise' Joins 'Object'  Majestic Theater
Although inspired by linguistic play, "Noiject" is far from playful.
According to a news release, this title came about when the Japanese choreographer Saburo Teshigawara joined the English words "noise" and "object." "Noiject" is certainly noisy, for it is performed to electronic sounds that recall the humming of turbines.
And the dancers behave like moving objects rather than human beings.


A Lesson in Volatility From the Bond Group
Bond funds have been a money-losing proposition in 1994 -- their principal eroded by the rise in interest rates.
What's more, the recent bear market for bonds has been severe enough to bring down total returns for the last three years.
Only two fund categories, convertible bonds and corporate high yields, both of which take their cues from the stock market, have produced sizable returns after taxes and inflation.


One High School's-Eye View of Budget Cuts
To the Editor:
In recent months, as New York City's education budget has been cut again and again, we have been told that these cuts do not pose a threat to education.
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines has responded to the cuts with education by fiat.
The budget cuts have had a severe impact on the schools, and many of the Chancellor's mandates have been rendered absurd.
For example, the Chancellor has mandated that all high school students take laboratory sciences.
While this is an excellent idea, Chelsea High School, where I teach social studies, has no laboratories -- which is just as well, since we have no laboratory equipment.


Midnight, and the Red Storm Gets Zany
Felipe Lopez was the last of 12 players announced this morning during Midnight Madness and the resounding cheers, hip-hop music and dancing in the aisles made Alumni Hall seem more like a disco than a basketball arena.
Lopez clapped his hands and smiled after the introduction and at first was so engulfed in a maze of camera operators that he could not locate his St.
John's teammates at the other end of the court.
That changed.
It was the last time he looked lost.
The Felipe Lopez Era officially started today and it included 5,500 frenzied fans anxious to see the new man on campus.
Lopez arrived, so St.
John's held the practice as early as possible on the first day permissible, ESPN televised it and thousands of students who usually bolt off the commuter school's campus stayed to watch it.
There was a laser light show and promotions that included a failed opportunity for one student to have his tuition and expenses paid for a year by sinking a half-court shot.


Greek Albanians Had Fair and Open Trial
To the Editor:
Re "Another Balkan Flash Point" by Nicholas Gage (Op-Ed, Oct. 6):
The five Albanian citizens of Greek origin Mr.
Gage speaks of were found guilty by the Tirana Court and the Appeal Court for arming the Greek minority with weapons bought with Greek Government funds and smuggled into Albania; for organizing the registration of ethnic Greeks from Albania in military schools in Greece without the consent of the Albanian Government; for transferring classified information on the Albanian military to the Greek secret service, and for illegal arms possession.
The five had an open trial by an independent court.
Video recording of the interrogation made public by the prosecutor tarnished claims by four defendants of being tortured or intimidated by electric chair, a practice that is nonexistent in Albania.
At a meeting of European Union foreign ministers in Luxembourg this month the chairman, Klaus Kinkel of Germany, declared that "the trial procedures observed Albanian law, and there was no tendency to influence the courts."
It is regrettable to see the Greek minority in Albania become an instrument of the questionable policies of Athens and the hypernationalist elements of the Greek lobby in the United States.
Since the fall of the Communist regime the situation of the Greek minority has tremendously improved.
It has schools, from elementary to university level, where 62 percent of the teaching is in Greek.
It publishes three independent newspapers and has its own broadcasts.
The ethnic Greeks in Albania move freely to Greece (so far as Greece lets them in).
They hold unrestricted religious services and have a political party, the Human Rights Union, with two elected representatives in Parliament.
The size of the Greek minority has been exaggerated.
A reliable index would be the votes gathered by their party in national elections.
The highest turnout for the Human Rights Union came in July 1992, with 49,000 votes, less than 1 percent of the electorate.
GENC POLLO Spokesman for the President Tirana, Albania, Oct. 8, 1994


Computer Maker AST to Cut 10% of Jobs
Struggling to deal with intense price competition in the personal computer business, AST Research Inc. said today that it would lay off nearly 10 percent of its employees and close its California factory.
AST also projected a loss of $39 million to $40 million in its first quarter on lower-than-expected revenues.
And it said it had obtained a waiver on its $300 million bank credit line to cover a potential default because of the anticipated loss.


Wellfleet Communications Inc.(WFLT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Treasuries Prices Rise For 2d Consecutive Day
Prices of Treasury securities rose yesterday for the second consecutive session after a Government report showed moderate inflation pressures at the consumer level in September.
The report on consumer prices provided the bond market with further evidence that the Federal Reserve would not need to raise short-term interest rates before the Fed's policy-making committee meets on Nov. 15.


Taking the Plunge and Running for Public Office
In 1992, Nora Bredes decided to run for a Suffolk county legislative seat that had been vacated in mid-term.
In the past, she had headed a group aiming to close a nuclear power plant, and had mounted two unsuccessful campaigns for public office.
"After many years of working on the outside trying to influence lawmakers," Ms.
Bredes said, "I thought it was time to take on the challenge of running for office" -- again.


Willis Walks Out
KEVIN WILLIS, who led Atlanta in scoring and rebounding last season, has walked out on the Hawks, saying management is not committed to winning.
Management said it was about money.


Remembering Steph, a Saint With a Subtext
MONUMENTS to Stephanie Munoz are scattered all over East Harlem, a high school drop-out now in college, a recovering addict raising a family, a municipal bureaucrat renewed in her mission, a former gangster in law enforcement, a mentally handicapped man with a job.
"Steph was a saint, she was a saint, a saint," chanted Johnny Colon, her partner and husband, at a memorial service 10 days ago.
The spare grayness of the room, the Friends Meeting House on Rutherford Place, somehow gave the word greater resonance.
No stained glass, no choirs, no horseshoes of flowers for this saint, just a progression of people, the diversity that exists mostly in politicians' speeches, all the shades from pink to black, teen-agers, old people, mumblers and street slicks, tweed-and-turquoise people, polyester people, a few enraptured by their own eloquence and most just exhausted by their grief.
Stephanie may well have been a saint, whatever that means.
She never gave up on anyone who tried.
She was 49 when she died on the first day of October.
I met Johnny Colon 17 years ago, but I don't remember when I first met Steph.
She just materialized one day while I was talking with Johnny, a pillowy woman with a switch-blade mind, wry, an easy laugher, connected to the world.
She didn't seem to take up much space because she kept the focus off herself.
In the spare gray room, speaker after speaker said, often in wonderment: "She just wanted to help the people. She didn't want anything for herself."


West Va. Beats Pitt In Typical Nail-Biter
W. Virginia 47, Pittsburgh 41
Chad Johnston threw two touchdown passes in the final 1 minute 32 seconds, rallying visiting West Virginia to a bizarre 47-41 victory over Pittsburgh yesterday.


The Mexican Peso Gets a New Look
Mexico began circulating redesigned banknotes on Oct. 1 in denominations of 10, 20, 50 and 100 pesos and issued 200- and 500-peso bills for the first time.
Both old and new currency will circulate through 1996.
Brochures in English describing the new bills are expected to be available later this fall at major airports and border crossings, according to the Mexican Tourism Ministry.


Why Hiroshima Still Haunts America's Psyche; Casualties of Invasion
To the Editor:
Kai Bird (Op-Ed, Oct. 9) and William Craig (letter, Oct. 11) dispute the number of American casualties that would have been sustained in an invasion of Japan.
I think Mr.
Craig has the right side of that argument, that American losses would have been very heavy.
The historian John Keegan cites a June 18, 1945, meeting between Adm.
William Leahy and President Truman where 268,000 Americans killed and wounded were expected in the planned invasion of Kyushu, scheduled for autumn 1945.


County Sludge to Go to Jersey for Disposal
THE county is awaiting final approval from the United States Justice Department and the Environmental Protection Agency of its newly forged agreement to ship sewage residue to a New Jersey treatment plant.
The county's plan -- which would end a longstanding controversy over ocean dumping -- includes a contract with Tully Construction-Hydro Press Environmental Services to truck sludge from the Yonkers Wastewater Treatment Plant to Phillipsburg, N.J., to be converted to fertilizer.


To Curb Malpractice, Try Federal Licensing
To the Editor:
In "Crushed by My Own Reform" (Op-Ed, Oct. 7), Frank Cornelius argues that malpractice litigation is an improbable cause for spiraling medical costs because it accounts for less than 1 percent of United States health care expenditure.
While Mr.
Cornelius's harrowing experiences at the hands of the "medical industry" are regrettable, horror stories like his do not provide solutions.
As such, he misses a chance to suggest improvements.


As Mating Season Nears, Deer-Car Collisions Rise
THEY seem to come out of nowhere.
"It was like he was shot from a cannon," said Bob Sherman, who collided with a deer in Chappaqua.


Kristin Hillestad, Christopher Licata
Kristin M. Hillestad of Chatham, N.J., and Christopher D. Licata of Hoboken, N.J., both certified public accountants with Rayfield &amp; Licata, an accounting firm in Livingston, N.J., are to be married today at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
James in Basking Ridge, N.J.
The Rev.
James Fraser is to officiate.
The bride, 25, is the daughter of Connie Frost of Tewksbury, N.J., and James Hillestad of Paradise Valley, Pa., and the stepdaughter of Marshall Frost and Carol Hillestad.
She graduated from Muhlenberg College.


Avis Widens Access To Cars for Disabled
Avis has agreed to make rental vehicles with hand controls more widely available for use by drivers with disabilities.
The vehicles are available on request, at no extra cost, at all corporate offices, and the company is recommending that its licensed locations follow suit.
Demetria Mudar, a spokeswoman for Avis, said more than 80 percent of its rentals were made at corporate-owned locations, although the company will not disclose how many of the 1,000 United States rental offices are corporate.
Ms.
Mudar said the company had agreed to equip more makes and models of cars with hand controls than previously, and to make them available on shorter notice, in an agreement reached with the Justice Department last month.
Avis said it would try to get the controls installed on less than eight hours' notice at 20 major locations and in less than 24 hours at most other corporate locations.
Previously, 24 hours' notice was required to reserve a hand-controlled car.


Penn State's Collins Eludes the Pressure
There was no room to run now.
The linebackers were coming hard, enveloping the pocket, closing it abruptly with acceleration.
Kerry Collins of Penn State and Todd Collins of Michigan each had a choice.
They could throw or be sacked.


No Defense
To the Sports Editor:
As a black writer, William C. Rhoden's defense of black athletes in matters of academics, recruitment, etc., is understandable.
But for him to defend the in-your-face taunting and spiking by the players he euphemistically labels "young people" ("No Cheering, No Dancing, No Nothing," The Times, Oct. 8) is absolutely ridiculous.


Where Irish Food Surprises
IRISH food has gotten a bad name for itself -- undeservedly.
It is hard to explain how a land whose lush pastures nourish dairy and beef herds, whose kitchen gardens and orchards yield sweet strawberries and herbs, whose moors pullulate with lambs and game, and whose cold, clean waters brim with seafood gained a reputation for overboiled cabbage, overdone meat, potatoes with everything.
But a new generation of chefs is restoring the nation's culinary honor.
Whereas only a few years ago the better cooks confined themselves almost exclusively to country-house hotels, today Dublin's increasing prominence as a financial center enables it to support some remarkably distinguished restaurants.
If their menus have Continental embellishments, each of these three has a character as particular to Dublin as a pint of hand-drawn Guinness.
The Commons Restaurant
The most conspicuous newcomer to the Dublin restaurant scene, the three-and-a-half-year-old Commons Restaurant, occupies the basement of two elegant 18th-century houses on the south side of St.
Stephen's Green.
Collectively, the buildings are known as Newman House, for it was under their sumptuous plasterwork that the writer and theologian John Henry Newman gave substance to his "Idea of a University," serving as the first rector of the Catholic University of Ireland, the institution that grew into University College Dublin.
The poet Gerard Manley Hopkins wrote and taught there in the 1880's, and James Joyce, a student of philosophy and English there at the turn of the century, set part of "A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man" in its rooms.
No wonder Michael Fitzgerald pressed for the opportunity to open a restaurant in what until the late 1950's had served as the student canteen.
He spent 15 months supervising the remodeling of the basement and the garden behind.
The result is a discreet, consistent and stylish haven, more home to corporate pinstripes than student jeans.
The restaurant seats only 40 at generously spaced round tables, each covered with not one but two beige tablecloths.
A spectacular flower arrangement occupies a central slate table framed by a pair of columns, but attention shifts to the collection of paintings on Joycean themes specially commissioned from local artists by Mr.
Fitzgerald, who revels in pointing out Louis Le Brocquy's striking "Image of James Joyce."
The food is as imposing as the setting, with fixed-price menus changing daily.
The head chef, Michael Bolster, a native of County Cork who trained in Britain, delights in juxtaposing Irish products with French delicacies, pairing, say, lobster mousse with braised Puy lentils and black pudding with foie gras.
We opted for savory duck confit, its unctuousness cut with muscat grapes and beets, and a warm parsnip and caramel timbale, which all by itself redeems the reputation of that maligned vegetable.
Mr.
Bolster's seafood, much of it purchased direct from small cooperatives on the south coast, is prepared with split-second precision, witness the firm-fleshed John Dory on which I lunched recently.
Its chive-strewn white-butter sauce was at once light and sassy, providing an urbane foil to the accompanying colcannon, a classic Irish melange of cabbage and potato, here whipped to a fluff.
Lamb with sun-dried tomatoes arrived pink as requested; it was so good that my guest yearned for a more generous helping.
The side vegetables played textural counterpoint, crisp broccoli contrasting with well seasoned carrot puree, new potatoes alongside saffron-tinctured duchesse potatoes.
Desserts are modern readings of classics, artfully presented.
Who can resist a sinful chocolate roulade filled with white chocolate mousse or fragrant warm apple strudel accompanied by cinnamon cream?
At dinner a cheese board laden with half a dozen of Ireland's finest poses a dilemma.
How does one choose between mild Cashel Blue, Camembert-like St.
Killian, or washed-rind Milleens -- all in tip-top condition?
Slivers of each are essential to any cheese-lover's education, or so we discovered.
Wines, too, are up to the mark, with a long, well balanced list.
Having decided to drink wine in a country where the (very high) taxes on alcohol are based on volume rather than value, one might as well drink better vintages.
At The Commons a pleasant 1993 Sancerre runs $32, whereas twice that buys an outstanding 1991 Condrieu.
The Commons has lived up to University College Dublin's motto, "ad astra," "to the stars," at least partially by winning a first Michelin star last spring.
The chef who garnered that honor has moved on, but Michael Bolster and his polished team of 9 chefs and a dozen waiters seem well equipped to maintain the standard.
Roly's Bistro
Nearly two years ago, at the height of the recession in Ireland, a group of catering professionals opened a 150-seat "bistro" deep in Dublin 4, the home of Ireland's chattering classes.
Against all the odds, Roly's Bistro, named for the restaurant's red-bearded greeter and mastermind, has been a near sellout ever since.
Its recipe: a top-flight chef using the best materials, reasonable prices based on high turnover and an attractive, buzzy ambiance.
Colin O'Daly heads a staff of 24 chefs.
This most resolutely Irish of chefs, locally trained, offers modern renditions of a broad variety of native dishes, changing his menus at least twice a month.
Thus his fillet of beef may be accompanied by boxty; this medley of mashed and grated potatoes enriched with melted butter, originating in County Cavan, has supplanted gratin dauphinoise in my potato pantheon.
Most of us recoil from the notion of blood sausage, but Mr.
O'Daly's Clonakilty black pudding, sauced with sage-infused tomatoes, converts even the most squeamish to this country staple.
Mr.
O'Daly also toys with exotic accents.
His Dublin Bay prawns, perhaps more familiar to us as langoustines, come with beautiful saffron tagliatelle, and snappy cucumbers and fennel, and his lamb from the Wicklow Mountains just south of Dublin has the added tang of apricots and ginger.
We admired Mr.
O'Daly's approach as we settled down to delicate warm scallop mousse sharpened with lemon balm and Colin's prawn bisque, a full-flavored yet light shellfish essence.
Monkfish, sauced with nettles and hazelnuts, and a scallop of wild salmon, set off by the acid of both sorrel and spinach, were firm-flaked, their tastes fresh and defined.
On advice, we opted for creme brulee.
Lest regulars tire of its silken shimmer, Colin O'Daly regularly alternates its flavoring.
On this evening he had added a hint of maple syrup and a dollop of crunchy walnut ice cream on the side.
Desserts here tend toward schoolboy favorites such as queen of puddings -- bread pudding layered with red-fruit jam and crowned with meringue.
The relatively short wine list, revised monthly, runs mostly to European wines.
The Chablis Premier Cru '90 from A. Regnard ($31.75) is an exceptional value.
Such good food naturally breeds good cheer, which is compounded by the surroundings: daffodil-colored walls, comfortable seating and eager clients.
In spite of the high turnover, customers rarely feel pressured, thanks to a well-staggered reservation system and an alert young dining-room team.
Locks
For atmosphere and choice food, Locks is hard to beat.
Situated along the reedy Grand Canal, which marks the southern boundary of the Georgian part of the city, Locks exudes Irish charm with a rustic inflection that has endeared the place to Dubliners for the past 14 years.
Theater people, in particular, seem to congregate here.
After ringing the doorbell, diners are shown in, as often as not by the Danish-born owner, Claire Douglas, who graciously seats them beside the bar.
Over drinks they can peruse a menu and take in the neighboring 50-seat dining room.
An eclectic feast of 19th- and 20th-century engravings and lithographs lines the cream walls, and hoop-backed Victorian chairs face old-rose-colored banquettes across white-napped tables arrayed on worn Oriental rugs.
The menu is at one with the decor: reassuring and homey, even if few homes can boast a chef as skilled as French-trained Brian Buckley.
Succulent black pudding with onion sauce enriched with duck fat and lamb kidneys with mustard are almost always listed as starters, but Mr.
Buckley's inventive grace notes include monkfish and prawns sparked with Thai curry sauce and pineapple or salmon with vermouth garnished with herby marinated tomatoes.
Servings arrive on handsome old china, each elaborate pattern seemingly chosen to set off the preparation.
With supreme (if fleeting) disregard for American Heart Association guidelines, I tucked into a vast portion of salmon in pastry with rich caraway hollandaise and too soon found myself mopping the plate with the house soda bread.
Game is a delight at this time of year.
Venison in a titillating raspberry vinegar and Dubonnet essence is generally offered, but Locks is a fine place to try less familiar widgeon (a small wild duck) or rare roasted tender young snipe or woodcock when they are available.
My husband, Arthur, chose the rich game pie, an amalgam of hare, pigeon and pheasant, and found it wonderful.
"Rich" is an adjective that recurs when describing food at Locks.
No stinting on butter and cream here.
Such sophisticated comfort food suits Dublin's damp northern climate.
Visitors who are less self-indulgent will find alternatives, for example, smoked salmon and grilled black sole.
Don't be put off by the term "black sole"; it's known as Dover sole on the other side of the Irish Sea.
At Locks it is cooked to flaky perfection.
For dessert I chose the comparative austerity of fruit salad with flavorful blackberry sorbet but couldn't resist a spoonful of my husband's gooseberry fool, a lush blend of tart fruit and sweet cream.
The relatively short wine list reveals the manager Brian Cornish's penchant for things French.
The dry Jurancon Domaine Cauhape '92 ($30.30) was a happy revelation, as was the 1984 Chateau Lynch-Bages ($65.60) that incited us to linger over a superb Stilton, chatting contentedly and enjoying the lilt of our neighbors' conversations.
Three local favorites
Unless otherwise noted, prices are for a three-course meal for two, with wine and tax.
Service charges are automatically included as indicated.
All three restaurants offer vegetarian choices.
Reservations are advised at all of them.
The Commons Restaurant, Newman House, 85-86 St.
Stephen's Green, Dublin 2; telephone 475 2597.
Closed Sunday, for lunch Saturday, on bank holidays and for a week from Christmas Eve.
With the exchange rate calculated at $1.60 to an Irish pound, lunch averages $80, dinner $160, including wine and 15 percent service.
Roly's Bistro, 7 Ballsbridge Terrace, Dublin 4; 668 2611.
Closed Dec. 25 and 26 and Good Friday.
Lunch $48, dinner $80, including wine and 10 percent service.
Reservations several days in advance advised, especially for Fridays and weekends.
Locks Restaurant, 1 Windsor Terrace, Portobello, Dublin 8; 454 3391.
Closed Sunday, for lunch Saturday, on bank holidays and for a week at Christmas.
Lunch $88, dinner $112, including wine and 12.5 percent service.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Cresskill; High-Cost Housing, Quality Services
NAMED for the watercress that grows along its Tenakill Brook, the two-square-mile Borough of Cresskill is known for its well-maintained, maple-lined streets, low crime rate, quality municipal services and high-priced real estate.
Once a blue-collar town, it is now a mainly white-collar bedroom community from which an increasingly large majority of wage earners commute to jobs in New York City.
Among those commuters from Bergen County to Manhattan is Kevin Flood, a financial planner.
He and his wife, Jeanne-Marie, bought a three-bedroom 1904 colonial on Westervelt Place in the older, western section of the community three years ago.
They had been living in a rental apartment in Tenafly.


Idea of Chlorine Against Zebra Mussel Vexes Trout Fishermen
A proposal to use chlorine to kill zebra mussels if they enter New York City's reservoir system has Catskills trout fishermen upset.
Although none of the mussels, which invaded the United States from Eastern Europe six years ago, have appeared in the reservoirs, anxious city officials have been preparing for a major battle if they arrive.
As part of the defenses, the city has applied to the state for permission to use chlorine to poison the black-and-white-striped mussels if they foul the tunnels and intake valves in the reservoir system.


Plague in India Giving Visitors Second Thoughts
AS a travel destination, India was never for the faint of heart.
Heat and dust, crowds and hawkers, the vagaries of travel by taxi and bus, train and plane: Befitting a country with 20 percent of the world's population and barely 2 percent of its wealth, the list of challenges is daunting.
And now the plague.


What Is Intelligence, and Who Has It?
THE BELL CURVE Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life.
By Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray.
Illustrated. 845 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $30.


Correction
A picture caption on Oct. 2 about Dingle, Ireland, misidentified a geological formation.
The promontory in the background was Slea Head, not Dunmore Head.
Coumeenole Beach, is directly in front of it.


Daily News To Landlord: Drop Deal?
The Daily News, headquartered at 220 East 42d Street since 1930, is in negotiations for space across town, real-estate industry sources say.
The News's lease for the last two floors it occupies in the 37-floor Art Deco tower on the corner of Second Avenue is up next summer, and discussions are being held with the managers of the Hancock Building, at 450 West 33d Street, near 10th Avenue.


Singleton's Scoring Pass Helps Lift Dartmouth Over Yale
Dartmouth 14, Yale 13
Jerry Singleton's 22-yard scoring pass to David Shearer and Pete Oberle's 2-point conversion run with 3 minutes 1 seconds left in the game lifted Dartmouth to a 14-13 victory over Yale yesterday in Hanover, N.H.


What's Missing
To the Sports Editor:
Murray Chass states, "The World Series died because neither side was ready to accept the other's position" ("Fall of a Baseball Autumn: An Inevitable Strike," The Times, Sept. 20).
Perhaps, such a stalemate between owners and players would not have occurred if the office of commissioner still existed in the tradition of Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis.


'All's Fair'
To the Editor:
Why ask Gore Vidal -- a snob in the truest sense, with no knowledge of "folks" -- to review "All's Fair: Love, War, and Running for President," by Mary Matalin and James Carville with Peter Knobler (Sept. 18)?


Through a Lens Darkly
This is one night in the making of Fox Television's "Trauma Center," as it was filmed Saturday, Oct. 8, at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Greenwich Village.
The program is the newest in a whole class of television shows, spawned by "Rescue 911," that attempt to give viewers a behind-the-scenes look at emergencies.


A Familiar Name, but I Can't Place the Face
CONSIDER THESE SCENARIOS: On a seemingly ordinary day in September, you discover -- with no warning whatsoever -- that a neighbor's face has changed beyond recognition.
Or that an adult man has added three inches of height over his summer vacation.
Or even that the woman you know as Mom has disappeared, to be replaced by a smiling, wisecracking substitute who has taken over the kitchen, bedroom and many of the mannerisms of her predecessor -- with nary an objection from anyone else around her.
If all of the above sounds vaguely upsetting to you, imagine how scarily it resonates in the already terror-filled world of television series production.


New Flare-Up in Region's Border Wars Kills an Oft-Ignored Truce
Border War II?
It sure sounded like it last week when Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani threatened to pull out his big guns in retaliation against Connecticut for luring the Swiss Bank Corporation from New York City to Stamford with a package of tax incentives.
The angry words -- Hartford's "shameless raid" versus accusations that New York City officialdom was whining like a "pimply faced freshman" -- recalled the battles over corporations and jobs that have bedeviled the metropolitan area for years.


When Violence Strikes in the Work Place
A DISPUTE between two men employed at Heublein Inc., a manufacturer of distilled spirits in Farmington, ended when one of the men fatally shot the other.
The dead man was the father of two children.
Memories of that day six years ago linger on the company's manufacturing floor.
"It was a flash of anger. We never had a fight in that plant until then," the director of education and training for Heublein, Robert LaMontagne, said.
Mr.
LaMontagne described the incident to about 45 people from businesses throughout the state at a conference on work place violence sponsored by the Connecticut Business and Industry Association.


Big Apple Greeter
To the Editor: All of us at Big Apple Greeter read the Practical Traveler column "Fewer Tours for the Disabled" (July 31) with great interest, particularly since it says that travelers with disabilities are interested in mainstreaming and fewer are traveling in groups.
This trend has led us to expand our "welcome-visitor" program, to let travelers with disabilities know that New York is a manageable and friendly city.
Your article identified exactly the population we serve: the individual traveler.


Sex and Drugs and Mick and Keith
FAITHFULL An Autobiography.
By Marianne Faithfull with David Dalton.
Illustrated. 310 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company.


Providing Creature Comfort on Halloween
WHAT would Halloween be without doughnuts and cider?" This question introduces a recipe for apple doughnuts in "Doughnuts" by Dorian Leigh Parker (Clarkson Potter).
A book of doughnut recipes is not like the latest low-fat vegetable cookbook.
You set it aside, waiting for the right moment to indulge in the rich treats it promises.
The moment finally came a couple of weeks ago when the weather snapped to attention, and the thermometer took a decidedly autumnal plunge.


Site of a Rape: Eerie, Quiet, Abandoned
During the day, it is a quiet place that attracts a random fisherman or skyline gazer.
At night, once its abandoned warehouses are shrouded in darkness, the waterfront area in Williamsburg suddenly seems eerie.
It is not a romantic place.
It is not particularly cheerful.
And yet, the police say, despite an atmosphere seemingly ripe for menace, the area is also not particularly unsafe.


Alexandra Loeb, Joseph Driscoll
Alexandra Loeb, the daughter of Mrs.
Thomas S. Tisdale Jr. of Charleston, S.C., and John L. Loeb Jr. of Purchase, N.Y., was married yesterday to Joseph Edward Driscoll, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Driscoll Jr. of Belmont, Mass.
The Rev.
John Andrew performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Driscoll is an art dealer and art historian in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Harvard University.
Mr.
Driscoll is a trader in New York for Manro Hayden Futures, a financial management company in London.


Amy Greenspan, Matthew Millikan
Amy Bullard Greenspan, the daughter of Connie and Bill Greenspan of New York, was married last evening to Matthew Glenn Millikan, the son of Marlene and Rick Millikan of Berkeley, Calif.
Don Robert Johnson, a leader of the Ethical Culture Society, performed the ceremony at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Mrs.
Millikan, 24, is an elementary-school teacher in McLeod, Mont.
She graduated from Wesleyan University.
Her father is the managing director of the Center for Management Technology, a consulting concern in New York.
Her mother is a vice president of the MSW Columbia Travel Group in New York.
The bride is a granddaughter of the late E. Douglas Hamilton, a libel lawyer who was a professor of journalism at Columbia University.


JUSTICE SOUTER EMERGES
In his zeal to extol Justice Souter for saving Roe v.
Wade, David Garrow fails to mention that the jurist at the same time approved roadblocks that virtually deny access to the poorest and most unfortunate women in our society.
Garrow credits Souter for providing the brainpower for the Souter-Kennedy-O'Connor opinion in the Planned Parenthood v.
Casey abortion case, which turned back the efforts of the ultra-right Justices to overrule Roe.
But that same opinion validates virtually all the restrictions of the Pennsylvania Abortion Control Act, which were designed to overturn Roe v.
Wade.


Soldier's Death Heightens Unease on Gaza Self-Rule
Israeli officials and Palestinian self-rule leaders in the Gaza Strip said today that they wanted to restart peace talks that had broken down because of the kidnapping and killing of an Israeli soldier this week.
But it is clear that the process will take time.
Before any negotiations resume, officials on both sides said, they must resolve the critical issues and recriminations that were forcefully brought to the surface with the abduction of Cpl.
Nahshon Waxman by armed Islamic militants of the Hamas group.


Adair P. Mali, Tonio Guindon
Adair Price Mali, who teaches tropical ecology at the Monteverde Institute in Monteverde, Costa Rica, and Lyn Antonio Guindon, a custom furniture builder there, were married yesterday in Norfolk, Conn.
Arthur Rosenblatt, a justice of the peace in Norfolk, performed the ceremony on the shore of Tobey Pond.
Ms.
Mali, who is keeping her name, graduated from Middlebury College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in botany from the University of Vermont.
She is a daughter of Jane Lawrence Mali of New York and the late H. Allen Mali.
Her father was the vice president of H. W. T. Mali &amp; Company, textile distributors in New York.
Her mother is an author of children's books.


ARISTIDE, IN A JOYFUL RETURN, URGES RECONCILIATION IN HAITI
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide flew home today to a Haiti filled with joy, bringing a message of reconciliation after three harsh years of military rule.
Arriving at midday aboard a United States Government plane, Father Aristide boarded a helicopter to join an enormous throng awaiting him downtown at the National Palace.
As his helicopter took off, ecstatic supporters at the airport turned and began running toward the palace some three miles away.


THE WHITE WIFE
I am a practicing black psychotherapist who in my 25 years of private practice has counseled many interracial couples.
Adams described the dilemma of two black men.
One gave up a serious relationship with a white woman because of his own internal conflicts regarding the way he perceived white society viewed the relationship.
The other went into the relationship because "she made him better than he was."


Police Say Officer Hit by Drunken Driver
An investigator for the Manhattan District Attorney's office was arrested for drunken driving yesterday after his car struck an off-duty transit police officer who was standing inside a telephone booth in Harlem, the police said.
The officer, identified as Saadia Simmons, was taken to Harlem Hospital, where she was treated for minor injuries and released, said Sgt.
James Coleman, a Police Department spokesman.


Wall Street; There's Money in Those Bogs
INVESTORS have a lot of reasons for liking Northland Cranberries Inc.
Some like the fact that insiders own so much of the stock.
Others adore how cranberry prices keep rising along with demand.
And still others, the easy-to-please types, just like knowing that a box of cranberries will land at every shareholder's doorsteps each year -- just in time for Thanksgiving.
But whatever their reasons, they've nearly all made money playing the bogs.
The grower, based in Wisconsin Rapids, Wis., has been one of the quieter successes among over-the-counter stocks in recent years.


Common Plant With Uncommon Blooms
AT this time of year impatiens live up to the name by which they are sometimes known: touch me not.
Children know the reason for this odd quality and look for the impatiens' seedpods.
In response to the slightest touch, swollen pods explode with springlike force.
Giggles and "Let's do it again."
Sometime next July or August, a few of these widespread seeds may pop up in the garden as if to defy any tenderness to cold.
These volunteers are always worth rescuing as they will make splendid plants to fill in bare patches.


Audrey Jacobsen, Loren Copeland
Audrey Louise Jacobsen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles F. Jacobsen of Edison, N.J., was married yesterday to Loren Scott Copeland, a son of Dr.
Adrian D. Copeland of Merion, Pa., and the late Elise L. Copeland.
Judge A. Leo Sereni of the Delaware County Court of Common Pleas in Media, Pa., officiated at the Inn at Historic Yellow Springs in Chester Springs, Pa.
The bride, 36, is a partner in Marshall, Dennehey, Warner, Coleman &amp; Coggin, a Philadelphia law firm.
She graduated from Colgate University and received her law degree from the College of William and Mary.
Her father retired as a program manager at the International Business Machines Corporation in New York.
Her mother is an artist.


Wendy L. Kallos And Jeff Nixon
Wendy Lee Kallos, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce O. Kallos of Greenville, Del., was married there yesterday to James Jeffrey Nixon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Nixon of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
William B. Lane, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at Christ Church Christiana Hundred.
Mrs.
Nixon, 30, is a regional sales manager in Rowayton, Conn., for the Hoppman Corporation, a packing equipment manufacturer.
She graduated from Lehigh University.
Her father is the director of marketing for Baker, Nye Investment Advisers in New York.
Her mother, Lee M. Kallos, is the owner of Designing Your Time, an interior decorating concern in Greenville.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  ARISTIDE RETURNS  President Jean-Bertrand Aristide returned to a joyous Haiti after three years in exile, greeted by huge crowds, but heavy security was a sign that problems remain.  1  REVIVING A BANKRUPT COUNTRY  News analysis: The President of Haiti is returning to a country that is largely destroyed and bankrupt, and he faces a daunting challenge and high expectations.  1


Beth A. Rodgers, William Pope 3d
Beth Anne Rodgers, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Rodgers of Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday to William Hayes Pope 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Pope Jr. of Villanova, Pa.
Msgr.
Kenneth Roeltgen officiated at the Church of the Little Flower in Bethesda.
Mrs.
Pope, 26, is a law student at Fordham University.
She and her husband graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is a partner in Collier, Shannon, Rill &amp; Scott, a law firm in Washington.
Her mother, Susan R. Rodgers, is the president of the Tri-Cities Nurses Registry in Chevy Chase, Md.


HER PECULIAR CAREER
I was puzzled and disappointed by Bernard Weinraub's article on Meryl Streep when I got to the end of it and realized that no mention was made of "A Cry in the Dark," a film that many of Streep's admirers consider her finest.
I emerged from the cinema with emotions flayed and shattered, and only later fully came to terms with the fact that this falsely accused mother was Meryl Streep; she had become her role.


Condom of Champions
Every Olympic competition has an official credit card and soft drink.
But the XV Commonwealth Games in Victoria, B.C., this summer had an official condom, part of a donation of goods and services by a sponsor, Ortho-McNeil Inc.


A Misleading Picture of Derivatives
To the Editor:
It was inaccurate and misleading to put Fannie Mae in a chart illustrating the biggest users and losers in derivatives ("P.&amp; G. Meets the Derivatives Monster: Chapter 2," Money, Oct. 9).


The Good Wolves
Jack Nicholson didn't need a cure when he turned into a wolf, just a little spin-doctoring from the Wolf Education and Research Center in Ketchum, Idaho.
The center is doing for wolves what Kevin Costner did for the Sioux, showing them to be so noble that it makes "Peter and the Wolf" seem obscene. (A cellist recently quit the Eureka, Calif., Symphony Orchestra in protest against a performance of "Peter.")
The wolf center keeps a pack of lupine "ambassadors" in a multiacre enclosure and offers wildlife romantics a chance to contribute to its work by purchasing a $20 Wolf Sponsorship Kit.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about research into the original appearance of traditional New Mexican furniture quoted incorrectly from a comment by Keith Bakker, the conservator who is making the study.
Mr.
Bakker, who found that the furniture was originally painted brightly, not washed out, said, "If furniture reproducers want to be accurate, they should paint the pieces bright red, blue, yellow and green"; his reference was not to furniture restorers.


Sonia Gottfried, Alexander Bernstein
Sonia Daccarett Gottfried, a daughter of Ida Gottfried Daccarett and Nessim Daccarett of Bogota, Colombia, is to be married today to Alexander Paul Bernstein, a son of Leah and Ralph Bernstein of Los Altos, Calif.
Rabbi Marvin Goodman is to officiate at the West Park (N.Y.) Wine Cellar.
The bride, 26, graduated from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University.
She was until recently the director of Latin American affairs at Smith McCabe Ltd. in New York, a public-relations concern.


Carol P. Morse, John Kennedy 3d
Carol Patricia Morse, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elwood Heinz of Montvale, N.J., was married yesterday to John Joseph Kennedy 3d, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Kennedy Jr. of Windsor Locks, Conn.
The Rev.
Gregory Gebbia, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the New York Athletic Club in Pelham Manor, N.Y.
Mrs.
Kennedy is the executive vice president in the New York office of ACT International, a manufacturer of banking software in London.
She graduated from Rutgers University.
Her father is the president of Heinz Consulting, an engineering concern in Montvale.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


The G.O.P. Looks Homeward on Trade
THE Republican Party is showing more and more signs of returning to its roots as the party that protects small and medium-sized manufacturers from foreign competition.
The party of Lincoln pursued higher tariffs and protectionism from the Civil War until the Great Depression, allying itself with Northern manufacturers against Southern farmers who wanted cheap access to European goods.
Having swung during World War II to the side of international businesses eager to sell in foreign markets, the Republican Party now seems to be swinging back to its more insular ways.


Syria Is Now Trying to Woo Iraelis, Not to Bury Them
At an Arab-Israeli peace conference in Madrid three years ago, Syria's Foreign Minister, Farouk al-Sharaa, shocked his fellow diplomats by holding up a picture of Yitzhak Shamir, Israel's Prime Minister at the time, and calling him a murderer.
But Mr.
Sharaa's tune has changed considerably since then.
Last week, in the first interview by a Syrian official with Israeli television, he said the people of Syria, like the people of Israel, wanted to reach a peace accord as soon as possible.
That interview was the latest step in a new strategy: trying to woo Israelis, rather than vilifying them.


The Met Museum Turns 125
Honoring guests who have made a habit of giving generously, Oct. 5.


How I Gave Up My Alias
Just seconds after my wedding ceremony, when a friend rushed to whisper in my ear, "I wanted to be the first to call you Mrs. Walker," I knew I'd made a mistake.
That name would never be mine.
Without giving the decision as much thought as I routinely gave to choosing a new dress, I had taken on the name of a family I barely knew and had given up the name that had been mine for 24 years.
I felt suddenly hollow and depleted, achy, as if some internal organ I hadn't even been aware of -- an ancestral curl of tissue perhaps, a patrimonial appendix -- had been removed.
But this was silly.
I was a new bride, happy, even if tears were leaking from my eyes.
All I'd done, after all, was exchange one bland six-letter surname that began with W for another bland six-letter surname that began with W. How important could it be?


From a Utility's Gadfly To Its Profligate Lobbyist
As a state senator in Albany, Linda Winikow was a gadfly who hounded power companies relentlessly about soaring electric rates and recurrent power failures.
She was, a colleague said, the industry's "worst nightmare."
In 1984 she switched sides, startling supporters by going to work as a $100,000-a-year lobbyist for Orange and Rockland Utilities.
Mrs.
Winikow the lobbyist turned out to be even more aggressive, courting politicians and regulators in novel and daring but sometimes illegal ways.
Here too, Mrs.
Winikow, proved to be a power company's worst nightmare.


No Headline
"No to violence, no to vengeance, yes to reconciliation." PRESIDENT ARISTIDE.  [ 1:6. ]


Rhett Barry, Jeffrey Anderson
Rhett Barry, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Barry of Douglaston, Queens, was married there yesterday to Dr.
Jeffrey W. Anderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Anderson of Pelham, N.Y.
The Very Rev.
Ambrose Wolverton, the prior of Portmouth (R.I.) Abbey, officiated at St.
Anastasia Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Anderson, a registered nurse, is to join the oncology unit of Stamford (Conn.) Hospital starting tomorrow.
She graduated from Trinity College in Washington and from Phillips Beth Israel School of Nursing.
Her father retired as a director of affiliate relations at NBC-TV in New York.


Elizabeth Corley, Peter Stathatos
Elizabeth Ann Corley, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin Ray Corley, is to be married today to Peter Anthony Stathatos, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Anthony Peter Stathatos of Holyoke, Mass.
The Rev.
Theodore Baglaneas is to perform the ceremony at the Greek Orthodox Church of Our Saviour in Rye, N.Y.
The bride, 28, is an associate with Newman, Schlau, Fitch &amp; Lane, a New York law firm.
She graduated from Tulane University and received a law degree from Pace University.
Her father was a novelist who wrote under the name David Harper.


Susan Streisand, Steven J. Zweig
Susan Lynn Streisand, the daughter of Kenneth and Judith Streisand of East Brunswick, N.J., is to be married today to Steven Joseph Zweig, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome Zweig of Bridgewater, N.J.
Rabbi Ronald Isaacs is to officiate at Temple Shalom in Bridgewater.
The bride, 27, graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and received a master's degree in electrical engineering from the University of California at Berkeley.
She is a chief architect at AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories in Holmdel, N.J.
Her father is a member of the technical staff at AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories in Middletown, N.J.
Her mother is an administrative assistant at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J.


Margaret Watson, Karl D. Cooper
Margaret L. Watson and Karl D. Cooper, both associates at the law firm of Lankler Siffert &amp; Wohl in New York, are to be married today at the American Yacht Club in Rye, N.Y.
The ceremony is to be performed by Judge Whitman Knapp of the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York, for whom the bride had been a law clerk.
The bride, 32, graduated from Swarthmore College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her law degree from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Maureen and Gerard Watson of Brooklyn.
The bride's father retired as a partner in LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby &amp; MacRae, a New York law firm.


Security Council Condemns Iraqis' Threat to Kuwait
After a day of intense debate marked by a long standoff between Russia and the United States, the Security Council tonight unanimously adopted a resolution condemning Iraq for its recent troop deployments near the Kuwaiti border and warning Baghdad against future "hostile" actions.
The vote was 15 for the resolution and none opposed.
Russia supported the measure, althout it said the Council had acted hastily.


A Fragrance Designed For Couples Who Share
WHAT: CK One, the new unisex fragrance from Calvin Klein.
WHY: Because even though the idea of men and women sharing the same cologne sounds far-fetched, department stores report that CK One, which has been on shelves since Sept. 24, is one of the most successful new fragrances to hit the market in recent memory. 'SMELLS LIKE TEEN SPIRIT': For Generation X, the gender gap is narrowing.
After all, young men and women now live together (in coed college dormitories), shop side by side (at stores like the Gap, Banana Republic and Urban Outfitters) and wear the same styles (multiple earrings, jeans and clunky boots), so an androgynous fragrance seems a logical component of a unisex wardrobe.


Why Green Jackets Speak Louder Than McCord
Gary McCord is the most entertaining golf commentator to come along in years.
He is quick, knowledgeable, colorful and irreverent.
The first three attributes have never been a problem.
The fourth, though, is the one that has put McCord where he is -- out of the world come April.
McCord has been banned from CBS's broadcast of the Masters, a move that has led to an unusual amount of huffing, puffing, posturing and editorializing all across the golf world.
His offense has been well documented: he said Augusta National used "bikini wax" to get its greens as fast as they are, and he used the term "body bags" when referring to a fate that awaited golfers who hit their balls over the 17th green.


A Nepalese Garden Of Buddhist Legend
IN my hotel room in Lumbini, instead of a Gideon Bible, there was a copy of "The Teachings of Buddha." I searched it and found a lesson appropriate to the place: "Soft zephyrs pass through the trees of that Pure Land and stir the fragrant curtains of the pavilions and pass away in sweet cadences of music."
It was evening, and a cooling breeze stirred the flower gardens of the small hotel where birds twittered to mark the fading of daylight.
For millions of Buddhists, this isolated pocket of Nepal is holy ground.
They believe that the Lord Buddha was born here more than 2,600 years ago as Siddhartha Gautama, a prince of the Shakya clan whose people still live among the rice fields and groves of the subtropical Terai, a region of Nepal along the border with India.


15,000 Pitch In for 5-Borough Cleanup
Anne Todd is a hard-driving securities analyst for Lehman Brothers who routinely works 90 to 100 hours a week crunching numbers.
On Saturday she knelt studiously on the playground of Public School 91 in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, painting a hopscotch pattern.
"I thought at least I could do something having nothing to do with numbers today," she said.
"And I here I am painting them."


Pamela K. McIntyre and Doug Kelly
Pamela Karen McIntyre, a daughter of Peggy McIntyre Jacobs of Scarborough, N.Y., and the late Robert C. McIntyre, was married yesterday to John Douglas Kelly Jr., a son of Mr.
Kelly of Colorado Springs and Arthe Kelly of New Rochelle, N.Y.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Walker officiated at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Kelly is a senior consultant at the Wyatt Company, human resources consultants in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Boston College and is studying for a master's degree in social work at Columbia University.
Her father owned RMSI, an advertising agency in Mount Vernon, N.Y.


Clinton Finds Few Listeners at Rally in Miami
President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, came to town this evening to campaign at a rally for Hugh Rodham, Mrs.
Clinton's brother and Florida's Democratic nominee for the United States Senate.
Not many people showed up.


Chain Gang: Functional Fades Into Decorative
Motorcyclists were among the first to attach their wallets to a chain anchored on a belt loop.
As skateboarding and all its acrobatic jumping became popular with teen-agers, they quickly adopted the chain and wallet idea, exaggerating the length of the chain to match the exaggerated style of their baggy shorts.
And in-line skaters have picked up on the idea to keep their wallets from falling out of their pockets; some have even doubled the chain as a style statement.


Traci C. Nagle, Sumit Ganguly
Traci Christine Nagle, a project editor at W. W. Norton &amp; Company, the book publisher in New York, was married yesterday to Sumit K. Ganguly, a political science professor at Hunter College and at the City University of New York's Graduate School.
The Rev.
James Enright performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Willard Memorial Chapel in Auburn, N.Y.
The bride, 27, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Cornell University.
She is the daughter of Robert W. Nagle of Auburn and Christine Flask of Memphis, N.Y., and the stepdaughter of Louis T. Flask Jr.


Out of the Nightclubs And Into the Alleys
THE man who identifies himself only as Diablo makes late-night visits to the Port Authority Bus Terminal two times a week.
His girlfriend thinks he has a night job.
That way she does not ask questions when he returns to their Bronx apartment at 4 A.M.
On this particular Friday night, though, Diablo is definitely not hard at work.
He has a beer in one hand and a bowling ball in the other, and he's about to roll a spare in Frame 4 of his third game of the night.


Foliage, in Our Own Backyard
VERMONT and Massachusetts may have more brilliant fall foliage than New York City, but beautiful foliage is accessible to urban dwellers, even without a car, in the city's forests.
The city's trees will reach peak foliage this week and next, according to the Urban Park Rangers.
Leaves change colors in the fall because of chemical reactions related to photosynthesis, the biological process by which leaves produce food, explained Linda Huntington, an Urban Park Ranger.
In photosynthesis, food, mostly sugar, comes from the interplay of water, sunlight and chlorophyll, a natural chemical.


Miss Wasserman And Mr. Rheins
Valerie Ann Wasserman, the promotion director for Wenner Media, the publisher of Rolling Stone and other magazines, is to be married today to David Michael Rheins, the associate publisher of Spin magazine.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Richard Rheins, the brother of the bridegroom, is to officiate at Le Chateau in South Salem, N.Y.
Miss Wasserman, 32, graduated from Fairleigh Dickinson University.
She is a daughter of Adrienne Ament of West Orange, N.J., and the late Joseph J. Wasserman, and is a stepdaughter of Morton Ament.
Her father founded Computer Audit Systems in West Orange.
Her mother is an interior designer there.


Profile; The Giant of Fitness Video Pumps Up the Volume
STUART HERSCH may be the king of the fitness video market, but Charles Atlas he is not.
Yet here he was on a recent morning, a chief executive in pinstripes, working up the kind of sweat that even Jane Fonda could respect.
In the fitness aisle of Tower Video on West 67th Street in Manhattan, Mr.
Hersch was tugging on his lower lip with more than a little perplexity.
"This is not a happy sight," he said, pointing at the 1,000 or so titles sloppily arrayed before him.
The Jane Fondas were thoroughly disorganized.
And the Susan Powters?
Understocked.
"This is where people are ready to spend their money," he complained.
"And if they can't find your video, there is no sale."


Linda Marciano, Christopher Snyder
Linda Marciano, a vice president and associate media director at BBDO New York, the advertising agency, was married yesterday to Christopher Dennis Snyder, a human resources specialist at the Swiss Bank Corporation in New York.
The Rev.
Thaddeus Kazanecki performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Athanasius Church in Brooklyn.
The bride, 33, graduated from New York University.
She is the daughter of Nicoletta and Rosario Marciano of Brooklyn.


No One in Grant's Tomb Unless It's Fixed, Family Warns
The answer to Groucho Marx's classic quiz-show consolation question, "Who is buried in Grant's Tomb?" could be, "Nobody!" if descendants of the 18th President do not get satisfaction from the National Park Service.
Ulysses Grant Dietz, a great-great grandson of Ulysses S. Grant, threatened yesterday to have the bodies of the victorious Civil War commander and his wife, Julia Dent Grant, removed from their great domed tomb at Riverside Drive and West 122d Street in Manhattan.
He and his family are demanding that the Federal Government rescue the site from disrepair and neglect, as well as from abuse by skateboarders who use its stairs as a ramp, graffiti writers and people who leave something other than paint on its walls.


Agassi Is No Beavis
To the Sports Editor:
I am 16 years old and I was offended by some things that Harvey Araton wrote in "A Grungy Showman: 'Uh, Wow!' and Cool," (The Times, Sept. 12).
Araton not only puts down Andre Agassi, but, more important, everyone who is my age.


Nancy E. Dolinko, David Berkowitz
Nancy Elizabeth Dolinko, a daughter of Phyllis and Marvin Dolinko of Highland Park, Ill., is to be married there today at Congregation Solel to David Philip Berkowitz, a son of Beatrice and Bernard Berkowitz of Newton Centre, Mass.
Rabbi Dov Taylor is to officiate.
The bride, 30, is an account manager at Allure magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is a graphic arts consultant in Chicago.
Her mother is a lawyer in Chicago for the United States Labor Department.


Elisabeth Holmes, George McKean 3d
Elisabeth Porter Holmes, a daughter of Mrs.
David K. Easlick Jr. of Grosse Pointe Farms, Mich., and Russell Porter Holmes of Boston, was married on Friday to George Edwin McKean 3d, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
McKean 2d.
The Rev.
John Andrew performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
McKean, 29, is an assistant product manager at L &amp; F Products, manufacturers of household products in Montvale, N.J.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Holmed Corporation and is a vice president and the treasurer of Riley Medical, both health care companies in Boston.
Her mother, Susan Easlick, is the administrative director of Delta Kappa Epsilon International Fraternities in Grosse Pointe, Mich.


Hotel Security
To the Editor: Speaking of hotel safety ("Practical Traveler: Security Never Takes a Vacation," Aug. 28, and "Hotel Safety: Out in the Open," Sept. 4): I travel a lot and the lack of safety, or its abundance, is astounding.
One of my major gripes is the peepholes in the doors.
You say guests don't use them.
I'm 5 feet tall, and usually they are installed above my head.
The field of vision of this little round dot is so limited that one barely sees the other side of the hall and not who's in front of the door.
I'd like to suggest a 3-to-4-inch-wide slit about a half-inch high, with one-way glass, the whole thing to be mounted about four feet from the floor.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday about an experiment in tenant self-ownership in Washington Heights misidentified a tenant at a board meeting.
She was Jeanette Morais, not Rosa Urena.


Hotel Security
To the Editor: Regarding the Practical Traveler columns on hotel safety, in August 1993, we checked into the Albany, N.Y., Marriott between 1 and 2 A.M. with a confirmed reservation.
The desk clerk gave us our room number and plastic card key.
We opened the door, flicked on the light and woke up the two people in the bed.
The man bounded to the floor.
We turned off the light and backed out, apologizing profusely.
At the desk, the clerk thought that was the funniest thing all night.


Cruising


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE BOTTLE FACTORY OUTING By Beryl Bainbridge.
Carroll &amp; Graf, $9.95.
Two Englishwomen, Freda and Brenda, go on an excursion sponsored by their employer, an Italian-owned wine bottle manufacturer.
Humorous events and tragic ones ensue.
In 1975 our reviewer, Guy Davenport, said the author "has her comic eye on cultural confusion."  BEFORE NIGHT FALLS By Reinaldo Arenas.
Translated by Dolores M. Koch.
Penguin, $11.95.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
HONORING THE ARTS
Westport has found a way to commemorate its artistic past and promulgate its future by initiating an annual arts award, for which the first ceremonies will be held on Friday at 2 P.M. at the Westport Arts Center, 17 Morningside Drive South.
The public is invited free of charge, but reservations must be made by calling 222-7070.
An illustrious list of full-time, part-time and sometime Westporters will receive, in person or posthumously, plaques acknowledging their lifetime achievements in drama, literature, music, or the visual arts.


Out of the Ashes and Over the River


Mistaken Identity
To the Editor:  As the editor of the newly revised and expanded Anchor paperback of "Leonard Bernstein's Young People's Concerts," I welcomed Edward Rothstein's mention of the book in his nostalgic appreciation of Mr.
Bernstein's achievement with young audiences  [ "Job Opening: A Bernstein for Today," Oct. 2 ] .


He Could Not Tell a Lie
WHAT I LIVED FOR By Joyce Carol Oates. 608 pp.
New York: A William Abrahams Book/ Dutton.


School Revolution Rages Under Miss Liberty's Eye
When proponents of a school voucher plan rally at the foot of the Statue of Liberty this weekend, they will be matched -- in word, if not in number -- by their opponents gathered just outside the park.
The competing rallies -- one by the pro-voucher group Save Our Schoolchildren and the other by the opposing Community Advocates for Public Education, will be a symbolic snapshot of the contentious battle over school choice.


Streetscapes/Charity Hospital on Roosevelt Island; Piles of Rubble Where Grim Gray Walls Once Stood
THE vast Charity Hospital is now almost gone, reduced to piles of rubble on Roosevelt Island.
The demolition of the near, but not quite, landmark has been considered for a quarter century and now wreckers for the Roosevelt Island Operating Corporation are pulling down the last of its grim stone walls, which are to be reused for a new park at the tip of the island.
New York City bought what was then Blackwell's Island in 1828 for a penitentiary and soon added an insane asylum, a charity hospital, a workhouse, a smallpox hospital and other structures.
In 1858 the hospital caught fire and was demolished, and the Commissioners of the Almshouse, who supervised the institutions, quickly broke ground for a replacement, which was completed in 1861.


OCT. 9-15: Awaiting a Quiet Exit; Report on Espy's Ethics Is Gently Worded
Three months ago, when White House aides began an ethics review of Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy after reports that he had taken gifts from companies his agency regulates, the actions seem intended to show that the Clinton Administration took such matters seriously.
But last week, the White House issued its result, a gently worded appraisal of Mr.
Espy's dealings with companies like Tyson Foods, the huge Arkansas chicken conglomerate, that strained to avoid passing any judgment.


For Melvin and Jocketty, G.M. Posts Had Their Names on Them
A few weeks ago, Doug Melvin and Walt Jocketty, longtime friends but now competitors, discussed their coming interviews with the Texas Rangers and the St.
Louis Cardinals.
"Walt," Melvin said in jest, "this is what we'll do. I'll take the Texas job and you take the St. Louis job."


MANHATTAN MINUTE
DEFENDING THE SQUATS: On Wednesday, State Supreme Court Judge Elliott Wilk issues a temporary restraining order barring the city from ejecting squatters from five city-owned buildings on East 13th Street.
The Department of Housing and Urban Development wants to renovate the buildings to house low-income families and the homeless.
The squatters are legally protected until Nov. 2, when lawyers for both the city and the squatters are due back in court. . . .
A LOT OF TROUBLE: Angered about loud construction equipment on their street, about 50 residents of West 87th Street between Central Park West and Columbus Avenue sign a petition asking the city to move the machines.
The city leased the lot for $1 a year to a company working on the reconstruction of Columbus Avenue. . . .


Business Diary: October 9-14
COMAPNIES Today's Artists Unite, and Hollywood May Never Be the Same  In 1919, Charlie Chaplin, Mary Pickford, Douglas Fairbanks and D. W. Griffith had a Hollywood-shaking idea -- get together some people who know movies and let them run the show.
United Artists was born.
Since those glory days, though, corporations and committees and accountants have taken over -- and their movies, alas, often look the part.
But last week a grand cycle came round again as three men who indisputably know movies now -- Steven Spielberg, Jeffrey Katzenberg and David Geffen -- joined forces to create a studio.
The rest of Hollywood may soon look as if a "Jurassic Park" dinosaur had tromped through.
Mr.
Spielberg will stop making films for Universal, Mr.
Katzenberg will probably raid the animation talent at Disney, his former home, Mr.
Geffen will bring his production unit.
And all that talent will flow to the new studio.
A Novel Cash-Flow Problem  Every company should have such problems.
Chrysler -- yes, the one that almost went under -- has been making so much money it's running out of mattresses to stuff it in.
With buyers clamoring for its cars and Cherokees, its earnings reports are getting boring -- another quarter, another record.
And again last week: $11.66 billion in revenues, $651 million in profits, both records.
So, what to do with it?
The company even has all it needs in its pension funds -- the first time since 1957.
It could raise the dividend, it could buy back some stock.
But it also hasn't forgotten how wet the rainy days can be.
The Car-Buying Minuet  What is it about new cars?
When you buy anything else, you shop around, you find the best price, you pay it.
Simple. (Or you don't shop around, you pay too much, you kick yourself.) With cars, though, a bizarre world has evolved -- meaningless price tags, complex formulas for figuring what the price should be and the dealer's profit. (But do you know the deli's profit on that bagel and coffee?) And then "no haggle" pricing, to make it all nice and simple.
But nothing, of course, is simple -- last week it turned out that the Justice Department is investigating the whole idea of no-haggle pricing.
What are they looking for?
Price-fixing possibly.
Or maybe, like the rest of us, they're just trying to figure out what's going on.
Lutece Super-Value Meals?
The bistros come and go, the temples of Tuesday's cuisine vanish by Wednesday.
And then there's Lutece, as indestructible as the Brooklyn Bridge.
But the bridge shook a bit last week: Andre Soltner sold Lutece.
So is it any cause for alarm that the buyer, Ark Restaurants, owns less-illustrious establishments like Albuquerque Eats and B. Smith's?
No, insists Ark's president; this pillar of French cuisine will remain intact.
But -- a "but" always seems to sneak in about now -- "there may be room for enhancement," he said, like a "Lutece Brasserie somewhere." Stay off the Brooklyn Bridge.
Toys Don't Kill?
Think Again  Kids love toy guns; parents hate them.
So guess who usually wins out: Toy guns were a $246 million business in this country last year.
But parents' vague unease has turned to tangible fear lately, as one New York boy, then another, was shot by a police officer who mistook a toy gun for the real thing.
Toys 'R' Us heard those shots loud and clear, and last week it said it would stop selling "realistic" toy guns; others, like Kay-Bee Toys, quickly followed suit.
Toys 'R' Us had banished toy guns before, but later started selling guns in bright colors -- to mark them as fake.
But kids started painting them to look real, so the issue exploded again.
Microsoft, On Top Again  Microsoft clearly intends to be master of everything it touches, and if it can't build what it needs, it won't hesitate to buy it.
Its own personal-finance software has managed only 4 percent of the market.
But Bill Gates probably can't even see numbers that small, so last week, he had Microsoft issue $1.5 billion in stock -- in the largest software acquisition ever -- to buy Intuit, whose Quicken software owns the market.
So if more people take to writing checks and paying bills electronically, Microsoft could just tiptoe in with a tiny transaction fee, then gather those golden crumbs into quite a rich cake indeed.
ECONOMY Making Economics a Game  There's a concept in economics called "perfect competition" -- the idea that businesses and nations exist in a vast state of nature, and the fittest will prevail by brute, faceless mathematical force.
Some economists, though, think it's a bit murkier -- that something called "game theory" must be factored in.
That theory takes into account the bluff and swagger, the backing and filling, of real-life competition -- a world, in short, in which rivals play a lot of "games," possibly devious ones.
Last week this economic school got a powerful blessing when the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science was awarded to three game-theory pioneers.
Lilco as Politics?
Don't Be Silly  There's been talk of a state takeover of the Long Island Lighting Company for years, especially during the Shoreham mess.
But it's naturally just a coincidence that Governor Cuomo proposed a takeover just last week -- a few weeks before his charmed political life could skid to a halt.
Certainly it's not politics -- though the takeover would, by the by, lower rates for Lilco customers, among the nation's highest, by about 10 percent.
George Pataki -- possibly munching some sour grapes as he witnessed, in living color, the joys of incumbency -- called it "the height of political opportunism." But Mr.
Cuomo insisted it was "for the public." Follow the Bouncing Subsidy  One way to get cheap magazine subscriptions is to accept a cut-rate offer, not renew, then take another introductory offer.
Companies could probably play that game, too, hopping from New York to Connecticut and back, following the tax break du jour.
Last week, angry that Swiss Bank had been lured to Stamford, Mayor Giuliani started talking tough, saying that a 1991 tristate peace treaty had been broken and he'd start trying to entice companies away from Connecticut.
New York, in fact, has just offered Viacom $15 million in tax breaks to stick around.
Of course, as a Connecticut official pointed out, the whole region gets hurt by this tax-draining game.
No Inflation for Retirees  Don't mention inflation to people getting Social Security; there's none of it in their paychecks.
When the consumer price numbers came in on Friday, the yearly increase added up to just 2.8 percent -- and that instantly became the magic number for 1995 Social Security increases.
But for all that talk about lurking inflation, that's the third-smallest increase since the payments were pegged to price rises two decades ago.
And the consumer-price data came on top of a surprising decline in producer prices reported the day before -- so, yet again, that feared price pressure isn't showing up on any radar.
INTERNATIONAL A Weak Link: The Ruble  Russia's on a tightrope.
It has to get its economy moving, but if it tries to do so by overdoing subsidies to business, the resulting inflation will be as destructive as anything else.
Last week it took quite a jolt on that tightrope, as currency markets suddenly had big doubts and sent the ruble plummeting by 25 percent against the dollar -- its biggest single drop ever.
Russia had made big strides in taming inflation, but this could well send it back to the drawing board.
Boris Yeltsin started talking about conspiracies, and heads rolled -- Mr.
Yeltsin fired the acting Finance Minister.
But it was really just the market, and speculators, at work.
The central bank managed to get the ruble to bounce back the next day, but that by no means meant the crisis was over.
That was clear on Friday when the head of the central bank resigned.
What Now for Mexican Labor?
So now that Nafta has been around a while, what's in store for workers at American-owned plants in Mexico?
An answer may be taking shape.
With Mexican factory workers lucky to get $16 a day -- about what Americans get an hour -- American unions have been trying to address that disparity.
But there have been charges that companies like Honeywell and General Electric have fired union sympathizers, so the unions turned to Labor Secretary Robert Reich to ride to the rescue.
But last week Mr.
Reich refused to pursue the complaints.
And union organizers and companies alike were watching it all very closely.


A Restaurant Comes to a Fork
Pots dropped in restaurants from coast to coast Tuesday, gastronomically speaking, upon the announcement that New York's icon of classic French cuisine, Lutece, had been sold to a theme-restaurant chain.
Andre Soltner, the 62-year-old chef and owner, sold a majority share of Lutece to Ark Restaurants, a corporation that owns 30 mainly casual restaurants on the East Coast.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Riley W. Regan; In the Fight Against Substance Abuse
RILEY W. REGAN, who heads the Governor's Council on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse, is considered by many to be New Jersey's most prominent spokesman on the prevention and treatment of the diseases of addiction.
Part of the reason for that stems from a life that could just as easily have made him another faceless statistic.
His own recovery from alcoholism and heroin addiction began in 1966, after he shot himself in the leg while robbing a grocery store in California.
He seems to have more than recovered from those early problems.


Public Enemy Tries Again To Get Its Message Across
ON PUBLIC ENEMY'S NEW ALbum, "Muse Sick-n-Hour Mess Age," Chuck D doesn't just make sure he enunciates every shouted word; he reprints all the lyrics in the CD booklet.
Even that isn't enough: the booklet also starts with a manifesto that explains the premise of the album and ends with a paragraph summarizing each song, a final attempt to make the messages clear.
It's as if the group no longer expects listeners to understand.
There's a sense of desperation throughout "Muse Sick-n-Hour Mess Age" (Def Jam/ Polygram 314 523 362; CD and cassette), Public Enemy's fifth album of new material.
Not long ago, at the end of the 1980's, Public Enemy was the unquestioned vanguard of hip-hop for both its sonic and verbal pyrotechnics.
Using layers of discordant funk riffs and compressed noise, the songs seemed loud at any volume.
The sound itself suggested an insurrection, and the words, rebounding among boasts and polemics and slogans ("Don't Believe the Hype," "911 Is a Joke"), harnessed rebelliousness to black-nationalist ideas.


Haiti Emerges, Eyes Blinking, In the Sunlight of Democracy
Today the light of democracy burns brightly in Haiti.
It illuminates our nation's promise and potential to become a full partner in the community of nations.
Many times during our three-year national nightmare, the light of democracy flickered and grew dim.
But that light did not fail.
The collective hopes of the Haitian people for a new beginning sustained it, and the international community raised it high so that it shone like a beacon, brightening dark corners far and wide.
Just as Nelson Mandela had to squint upon being freed from his dark prison, we Haitians are again adjusting to this bright light of freedom.
I thank President Clinton for his leadership; the United States Congress for its support; human rights, civil rights rights and religious leaders and all democracy-loving people for their solidarity, and the U.S. troops for their participation in this first critical phase of the re-establishment of democracy.


Four Players Fire the First Salvo of the Free-Agent Wars
Baseball's free-agent wars began yesterday.
Jim Abbott of the Yankees, Jack McDowell of the Chicago White Sox, Erik Hanson of Cincinnati and Kenny Rogers of Texas put themselves on the front line of the newest skirmish between owners and players by filing for free agency on the first day of the 15-day filing period.


Wall Street; Calling the Next Play on High-Flying Big Blue
A YEAR ago, it was the stock everyone loved to hate.
Now, it's sitting pretty as the stock everyone loves.
I.B.M. hit a 52-week high on Thursday, closing at $73.125 on Friday.
That's a long way from where it languished on Aug. 31, 1993, when Big Blue closed at $40.625.


Topics of The Times; Goodbye, Cruel Shoes?
Imagine a woman's foot folded downward and in half, slowly crushed over a period of years until toe and heel nearly meet, then placed in a dainty silken coverlet and described as a "lily." This was foot-binding and the "lily foot" was widely prized in China between the 11th century and this one.
Foot-binding passed, but the principle of mutilating to "beautify" remained integral to women's footwear.
Exhibit A: the high heel.
Cruel in its own right, the spike endangers nearly every part of the body, from toes to ankles to pelvis to back.
Like its Chinese counterpart, the spike's implicit message was that women's legs and feet were esthetic objects only, unlikely ever to be used for serious walking or running.
In the 1970's women began wearing sneakers on the way to work, submitting to the torture of heels only at the office.


Today Most Are in Their 40's, and Pretty Amazing
"WHEN WE'RE 25," SAYS Rita, "we'll be pretty incredible." Rita is one of seven Mount Holyoke seniors dividing their time between "gracious living" practice, James Taylor worship, and discussions of sex and what to do with their lives.
It is a time in history when college catalogues can get away with saluting women as "persons in their own right." Six years later, at a reunion lunch, times have changed, but Rita is reduced to predicting "When we're -- 45, we can be pretty amazing."
The scenes are from Wendy Wasserstein's first play, "Uncommon Women and Others," produced at the Marymount Manhattan Theater in 1977.
Maybe because of the reviews, maybe word-of-mouth, maybe the cast (largely unknown, but an unusual number went on to major careers), by the end of the two-and-a-half-week run, the play was sold out, and something of a phenomenon.
But it never went to Broadway.
"There was one man who wanted to move the play," Ms.
Wasserstein remembers, "but only if Holly married the doctor at the end."


Army Uses Rally to Sneak Up and Shock Louisville
Army staged one of its most dramatic victories in recent years, rallying to a 30-29 victory over heavily favored Louisville.
The Cadets tied the score at 29-29 on a 10-yard scoring pass from quarterback Ronnie McAda to fullback Joe Ross, capping a 14-play, 77-yard drive with 3 minutes 17 seconds left to play in front of a crowd of 32,125 at Michie Stadium.


Unwelcome Wagon Greets Toys 'R' Us
So far, in the Upper East Side's first mega-store battle, there has been no lack of wit, or resources.
Ten local block associations have joined forces to fight a Toys "R" Us store planned for 80th Street and Third Avenue.
Their choice for a name: Neighbors "R" Us.


Prize or No, Arafat Still Has Much to Prove
EVEN as he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize last week for his accord with Israel, Yasir Arafat faced his most critical test as leader of the Palestinians: Can he deliver to his own people, and to Israel, the sense of security on which peace is based?
In the three months since he returned to Gaza to set up a provisional government, the leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization has presided over the beginnings of a physical rebuilding, but has yet to establish real optimism.
People remain cynical -- in particular about whether Mr.
Arafat, as the governor of a territory, can shed the autocratic habits he acquired as a guerrilla leader.
And while Gaza and the West Bank town of Jericho have been relatively tranquil, he has yet to disarm the militants who threaten the peace talks and the self-rule arrangement itself.
A High-Wire Act
So the kidnapping and killing last week of an Israeli soldier, Cpl.
Nahshon Waxman, by the militant Islamic group Hamas, threw into sharp relief the question of whether Mr.
Arafat is moving effectively to establish his authority as the governing leader of the Palestinians.
Even though it turned out that the soldier was not held on soil under Mr.
Arafat's control -- he was killed by his captors Friday as Israeli commandos raided their hideout north of Jerusalem -- the kidnapping shook Mr.
Arafat's unsteady authority in the self-rule zones.
During the five days the soldier was held, the kidnapping forced him to walk a tightrope between demands from Israel that he crack down on the militants, and warnings from his radical Muslim rivals that he not become a tool of the Israelis.
As he executed this balancing act last week, ordering the arrest of 160 militants in the process, he exposed a basic vulnerability in the Israeli-Palestinian accord.
For months Mr.
Arafat had resisted Israeli demands that he confront and disarm Hamas in his territory; he insisted that the movement could be pacified by drawing it into Palestinian politics.
Now the question of his long-run willingness to make war on the organization is more critical than ever, with both Hamas -- which Saturday rallied thousands of supporters to protest the arrests, and threatened to "make Gaza burn," -- and Israel clearly stating their terms.
As Mr.
Arafat's policemen rounded up Hamas figures in response to Israeli pressure to find the kidnappers last week, a senior Hamas figure, Mahmud Zahar, warned: "I am telling Yasir Arafat, do not repeat the experience of the occupation. If you want to continue this path, you will have to suffer the consequences."
A few hours later, in announcing that the effort to rescue the soldier had failed, a grim Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, declared: "Whoever wants to advance peace must fight the radical, murderous terrorists of Hamas and Islamic Jihad and the rejectionists because they are the murderers of peace."
The pressure to make a choice between working with Hamas and making peace with Israel came amid the first, tentative signs of recovery in Gaza under the administration of Mr.
Arafat's Palestinian Authority.
After years of neglect, streets there do look cleaner.
Walls long defaced by nationalist graffiti are freshly whitewashed, and some fetid piles of garbage in vacant lots have disappeared.
Groups of men, employed in a $5 million dollar clean-up campaign funded by Japan through the United Nations, push brooms at street corners and paint walls.
But Gaza, the center of Palestinian self-rule, is still a long way from law and order.
Hamas gunmen occasionally ride through neighborhoods, rifles poking out of their cars, in defiance of Palestinian policemen.
Police officers try to direct downtown traffic, but their presence is otherwise hardly felt.
Since setting up his provisional government there last July, Mr.
Arafat has yet to transform the abidingly cynical community, ground down by years of occupation, into a civic-minded society.
Accustomed to leading a guerrilla movement, he prefers to work through personal influence and patronage.
He is reluctant to delegate responsibility, and takes a dim view of demands for greater accountability from both Palestinians and foreign governments, which are withholding financial aid until they know how it will be spent.
Over lunch several weeks ago in his office on Gaza's seashore, Mr.
Arafat shrugged off suggestions that he has had to make a profound adjustment from being a globe-trotting symbol of the Palestinian movement to manager of Gaza and Jericho.
"For me it's the same, being outside and inside," he insisted, as timid aides listened intently.
"The P.L.O. has been working for a long time as a government. From the P.L.O. budgets we were spending between 25 to 30 million dollars per month for schools, for universities, hospitals, education, health services. I was doing the same from the beginning."
Beyond the questions raised by his style of rule, Mr.
Arafat is caught in a vise created by the peculiar circumstances of Palestinian self-government in Gaza.
Despite the withdrawal of Israeli troops from most of the Gaza Strip, its population is still heavily dependent on Israel.
Tens of thousands of Gazan workers still need entry permits from Israel, which controls the area's borders, even with Egypt.
Severely ill Palestinians still seek referrals to Israeli hospitals because they are better equipped than those in Gaza.
In other words, the realities of daily life have not changed much.
Skeptical Gazans say they still face the same hardships, with the Israeli occupiers simply replaced by Palestinians in uniform.
To them, Mr.
Arafat seems less the leader of an an embryonic state than the steward of an Israeli protectorate, a supplicant who in talks with Israel asks only for more carefully measured doses of freedom.
Mr. Arafat is also hamstrung by internal constraints.
Attacks by Hamas, such as the kidnapping and a shooting spree in Jerusalem last Sunday that killed two people and wounded 13, eat away at the authority of his provisional government, which is bound by the agreement with Israel to stop such violence.
A Choice
Trying to cobble together a consensus that would strengthen his rule, Mr.
Arafat has met with Hamas leaders in an effort to draw them into his administration.
But what Israel wants is for him to stifle the militants to show that Palestinian self-rule does not threaten Israeli security.
Mr.
Arafat's response has been the traditional recourse of the weak: Move cautiously.
To appease Israel, he ordered the arrests of Muslim militants, including last week's sweep.
But in the past he has set most of the prisoners free, to avoid an irreparable break with the Islamic radicals.
One way Mr.
Arafat might strengthen his position is to hold elections, allowing him to reassert his leadership and emboldening him to move decisively against the militants.
Israel and the P.L.O. have begun to negotiate about elections, but persistent attacks by Hamas threaten to derail the talks, as they did last week.
According to the Israeli-P.L.O accord signed last year, the elections must be preceded by an Israeli pullback in the West Bank.
But the Israelis say they are hesitant to withdraw until Mr.
Arafat shows he can control the militants.
"It's a Catch-22 situation," said Khalil Shikaki, a critic of Mr.
Arafat who is director of the Center for Palestine Research and Studies in Nablus.
"Arafat needs elections so he can deliver security. But the Israelis say there can't be elections until he delivers security first."


Hearty Italian Fare With a Number of Light Turns
IN the early 1970's, Hugo Bua was an instructor at the Culinary Institute of America.
He went on to become the chef at Capriccio's in Jericho, the chef and owner of Da Vinci's restaurant in St.
James and then the chef of the executive dining room at the Long Island Savings Bank in Melville.
A few months ago, after the bank closed the dining room, he and a partner, Mary Ann Ballin, opened the modest 45-seat storefront Cafe La Strada at 352 Wheeler Road (234-5550) in Hauppauge, 100 yards south of Exit 56 of the Long Island Expressway.


Barbell Babies
Parenthood has always come complete with a fitness program -- lift the baby up; put the baby down; rock the baby; walk the baby.


Corrections
A front-page article in the Arts and Leisure section today about the bass-baritone Bryn Terfel misidentifies the conductor for performances of Mozart's "Don Giovanni" at the Metropolitan Opera next month, with Mr.
Terfel as Leporello.
The conductor is Leopold Hager, not James Levine.


Ms. Hermann, Mr. von der Schulenburg
Katharina Elisabeth Hermann, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Karl-Ludwig Hermann of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Nicolas-Friedrich Graf von der Schulenburg, a son of Susanna Grafin von der Schulenburg of London and the late Friedrich-Werner Graf von der Schulenburg.
The Rev.
Neely T. Towe performed the ceremony at the Stanwich Congregational Church.
The Rev.
Michael R. Moynihan, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs. von der Schulenburg, 29, graduated magna cum laude from Yale University and received a law degree from Harvard University.
Later this month, she is to become an associate at Foley, Hoag &amp; Eliot, a Boston law firm.


OCT. 9-15: A Thaw in Ulster; Loyalists Match I.R.A. Cease-Fire With Their Own
Outwardly, Belfast was just like any other European city Friday and yesterday.
City buses plied the roads, even in the Catholic section of Falls Road.
Traffic wardens, who seemed to have disappeared years ago, were out in force.
And even the British troops seemed to blend in better: Instead of patrolling in armored carriers, training their gun barrels on pedestrians, they were more apt to stroll down the sidewalk and even attempt the occasional greeting.
The difference was a cease-fire proclaimed Thursday by the death-dealing Protestant loyalist paramilitaries.
It matched a cease-fire put into place Sept.  1 by the equally deadly Irish Republican Army.
Together, that meant that the terrorists who have fighting for 25 years over whether they stay in Britain or join Ireland have put away their guns and are ready to try negotiations.
At least for a while.
Now it's up to the British Government, which has yet to recognize the I.R.A. cease-fire, to set a date for "talks about talks" and work out the complicated and volatile questions of who sits at the table and what is on the agenda.


Ann K. Toner, R. G. Gervase Jr.
Ann Kathryn Toner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Toner of Pound Ridge, N.Y., was married yesterday to Richard G. Gervase Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gervase of Marlton, N.J.
Msgr.
John Torney, a cousin of the bride, officiated at St.
Patrick's Church in Bedford, N.Y.
The bride, 29, is keeping her name.
She is an assistant editor at Marie Claire magazine in New York.
She graduated from Wheaton College.
Her father is the senior vice president of marketing and sales at Avondale Mills in New York.
Her mother, Tommye Toner, is a sculptor and the founder of the Uncommon Chisler, a women's sculpture group.


Joining Hands for the New Land for Haitians
They slapped hands in high-fives.
They embraced warmly and flashed wide smiles.
Above them, a dozen United States Army helicopters were swooping down to the national palace, bringing with them the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
It was a moment that members of Operation Mains Contras, or Operation Join Hands, a grass-roots block association in the teeming slum of Bel Air, had dreamed of since Father Aristide was ousted three years ago.


John Hart Ms. Gray, Mr. Gonzalez Wieland
Elisabeth Catherine Gray, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Gray Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to Carlos Gonzalez Wieland, the son of Carlos Gonzalez and Glory Wieland Naranjo of Madrid.
The Rev.
Bryant M. Kirkland officiated at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Kenneth M. Johnson, a United Methodist minister and the bride's uncle, and the Rev.
James Flaherty, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Gray is keeping her name.
A graduate of Barnard College, she is a jazz and cabaret singer in Madrid.
Her father is a managing director of Cowen Asset Management, a division of Cowen &amp; Company, an investment firm in New York.
Her mother, Betty J. Gray, is a singer and actress known professionally as Betty Johnson.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about the Westchester Symphony Orchestra misidentified the group rehearsing with Anthony Aibel, the orchestra's conductor.
It was the Hudson Valley Singers, not the orchestra itself.


After the Homecoming, the Hard Part
The national treasury is empty.
More than 3,000 people, many of whom were counted on to help run the country, are dead, the victims of state-sponsored violence that has left much rancor in its wake.
Schools, roads, hospitals, electricity and other services have all collapsed, and at least half the work force is idle.
Against all odds, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide has been restored to his rightful place as the legitimate, popularly elected President of Haiti.
But he returned today to a country so exhausted, bankrupted and riven by the ordeal it has endured these past three years that he now faces a challenge no less daunting: how to live up to the Haitian people's expectations that he will now bring about an immediate improvement in every aspect of their lives.


THE WHITE WIFE
Jacqueline Adams starts out reasonably in recognizing the effects of white racism on African-Americans.
But there the reasoning ends and her racial pathology takes over.
How else to account for her explanation of the African-American psyche based on the hang-ups of two black males and their relationships with two white women?
The travesty of citing such a minuscule sampling, and claiming these personal choices as evidence of the black man's insecurity, is exceeded only by the fear she expresses of racists' citing of the O. J. Simpson case as another rationale for their hatred.
WARREN J. HALLIBURTON Bronx


Gone but Not Forgotten
Even today, Southerners insist on maintaining some sense of decorum, as evidenced by the case of the disappearing Bird Girl, at right.
The image has been made familiar by the success of John Berendt's book, "Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil" -- a portrait of baroque Southern characters hung in the frame of a true murder story in Savannah, Ga.
The Bird Girl is on the cover.


Whose Gain From Whose Pain?
To the Editor:
What would Paul Krugman say to the eight million American workers now unemployed?
For them and their families, "short-term pain" may mar the rest of their lives and the lives of their children.
Economists seem well-prepared to record, identify, analyze and interpret statistical data but unable to translate into human terms the possible options for solving the problems that confront us.


Anna Sevillena, Anthony Berberabe
Anna Melissa Sevillena, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eligio A. Sevillena of Piscataway, N.J., was married there yesterday to Anthony Joseph Berberabe, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Berberabe of Edison, N.J.
The Rev.
Eduardo Abano performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Fatima Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, 28, and the bridegroom, 27, graduated from Rutgers University.
She is a group leader of field administration for the Phillips-Van Heusen Corporation in Bridgewater, N.J.
Her father is a computer technician in New York for General Electric Computer Services.
Her mother, Margarita L. Sevillena, is a medical technician at Interfaith Medical Center in Brooklyn.


Image of Capitol Maligned By Outsiders, and Insiders
Once there was a time when the dome of the Capitol was a symbol of something good, a majestic backdrop for commercials in a re-election campaign.
The senator or Congressman would come striding purposefully down the steps of the Capitol -- powerful, effective, delivering for the citizens of Montana or West Virginia or New Jersey.
A list of hometown projects would scroll across the screen: bridges, community centers, highways, all secured by the incumbent's clout.
Once there was a time when clout and seniority were good.


THE WHITE WIFE
After watching Jacqueline Adams for so many years on CBS and admiring her ability, I kept reading her column over and over trying to reconcile her words with a person that I had always assumed was fair-minded ("Hers: The White Wife," Sept. 18).


Absence in North Korea
Kim Jong Il did not appear this morning at a ceremony marking the end of the 100-day mourning period for his father, the late North Korean leader Kim Il Sung, according to a television report here.
The failure to appear is likely to revive speculation that the younger Mr.
Kim is either suffering from health problems or is facing a power struggle to become the nation's next leader.


Common Plant With Uncommon Blooms
AT this time of year impatiens live up to the name by which they are sometimes known: touch me not.
Children know the reason for this odd quality and look for the impatiens' seedpods.
In response to the slightest touch, swollen pods explode with springlike force.
Giggles and "Let's do it again."
Sometime next July or August, a few of these widespread seeds may pop up in the garden as if to defy any tenderness to cold.
These volunteers are always worth rescuing as they will make splendid plants to fill in bare patches.


Who's in Charge? Tenant Groups Clash at Housing Project
Theresa Anderson pointed with anger to the door of her building in the Hope Gardens housing project in Bushwick, noting that it had been missing its plate of glass for more than a month.
She said she had no tenant association to go to.
She was surprised to hear that she actually has two.


Sondra Zabar, Ira D. Breite
Dr.
Sondra Ruth Zabar, a daughter of Stanley and Judith Zabar of New York, is to be married today to Dr.
Ira Daniel Breite, the son of Dr.
Melvin and Norma Breite of Great Neck, L.I.
The ceremony is to be performed by Rabbi Robert Levine at the Pierre in New York.
The bride, 29, is the chief resident in primary-care internal medicine at New York University Medical Center and Bellevue Hospital.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University and received her M.D. degree from N.Y.U.
Her father is the vice president of Zabar's, the food store in New York.


In Another Revival, the Thalia Theater Shows African Films
After trying unsuccessfully to survive as a revival house last year and then as a showcase for first-run art films, the Thalia Theater opened again last week in what its owners hope will be a lasting incarnation: as a forum exclusively for African and African-American films.
The theater, at 95th Street just west of Broadway, was for many years the quintessential New York City art-film revival house, with its Art Moderne design and sloping floor.


Providing Creature Comfort on Halloween
WHAT would Halloween be without doughnuts and cider?" This question introduces a recipe for apple doughnuts in "Doughnuts" by Dorian Leigh Parker (Clarkson Potter).
A book of doughnut recipes is not like the latest low-fat vegetable cookbook.
You set it aside, waiting for the right moment to indulge in the rich treats it promises.
The moment finally came a couple of weeks ago when the weather snapped to attention, and the thermometer took a decidedly autumnal plunge.


In Short/Sports
COLLEGE FOOTBALL  ROUGH MAGIC  Bill Walsh's Return to Stanford.
By Lowell Cohn.
HarperCollins, $22.50.


Tammy A. Fergus, Scott L. Harvey
Tammy Anne Fergus, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Fergus of Highland Lakes, N.J., was married yesterday to Scott Laird Harvey, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank L. Harvey 3d of Lincoln, Mass.
The Rev.
Michael Lambeth performed the ceremony at St.
Catharine's Roman Catholic Church in Spring Lake, N.J.


JUSTICE SOUTER EMERGES
It is interesting and instructive to note that the Justice from Concord, N.H., has opened the Second Edition of Webster's New International Dictionary to page 1556, where there is depicted the Statue of the Minuteman at Concord, Mass., by D. C. French.
Like this noble ancestor, David Souter is a diligent guardian of our justice and liberties.
DANIEL B. LEMEN New York


Dispute Erupts on Settlement in Valdez Spill
An unlikely dispute has erupted in Alaska between marine scientists and environmentalists over how best to safeguard the coastal area damaged by the wreck of the Exxon Valdez.
The split between the two groups, which are usually allies, comes over the $620 million left in a $900 million fund the Exxon Corporation established in 1991 to settle charges stemming from the disastrous oil spill in Prince William Sound.


Juice or Gravy?
To the Editor:
Philip Roth's essay "Juice or Gravy? How I Met My Fate in a Cafeteria" ended: "Free at last. Or that's what I would probably be tempted to think if I were either starting out all over again or dead."


How La Guardia Rid City Of Big-Time Corruption
To the Editor:
It is difficult not to feel a fondness and even admiration for 98-year-old Louis Eisenstein who "toiled in Tammany Hall's army" for nearly 50 years ("The Thorns on the Little Flower," Oct. 9).
However, longevity cannot always be equated with wisdom, particularly political wisdom.
Mr.
Eisenstein is resentful of the fact that Fiorello H. La Guardia criticized Tammany leaders and "toilers" alike as "tinhorn politicians" and "clubhouse loafers," but they were apt descriptions of the vast majority of Tammany politicians during the 1920's and 30's.
It was not until the investigation headed by Judge Samuel Seabury paved the way for election of La Guardia that the Tammany stench began to leave municipal government.


Striking Imagery Out of Africa and Beyond
"MAMA AFRICA: FROM AF- rica to Harlem" may sound more like a slogan than a festival title, but it aptly stated the theme of the Lyons Dance Biennial last month: the manner in which Africa and her Diaspora have taken dance and music around the world.
What might have been an amorphous celebration glued together by a tenuous pretext turned instead into a rich exploration of complexity and diversity.
Of the 20 companies, from 4 continents, that performed in this French festival, no company better embodied the idea of black dance in Africa and beyond than the vibrant Bale Folclorico da Bahia, from Brazil.


Artists to Be Honored in Stamford Gala
AWARDS, awards, awards." Christopher Plummer was musing upon the meaning of them all, as if a revelation would rise up from the mere repetition.
A single Tony in 1974, one win out of four nominations, came as a vindication of sorts.
A great classical actor had to tread the musical boards in a flop show in order to be acknowledged for a great Cyrano, previously done straight and more than once.
The Tony was not for the seminal Iago that Walter Kerr, for one, termed "quite possibly the best single Shakespearean performance to have originated on this continent in our time." And forget that the best known role in Christopher Plummer's curious film career was not Oedipus or even Sherlock Holmes, but the chilly Baron von Trapp in "The Sound of Music."


Canada Seeks Money Trail Of Secret Cult
Although most of the leaders of the Solar Temple cult are dead, the police are still trying to answer questions about the cult's secret bank accounts and real estate holdings, and possible connections with arms or drug trading and money laundering.
Early reports said 4 of the 48 victims found in burned-out chalets in Switzerland were Canadian.
Now, with most of the bodies identified, the Canadian authorities say the number is 10.
Five more people died in Morin Heights, a ski resort north of Montreal.


Hawaii's Own Style of Design
The evolution of Hawaii's architecture from the grass shack of the 19th century to the buildings of the 1990's will be described in an exhibit this fall and winter at the Gentry Pacific Design Center in Honolulu.
"From Grass to Glass: The Search for a Hawaiian Sense of Place" will spotlight Hawaii-based architects whose commercial and residential structures are considered leading examples of a Hawaiian style of design.
The exhibit, which will include photographs and models of buildings, will run from Oct. 28 to Jan. 8.


Hostages Freed as Robbery Fails At a Costume Store in Brooklyn
Olga Padua and her husband were closing up their party-supply store in Brooklyn on Friday night when a man pleaded with them to open the doors so he could buy his two daughters costumes for a party.
They agreed.
The man then robbed the couple, their son and daughter, two employees and a customer of cash and jewelry.
But the police were alerted, and the gunman held the 7 hostages for 45 minutes in a standoff before surrendering, the police said.


There's Change in the Air for the Alpine Lake Placid
FOR years, this village in the high peaks region of the Adirondacks has been a popular tourist attraction, based as much on its reputation as a quaint Olympic town as for its scenic lakeside location.
Even though it underwent extensive changes to host the 1932 and 1980 Olympic Winter Games, Lake Placid has managed to maintain the look of a 19th-century village, with a decidedly Bavarian flavor.


Q and A
Freighter Travel  Q.  Could you help me locate information about freighters that carry passengers? -- Barbara Carroll, Edison, N.J.


BEST SELLERS: October 16, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
2
TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching Hour" and "Lasher."
2
1
7
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot.
3
3
4
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
4
5
33
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
5
4
5
THE BODY FARM, by Patricia Cornwell. (Scribners, $23.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates a murder.
6
6
17
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
7
8
114
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
8
12
2
WILD HORSES, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) A film maker pursues the secret confided to him by a dying racing expert.
9
7
12
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's visit to a small town changes many lives.
10
11
7
A SON OF THE CIRCUS, by John Irving. (Random House, $25.) Returning to his native India, a Canadian physician encounters a murderer he once knew.
11
13
4
BROTHERS AND SISTERS, by Bebe Moore Campbell. (Putnam, $22.95.) The loyalties of a black woman are tested by colleagues' behavior in a Los Angeles bank.
12
9
19
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist on death row.
13
5
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
14
14
11
DISNEY'S THE LION KING, adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works, $6.98.) The coming of age of animal royalty, told in words and pictures.
15
10
3
HOLLYWOOD KIDS, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) The tribulations of the privileged adult children of legendary movie stars.
16*
15
3
ONE TRUE THING, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) A woman who cared for her fatally ill mother is charged with killing her.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
5
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the present.
2
4
3
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.
3
2
6
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
4
1
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the country singer.
5
3
4
BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An illustrated history of the game.
6
7
3
ALL'S FAIR, by Mary Matalin and James Carville with Peter Knobler. (Random House/Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The 1992 Presidential campaign through the eyes of a pair of romantically involved consultants.
7
11
2
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
8
5
32
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
9
6
43
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
10
1
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
11*
8
75
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
12
9
12
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Addison-Wesley, $23.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
13
1
NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt on the home front during World War II.
14
15
4
BRANDO: Songs My Mother Taught Me, by Marlon Brando with Robert Lindsey. (Random House, $25.) The memoirs of the actor.
15
1
RUNNING FROM SAFETY, by Richard Bach. (Morrow, $23.) A middle-aged man's reflections on what he has learned from life.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
73
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
2
25
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
4
3
MAGIC EYE III, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
4
1
REAL MOMENTS, by Barbara De Angelis. (Delacorte, $21.95.) How to cope with life's problems.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 1, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) CHRISTINA STEAD: A Biography, by Hazel Rowley. (Holt, $37.50.) The difficult life of a fine and strangely mimetic novelist; Australian born, she had no real home but her writing captured whatever environment she occupied.
CITY ON A HILL: Testing the American Dream at City College, by James Traub. (William Patrick/Addison-Wesley, $25.) The transformative mission of a public institution that tried to do its duty first by elitism, later by inclusion.
CIVIL WARS: From L.A. to Bosnia, by Hans Magnus Enzensberger. (New Press, $18.) Three cheerless essays about nihilistic violence, recurrent chaos and the debate in Germany over immigrations and asylum, by a leading German poet, dramatist and philosopher.
CODA, by Thea Astley. (Putnam, $19.95.) In a shopping mall in northern Australia, the spirited, eccentric heroine of Ms.
Astley's 13th novel, a kind of female Lear, contemplates her past and articulates her wrath at age and abandonment.
FIFTY DAYS OF SOLITUDE, by Doris Grumbach. (Beacon, $15.) The record of a self-inflicted isolation in a Maine winter, taken by a distinguished writer as a test of character and a quest for "that mysterious inner place." IN THE LAKE OF THE WOODS, by Tim O'Brien. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) This grim, telling novel deals with the incapacity to register reality in the person of a politician whose disappearance from the record of the My Lai massacre precedes his disappearance from the earth.
THE MORAL ANIMAL: The New Science of Evolutionary Psychology, by Robert Wright. (Pantheon, $27.50.) A journalist's engrossing exploration of scientists' current understanding of the evolution of human moral feelings, driven by a genetic self-interest that is entirely hidden from the conscious mind.
THE PHYSICS OF IMMORTALITY: Modern Cosmology, God and the Resurrection of the Dead, by Frank J. Tipler. (Doubleday, $24.95.) Life is eternal, says a mathematical physicist, given the nature of this universe; a 123-page mathematical appendix is offered for skeptics.
STALIN AND THE BOMB: The Soviet Union and Atomic Energy, 1939-1956, by David Holloway. (Yale University, $30.) A superb history, showing how Stalin both helped and hindered his nuclear scientists, and telling more about the Soviet H-bomb project than is known about our own.
THE WESTERN CANON: The Books and School of the Ages, by Harold Bloom. (Harcourt Brace, $29.95.) A heroically brave, formidably learned and often very sad response to the current state of the humanities, with 36 pages of appendix identifying the real canon as the author sees it.
WHO WILL RUN THE FROG HOSPITAL? by Lorrie Moore. (Knopf, $20.) A sad, witty, disillusioned fairy tale whose heroine, approaching 40, recalls the illusion of limitless possibility she felt when she was actually young.


Americans Now Need A Visa for Turkey
Americans who wish to visit Turkey must now obtain a visa, either from a Turkish Consulate in the United States or at a Turkish port of entry.
A visa, costing $20, is valid for up to three months.
Until Oct. 1, when the new requirement went into effect, Americans needed a visa to enter Turkey only if they intended to stay longer than three months.
The visa can be obtained in person at a Turkish Consulate or by mail.
The consulate in New York is at 821 United Nations Plaza, New York, N.Y. 10017, (212) 949-0160; it says the procedure will take 48 hours.


Burning Up The Wires
What bugs Upper East Siders?
One barometer is the nearly 1,000 calls to Councilman Charles Millard's toll-free phone for quality of life complaints, (800) 954-LYFE, since it started last year.
"There are lots of little things that people feel ignored about," Mr.
Millard said.
The most frequent complaints: noisy bars, reckless bikers, piercing car alarms, the homeless, beggars, peddlers, rowdy youths, garbage, rats, dog droppings, idling buses, parking violations, traffic congestion, honking, chimney smoke, tobacco smoke, unsolicited menus, restaurant odors, York Avenue reconstruction and unsightly conditions around the Queensboro Bridge.
Some calls are offbeat; here is a sample from his staff's log.
B.L.
She thought talking to the Councilman's office might help in alleviating the problem.
She needs our urgent attention about this matter. 7/12/94 Called because upset that O. J. Simpson trial coverage interrupting his watching of Jeopardy which he watches with his grandchildren, feels bombarded by O. J. would like to call ABC if feel affects quality of life. (He had called last week to wish us a happy 4th of July.) 7/26/94 Rent control tenant having problem with management not returning her calls &amp; super threatening her life.  (undated)
Panhandlers -- make it illegal to give $.
Get away from banks.
Get word out that people shouldn't give. $ goes to crack, etc. 9/22/94 53d between First and Second, being an exit for F.D.R., honking deafening.
Leaning on the horns.  [ Put ]  'No honking' banner across the block -- honking illegal. 10/7/94 Bikes are a problem.
Rollerblades are a problem.
The light on 89th/2d is a problem.
The light on 89th/3d is a problem.
The light on 89th/Lex is a problem. 8/13/94 Overlooking vacant lot -- garbage dump filled with homeless -- hard to sell apartment.
Ask owner of lot to close it off.


Sports of The Times; Parcells's Family Portrait
IN the quiet of his office, bulky in a blue "New England Patriots" sweatshirt, Bill Parcells was talking about his place-kicker, Matt Bahr.
"He's in the family portrait," the coach said.


Unplug It
To the Sports Editor:
Please, please, please bench that college football rankings computer!
Last year was bad enough, but Nebraska seventh!?
It's an embarrassment.
JOEL SPENCER  New York The writer is a professor of mathematics and computer science at N.Y.U.


Tedd Joselson to Play at Pulvermann Concert
A NUMBER of events this week are well suited to family outings, including one that is also free.
The lack of an admission charge has been a hallmark of Pulvermann Foundation concerts in Rye since the series began three years ago, and the tradition will hold when the pianist Tedd Joselson, a resident of Rye, joins the Hudson Valley Wind Symphony in a "something for everyone" program in Rye High School today at 3 P.M.
Especially apt for youngsters are Ralph Herman's "Kiddie Ballet" and Don Gillis's witty legend of "The Man Who Invented Music" (with myself as narrator).
Mr.
Joselson will be featured in solo pieces by Scott Joplin and Morton Gould, while the music director, James Wayne, will add a theatrical touch with the suite from "Porgy and Bess."
The Philharmonia Virtuosi's popular Cushion Concerts, designed for children 3 to 9, are presented at three spots: the Little Theater of the Westchester County Center, the Rippowam Cisqua School in Mount Kisco and the Hoff-Barthelson Music School in Scarsdale.
Presided over by Richard Kapp and performed by members of the Philharmonia Virtuosi, the programs, in the words of Mr.
Kapp, "offer a relaxed family atmosphere with children bringing their own cushions to sit on the floor, and having the opportunity to see, touch and even try the instruments." At the first series of concerts for this season -- today at 11:15 A.M. and 1 P.M. at the County Center, next Sunday at the Rippowam Cisqua School and Oct. 30 at Hoff-Barthelson -- Kory Grossman demonstrates the vast array of percussion sounds available to composers.
For more details or reservations, call 723-1169.


Safety in Seat Belts In School Buses
It is unfortunate that the recently enacted law on the use of seat belts on school buses ("School Bus Seat Belts: Debate Continues," Sept. 18) is being subverted by the children themselves.
But this is not surprising to anyone with children.
Peer pressure is a powerful influence in their lives.
If it is not too late, I would like to make a proposal.
Rather than install seat belts, I propose that all new buses be equipped with seats facing the rear.
It seems to me that this could be done at little or no extra cost.


The Heart of Vegas To Get a Face Lift
After decades of decline, Fremont Street in Las Vegas, the birthplace of gambling and gaudy neon in the city, is undergoing a multimillion dollar face lift.
Last month a five-block stretch of Fremont Street was closed to automobile traffic, as crews began building a pedestrian mall being promoted as the "Fremont Street Experience."


Defying the Odds, Auburn Knocks Florida Off Its Perch
Auburn did it again.
Against all odds, against prevailing wisdom and against the top-ranked college football team in the nation, the Auburn Tigers pulled off another stunning victory today.
In one of the biggest upsets of the college season, Auburn scored with just 30 seconds left in the game to defeat the University of Florida, 36-33.
It happened a chilly, gray day at the Swamp, where Florida (ranked No. 1 by The Associated Press and CNN/USA Today and seventh by The New York Times computer) had not lost to a Southeastern Conference opponent since Steve Spurrier became the coach here five years ago.
Auburn -- which came into the game as 16-point underdogs and ranked No. 6 by the Associated Press (and No. 12 by The Times) -- forced Florida into six turnovers.
The Tigers turned the last one, an interception of a ball that never should have been thrown, into the winning touchdown in front of a record Ben Hill Griffin Stadium crowd of 85,562.


In Denmark, a Boredom-Proof Museum for Children
COPENHAGEN HAS GREAT MU- seums, and one of them, the National Museum, was voted European Museum of the Year for 1994.
But in terms of attendance, the No. 1 museum of art in Denmark is not in Copenhagen at all.
It is the Louisiana Museum, a museum of contemporary art that first opened in 1958 and is situated in a private park on the seacoast about 20 miles north of the capital.
From the outset, Louisiana was intended by Knud W. Jensen, its founder, patron and moving spirit, to be the very antithesis of the overbearing city museums of the late 19th century.
Visitors were never to feel, as they sometimes do in encyclopedic museums, that they were in some way on trial and would almost certainly be found guilty.


What Penalty?
To the Sports Editor:
I agree with Ira Berkow when he says that there is too much "showboating" in the N.F.L.
I also agree with the league's view that the players should be penalized for excessive celebration.
But what Chris Calloway did against the Saints was hardly a "flagrant act." It was barely a spike.
It did appear that the officials were having a difficult time deciding whether to call a defensive or an offensive pass-interference penalty.
Perhaps two officials had opposing calls and not wanting to appear inconclusive, the referee was forced to call offsetting fouls.
ROBERT GAMBARDELLA  Bronx


Autumn Treats
GOTHAM *** (212) 620-4020; 12 East 12th Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
"Autumn is my favorite time of year," said Alfred Portale, Gotham's chef.
"The Green Market is filled with inspirational colors and the anticipation of winter sparks a burst of creative energy. The cool weather puts me in the mood for hearty, slow-simmered, restorative dishes." Among them this fall: acorn squash risotto with roast quail, smoked bacon and marjoram; roast venison loin with wild huckleberries and fall squash; and pheasant poached in a broth of black truffles, savoy cabbage, potatoes and salsifis. (Review: 8/27/93)


Knicks' Ward Plays Strong, Silent Type
After one week of training camp, some definitive statements can be made about Charlie Ward.
Ward is quiet.
Charles Smith and Ward were together in the trainer's room recently.
As a joke, Smith decided not to talk until Ward did.
After more than 10 minutes of eerie silence, Smith couldn't take anymore.


Why Hiroshima Still Haunts America's Psyche; Lives Worth Saving
To the Editor:
Kai Bird (Op-Ed, Oct. 9) deplores the dropping of the atom bomb on Japan.
His prime argument is that it would have only saved some 46,000 American lives, instead of the one million asserted by Secretary of War Henry Stimson in 1946.
As a B-25 pilot who after 51 combat missions in Europe was being reassigned to the Pacific Theater, I might have been among those 46,000.
I would count my demise a most disagreeable turn of events.


Checking Up On Car Renters
AUTO-RENTAL companies are rapidly expanding the number of states where they check driving records -- applicants' accidents, convictions on moving violations and other infractions -- before agreeing to rent cars.
Hertz, which a year ago was checking the records of applicants in New York, Florida, Maryland and Ohio, now checks the record of applicants licensed in nine states and the District of Columbia when they apply for a car in any of 33 states or the District of Columbia.
Alamo, which did not run checks a year ago, now makes them on drivers from seven states and the District of Columbia.
Others are doing much the same.


Hospital Marking Its 100th Year
ONE hundred years ago Bloomingdale Hospital was open for public inspection here, and The New York Times, under the headline "New Home for the Insane," found "everything was in the best of order, and the buildings and their management were praised by everyone."
Tomorrow, the hospital, which is now formally known as the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, Westchester Division (though still referred to among residents as Bloomingdale's), will again open its doors to the public, this time to celebrate the institution's centennial.


Safety in Seat Belts In School Buses
The tragic death of Alicia Brager ("A Girl's Death on a School Bus, a Mission and an 'Eye-Opener,' " Sept. 11) could have been prevented if the school bus on which she was riding had been equipped with seat belts and if an adult monitor had been assigned to ride the school bus with the children.
Even young children can be taught to use them correctly, and a bus monitor could make sure that each child was properly belted and seated before the bus began to move.


Why 'Vanya,' and Why Now?
ANTON CHEKHOV WOULD BE pleased.
In the next several months no less than three versions of his 19th-century classic "Uncle Vanya" will come to movie screens.
"Vanya on 42d Street," opening on Friday, is Andre Gregory's no-frills rehearsal of the play filmed by Louis Malle with Wallace Shawn as Uncle Vanya and Julianne Moore as the femme fatale Yelena.
Also forthcoming is an Australian version of "Vanya" called "Country Life," directed by Michael Blakemore, which will be released in the United States next year.
Filmed in the Australian outback, with a post-World War I sheep farm standing in for a fin de siecle Russian estate, "Country Life" stars John Hargreaves as Jack (Vanya) and Greta Scacchi as Deborah (Yelena).


Topics of The Times; Perfectly Pianissimo
The sound of a well-played piano is beautiful, unless it is 3 A.M. and the unwilling listener is trying to sleep.
A poorly played piano is something else -- an earnest 8-year-old struggling through Czerny exercises or a boisterous 10-year-old banging out "Chopsticks."
Comes now a silent piano from the creative electronic wizardry of Japan -- a noiseless upright by Yamaha, which bills itself as the world's largest producer of musical instruments.
To all appearances, it is a normal piano with 88 keys, and it can be played that way.
But depress a foot pedal and it goes soundless.
The pianist hears the notes through earphones.
A teacher can plug in at the same time.
The father snoozing nearby in his armchair sleeps on, undisturbed.


Victory For Penn, Step Up for Columbia
If it was not the biggest game in two decades for the Columbia football program, today's contest against Penn was definitely the most important for the school in Ray Tellier's six seasons as head coach there.
Here were those lovable, laughable, perpetually losing Lions -- the butt of all those jokes for so many years -- marching into Franklin Field to take on the most dominant team in the Ivy League and prove that they belong on the same field.


Plans in Works For Restoring Jamaica Bay
Throughout the 1970's, toxic materials were leaching into Jamaica Bay, seepage from illegal dumping.
Now the State Department of Environmental Conservation is planning to restore part of the area and to buy several parcels of land along the shoreline to act as buffers against further damage to the surrounding wetlands and the Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge.
The department has given high priority to three sites along Jamaica Bay, including two in the Rockaways, though other affected sites are also being considered.


Hollywood Beckoned, Leading Japanese Astray
BACK in the heyday of Japan's buying spree in America, when Tokyo's most ostentatious restaurants were still topping their sushi with edible gold leaf, the chairman of Sony, Akio Morita, had a simple prescription for Americans who worried that their cultural treasures were falling into Japanese hands.
"If you don't want Japan to buy it," he said breezily over dinner one night just after he engineered the purchase of Columbia Pictures, "don't sell it."


A Successor to the Original Pearl's
A HUMAN dynamo whizzes from table to table at Pearl's in Manhasset.
She listens to diners' orders, takes no notes and makes few mistakes.
When the food appears she rushes to the table, gives directions and sometimes elbows waiters aside.
Customers cannot escape her efficiency.
We were told to make up our minds and order, as she could not stand around all night.
We quickly barked out a list of appetizers.
Later we were chastised for not putting in our soup orders before the appetizers.


Acorns Sprout Where Mighty Oaks Grew
HALF a century ago, the arrival of the latest issue of a scholarly journal devoted to the arts and humanities or the social sciences would send professors scurrying into their hideaways to devour a broadly illuminating article by John Maynard Keynes, John Dewey or perhaps William James.
Today, the excitement generated by many of these journals has waned, and many of their scholarly readers complain that the publications have been trivialized.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Mastery of the Heights
LONG ISLAND offers many leisure activities.
Mountain climbing is not one of them.
"Climbing was always something I was interested in," said Jim Space of Patchogue.
But unless he wanted to scale the local landfill, there weren't many heights to conquer.
As a child, he had trees.
As an adult, sitting atop a neighbor's tree can cause suspicion.
So Mr.
Space kept his climbing urge under control.
Until he learned that he could climb indoors.


OCT. 9-15: Going to Their Doomsday; Leaders' Bodies Are Found, But Riddles Linger On
Ritualistic self-destruction by an esoteric religious sect is hardly original.
Yet, as has happened so often before, after 53 members of the Order of the Solar Temple were found dead in Switzerland and Quebec earlier this month, the police and journalists seemed eager to find an explanation that excluded collective suicide.


What to Do With the Leftover Pieces Of a Life
IN 1960, POPULAR PHOTOGRAPHY asked its editors to review Robert Frank's book "The Americans," published in France in 1958 and in America in 1959.
The editors waxed eloquent.
One said, "The book seems to me a mean use to put a camera to." Another thought it "obvious that Mr. Frank had 1934 eyes and blinders on when shooting." A third suggested that anyone who did not dig out-of-focus pictures, unnecessary grain and abnormal compositions might find "The Americans" "one of the most irritating photo books to make the scene."
Oh, well, who listens to critics anyway?
That book has since become a classic, as every photohistorian acknowledges, and Frank has recently had the kind of publicity given to stars in an art-world system he studiously avoided for years.
"The Americans" effectively changed photography, which has not been the same since.
Come to think of it, Americans' feelings about America haven't, either, though the era of self-doubt that followed was already marching in along the paths of history, and in that respect the book was more signpost than spur.


Houston Rises in Present By Not Forgetting Past
Bobby Houston has finally found a home.
It's not very private, but it has lots of exposure and lots of green.
And the job pays well enough to allow him to spend money and time on his charities.
He is the Jets' left linebacker.
It is a spot that today will put him head to head against the most productive pass-catcher in football, Ben Coates of the Patriots.


The Executive Computer; Microsoft May Make Quicken the Home Banking Standard
ONE of the software industry's best David and Goliath stories came to an unexpected close last week when Goliath dropped his weapons and picked up his checkbook.
In a stock swap worth a staggering $1.5 billion, the Microsoft Corporation agreed to acquire Intuit Inc., producer of the much-loved personal finance program, Quicken.
With about 6 million active users of Quicken against 500,000 users of Microsoft's competing program, Money, Intuit has shown like no other company -- with the possible exception of Novell Inc. -- that it is possible to take on the Redmond giant and win.


An Awful Mirror
To the Editor:  See the current revival of "Show Boat" for its music.
But it's not "Show Boat," Harold Prince and your writer Ethan Mordden notwithstanding  [ "A Proud Flagship Keeps On Rollin' in Deeper Currents," Sept. 25 ] .


Some Things Are Better Than Other Things
IN DEFENSE OF ELITISM By William A. Henry 3d. 212 pp. New York: Doubleday. $20.


Keeping Budgets Honest
A REGULAR fall ritual in New York City co-ops is the budgeting process.
This time around, some major concerns are looming as officers and managers make their projections for 1995.
Those concerns include rapidly rising water and sewer charges and increased scrutiny of budgets by lenders and prospective buyers.
Moreover, opportunities to keep maintenance from rising are dwindling as some costs that had stabilized or dropped in the last five years -- interest rates, fuel, insurance, among others -- begin once again to inch upwards.


California Stations Pull Ad Critical of Tobacco Industry
Two of 22 California television stations that were running an anti-smoking advertisement sponsored by the California Health Services Department have pulled the ad under pressure from the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
The stations, KABC of Los Angeles and KBHK of San Francisco, stopped running the 30-second commercial last week after receiving letters from Reynolds's lawyers that termed it "false and defamatory" and raised the possibility of libel suits.


OCT. 9-15: A New Game Plan; Magaziner Role May Shrink For Next Debate on Health
Congress recently rejected a health care plan prepared by a task force of more than 500 experts who knew far more about health care than about politics.
Now, President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton have devised a new process to draft proposals for the next Congress, which is widely expected to be more conservative than the one just ended.
The proposals are to be developed by two Cabinet-level bodies, the National Economic Council, run by Robert E. Rubin, and the Domestic Policy Council, run by Carol H. Rasco.
One loser in all this is likely to be Ira C. Magaziner, the White House aide who was in charge of the process last year.
He will still be involved (he is a member of the Domestic Policy Council) but he is expected to have a lesser role.


Midnight Madness a St. John's Commercial
The commodification of Felipe Lopez, part of St.
John's new deal with the devil of college sports, began early yesterday with a portent: weeks before it was supposed to matter, Felipe Lopez missed a dunk shot.
No big deal, just a practice shot at a make-believe practice called Midnight Madness.
Very professionally, Felipe Lopez grinned and shrugged his bony shoulders; sorry, but it happens in this life, shots do not always go in.
He is 19 years old but he has been around.
The crowd at the St.
John's University arena moaned, that soft, disappointed moan of a dog nudged out of the way while expecting a pat.
Wasn't everything supposed to be perfect from here on?
Don't we have a new name, a new team, a new identity in the world?
Hasn't speaker after speaker called this night the opening moment of our "rebirth"?


A Policeman Marches Into Hot Water
When Capt.
Thomas M. Chan marched at the head of a Chinatown parade last week, he was only doing what local police captains have done for 20 years: honoring the anniversary of the 1911 revolution that established the Republic of China, whose Nationalist Government still runs Taiwan.
But things are not so easy in Chinatown these days, and the reaction to Captain Chan's presence in the parade underscores the difficulty the department's first Asian commander faces in trying to remain neutral in the community.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Business inventories, Aug., pct. chg.
0.3
0.4
Thursday
Housing starts, Sept., mils., ann. rate
1.44
1.42
Building permits, Sept., mils., ann. rate
1.35
1.33
Philadelphia Fed index, October
14.8
15
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
314
310
*4*This Week's Developments
Tuesday
Johnson Redbook report released
*4*Wednesday
Treasury announces two-year and five-year note auction details


A Minor Legend In His Time, Now A Major Cult Hero
MOST OF THE GREAT CONductors who have been deified on "historic" recordings acquired Olympian status during their lifetimes, then amplified their fame beyond the grave.
Jascha Horenstein is another case entirely, a conductor of marginal renown who has generated tremendous cult interest in the 21 years since his death.
He lacked the long-term association with a big-name orchestra and record label that has elevated lesser musicians.
But in the last few years his studio and live performances, with orchestras superior and inferior, in sound good and terrible, have proliferated on CD in astonishing numbers.
We finally have an adequate record of one of the most vital, idiosyncratic interpreters of the 20th century.
Among other things, Horenstein was the greatest Mahler conductor of his generation, perhaps of any generation.
His authority in Mahler was challenged only by Leonard Bernstein, and in some ways Horenstein brought his listeners closer to the heart of Mahler's music, rather than the heart of one conductor's experience of it.
Performances of Mahler, and of Bruckner, have grown increasingly monumental and monotone in recent years; it is deeply satisfying to go back to Horenstein's flexible, full-voiced, superbly balanced readings, in which the texture is richly varied yet all of a piece.
A missionary for these composers decades before they came into fashion, Horenstein never lost his youthful ardor and awe.


F.Y.I.
India India?
Q.
I've been noticing that manhole covers say "Made in India." So is that India as in India?
How is it that we're going all the way to India for manhole covers?
A.
Because they're cheap!


Hotel Security
To the Editor: Although electronic door locks may contribute substantially to hotel room security, they present a vexing practical problem to traveling observant Jews who cannot use electricity on the Sabbath, and may therefore be confined in their hotel rooms from sundown Friday to sundown Saturday.


Easy Does It


Science Fiction
Reading TERMINAL CAFE (Spectra/Bantam, paper, $12.95), by Ian McDonald, was hard work.
I persisted only because of my admiration for Mr.
McDonald's last novel, "The Broken Land," which created a haunting science-fictional analogue for the self-destructive frenzy that has gripped Mr.
McDonald's homeland of Northern Ireland.
Unfortunately, the excesses of diction and design that sometimes got in the way of the storytelling in "The Broken Land" have grown to appalling dimensions in "Terminal Cafe."
In a decadent near-future America, the development of "nanotechnology" -- bioengineering on a molecular level -- has made possible the resurrection of the dead.
Those who are resurrected retain their memories and quirks of character, although they lose interest in their former attachments.
They also lose their civil rights; in the eyes of the law, they are no longer people.
This is a promising conceit, capable of sustaining a number of different narrative strategies, from straightforward horror to social satire to philosophical meditation to psychological exploration.
Unable or unwilling to choose his ground, Mr.
McDonald ends up with an all but incomprehensible mix of tall tales and pseudohistorical lectures that fails to hold our attention, much less engage our intellect or emotions.


U.S. Relaxes Bank Rules On Reporting
Concluding that efforts to stop money laundering were bureaucratic and ineffective, the Treasury Department on Friday night announced sharp cuts in the information that banks must keep on large cash transactions.
The current rules are designed to prevent drug traffickers and others who illegally acquire large amounts of cash from moving it through the banking system.
The changes came after years of complaints from banking industry lobbyists that the reporting requirements were a costly paperwork burden.


Commercial Property/Stamford, Conn.; From Corporate Campus to Service-Industry Hub
LAST month, when Swiss Bank announced it would leave New York for Stamford, Conn., it was big news in both cities.
New York, still smarting from the defection of small-but-high-profile Mastercard to Westchester, now faces the prospect that 1,300 Swiss Bank jobs -- and 700 planned new ones -- will vanish up Interstate 95.
Stamford not only gets the jobs, but also a new office complex in a seedy part of town.
Stamford officials and landlords profess delight, but not surprise.
After all, Connecticut gave Swiss Bank tax breaks that could amount to $120 million over 10 years.
And, they note, Swiss Bank is just the latest -- albeit the largest -- company leaving New York for Stamford these days.


Stephanie Gribb, David Siddons
Stephanie Paige Gribb, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John J. Gribb Jr. of Doylestown, Pa., was married there on Friday to David Richard Siddons, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest G. Siddons of Pittsburgh.
Msgr.
Raymond Teller performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Mount Carmel Church.
Mrs.
Siddons, 28, is the marketing director at Sperry Top-Sider, the footwear manufacturer in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in Doylestown.


The Puck Glides at Night In Amateur Hockey League
NO hockey in New York?
Wrong.


Community Leaders Fear New Rise in Sex Shops


Energy Dept. Giving Critics More Voice
The Energy Department, which runs the nation's atomic complex and has a long history of rocky relations with internal critics and whistle-blowers, will unveil a plan on Monday to strengthen the hand of its 160,000 Federal and contract employees against retaliation and harassment.
It appears to be the latest expression of Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary's campaign to open the nation's sprawling and secretive system of atomic laboratories and weapons plants to greater public scrutiny.


Hardaway Receives $70 Million for 9 Years
ANFERNEE HARDAWAY, who starred for the Orlando Magic as a rookie last season, signed a nine-year deal estimated at $70 million.
The contract includes an option year.
"I'm more nervous about this contract than I was about the first one," said Hardaway, whose first deal was a 13-year, $65-million contract that contained a clause that allowed him to become a restricted free agent after one year.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Porsche 911 Carrera vs. Acura NSX; Two Faces of Hedonism
AND what is milord's pleasure today?
The Day-Glo turquoise Porsche 911 Carrera Coupe, with its bulging postmodern fenders, souped-up engine and gadgets to monitor the gadgets?
Or the screaming-red Honda Acura NSX, with its fighter-jet cockpit, all-aluminum body and 21st-century engineering?
Such choices seem a throwback to an era when investment bankers roamed the earth in Lamborghinis and only hippies and plumbing contractors drove vans.
But it's always nice to stay abreast of what's new and decadent, in case hedonism makes a comeback.
Besides, it makes a change from all those car reviews focusing on cup holders, 5-mile-an-hour bumpers and ozone-friendly air-conditioning.


Carol Ann Paik, Daniel Slifkin
Carol Ann Paik and Daniel Slifkin, lawyers in New York, were married yesterday at the First Parish of Sudbury, Mass.
The Rev.
Deborah Pope-Lance, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony, in which Rabbi Benjamin Rudavsky took part.
Ms.
Paik, 31, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Harvard University and received her law degree from Columbia University Law School.
The bride is an associate at the law firm of Reboul, MacMurray, Hewitt, Maynard &amp; Kristol.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sungik F. Paik of Lincoln, Mass.


Stabbed Author Bids Egypt Wipe Out Terror
Lying in a hospital as the police hunted for his attacker, the Egyptian author Naguib Mahfouz called on the Government today to wipe out terrorist violence for the sake of "freedom and Islam."
"This was an assault on liberty," said the 82-year-old author, who appeared on the evening news from his hospital bed a day after being stabbed several times in the neck.
Hospital officials said Mr.
Mahfouz was still in critical condition.


Topics of The Times; Yesterday's World of Tomorrow
Visitors to the 1939 New York World's Fair lined up for hours to see the General Motors "Futurama," one of the fair's star attractions.
Inside, they cruised on moving chairs for one-third of a mile around a detailed diorama of what the urban-suburban-rural landscape might be in 1960, as it seemed in those hopeful post-Depression days before World War II.
Among the futuristic concepts fairgoers saw there, and doubted they would ever see in the real world, was an automated highway.
Model cars scooted along on a fixed path at a governed speed under external controls, freeing drivers to scan the sky, play cards or whatever.


Emily Costello, Eric F. Nelson
Emily Costello, a writer of children's books, was married yesterday to Eric Freeman Nelson, an architect with Giblin Associates.
The couple work in New York.
The Rev.
David Nelson, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the Unitarian Universalist service at the Church Center for United Nations in New York.
Ms.
Costello, 28, is keeping her name.
She is the author of "Ballet School," a children's book series published by Harper Paperbacks.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
The bride is a daughter of Carol Costello of Cincinnati.


Economy, Crime and Immigration Dominate First Debate in Governor's Race
Gov.
Pete Wilson and State Treasurer Kathleen Brown finally met face to face in a televised political debate on Friday night, with sharp, occasionally emotional exchanges over crime, illegal immigration and California's struggling economy.
But neither emerged a clear winner from the largely low-key hourlong confrontation, held in Sacramento and broadcast on statewide public television.
As a result, Ms.
Brown still faces an uphill struggle to overcome Mr.
Wilson's lead of more than 10 points in what many political analysts say is one of the most important governor's races in the country this year.


Jess G. Siegler, Sarah A. Condon
Sarah Avery Condon, a daughter of Joseph F. Condon of Moscow and Ann F. Condon of New York, is to be married today to Jess Gabriel Siegler, a son of Robert Siegler and Dr.
Ava Siegler of New York.
Rabbi Emily Korzenick is to perform the ceremony at the Puck Building in New York.
The bride, 28, is the director of series development in New York for MTV.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father is the chairman of Providence Capital, a private investment fund in Moscow.
Her mother was until recently the manager of LST Design, an interior decorating concern in New York.


Mary L. Scott, James A. Himes
Mary Lynley Scott, a daughter of Janet and Michael Scott of Toronto, was married there yesterday to James Andrew Himes, the son of James R. Himes of Florence and Judith A. Himes of Lawrenceville, N.J.
The Rev.
M.
Jane Watanabe, an Anglican associate priest, performed the ceremony at St.
James Cathedral.
Until recently, Mrs.
Himes, 28, was an assistant designer at Dorf Associates, a retail design firm in New York.
She graduated from McGill University and from the Parsons School of Design.
Her father retired as the vice chairman of Scotia McLeod, an investment bank in Toronto.


A Misleading Picture of Derivatives
To the Editor:
The chart with "P.&amp; G. Meets the Derivatives Monster: Chapter 2" unfortunately creates a seriously misleading impression that the World Bank has been a loser in using interest rate swaps in connection with its borrowing operations.


Karen Gerwin, Michael Stoopak
Karen Sue Gerwin, a daughter of Gail Gerwin and Dr.
Kenneth Gerwin of Morristown, N.J., was married there last evening to Michael Alan Stoopack, the son of Jo-Ann and Jerrold Stoopack of Brooklyn.
Rabbi David Nesson officiated at the Morristown Jewish Center.
Ms.
Gerwin-Stoopack, 25, is an associate literary agent at the Literary and Creative Artists Agency in Washington.
Her father is an otolaryngologist in Morristown.
Her mother is the owner of Inedit, a Morristown public-relations company.


JUSTICE SOUTER EMERGES
I remember my friends around the college cafeteria table complaining that another conservative ideologue was going to make it to the Supreme Court ("Justice Souter Emerges," by David J. Garrow, Sept. 25).
From the beginning I had higher hopes for Justice Souter, and if David Garrow's article is an indication, I have not been proven wrong.
Souter has quickly moved to being a substantial presence on the Court.
MARK STEPHAN Trenton


In the Trenches of the Campaign, Cuomo and Pataki Develop a Blind Spot for Transit
Neither Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo nor State Senator George E. Pataki is making any promises to voters about what the price of a subway token will be after the election.
And both candidates for governor are keeping quiet on an issue of even broader impact in New York: a new form of car emissions inspection supposed to begin next year.
It seems that transportation issues, even though they have an acute impact on millions of people, are not the territory in this election, where the candidates are seeking to make points against each other.


Crossroads All Lead to Anaheim For Giants
The Giants' locker room was quiet this past week, perhaps quieter than it has been all season.
The Giants had suffered two straight losses, wrinkles of discontent had begun to show and Dan Reeves had decided to do what all good coaches do when faced with such situations: he told the players to stay together and to come to him if they have a problem.
Don't go to the media and don't go to anyone else but Reeves, himself.
It was that simple.
So in the days following his speech to the team, there was not even a hint of discontent.
Linebacker Corey Miller, who became engaged in a shouting match with his position coach, Don Blackmon, in last Monday night's game against the Vikings, was all business.
Everyone was.
Controversy didn't exist.


The Evening Is Both Cheever's And Gurney's
"A CHEEVER EVENING," NOW AT Playwrights Horizons, is A. R. Gurney's singular, exhilarating tribute to John Cheever (1912- 82), an American prose master whose stories and novels, in Mr.
Gurney's words, have been "a major influence" on his own work.
Yet don't go to Playwrights Horizons looking for a succession of dramatized readings.
"A Cheever Evening" is much too inventive and, in a positive sense, too high-strung and disorderly for that.
It's a first-rate theatrical piece that I suspect could have been brought off only by the man who earlier wrote such acutely observed social comedies as "The Dining Room" and "The Perfect Party," among others.
Mr.
Gurney's successes have been in the theater, Cheever's on the printed page.
As the dramatist can achieve effects that don't translate to straight prose, the novelist and short story writer is able to examine territories of the mind and conscience not within the easy reach of the playwright.
In "A Cheever Evening," two disparate disciplines intersect, often with the joy that attends the totally unexpected.


Nations Sign Pact to Stop Desert Growth
A plan drawn up two years ago at the Earth Summit to prevent agricultural land from turning into desert has been translated into an international agreement signed this week by some 100 countries here.
The Convention on Desertification focuses on the world's arid and semi-arid lands, which are steadily yielding less because of overgrazing, excessive planting, poor irrigation and deforestation linked to population pressures.


When It's Much More Than Just a Game
Hoop Dreams  William Gates and Arthur Agee A documentary by Steve James, Frederick Marx and Peter Gilbert PG-13 171 minutes
With visions of making it in the pros, two talented 14-year-olds get recruited off the Chicago playgrounds.
No, not for the N.B.A. but for suburban St.
Joseph High School, the alma mater of the Detroit Pistons' star Isiah Thomas and, if the grades stay up and boosters keep footing the tuition, a funnel to big-time college ball for the most promising prospects.
As detailed as a work of fiction, the documentary follows William and Arthur through four years of good times and bad on the court, in the classroom and at home, where life is real and the pressures severe.


Stephanie Neuhaus, Alfred Loomis 2d
Stephanie Ann Neuhaus and Alfred Fullerton Loomis 2d were married yesterday at the Cathedral Basilica of the Assumption in Covington, Ky.
The Rev.
William Neuhaus, a Roman Catholic priest and the bride's cousin, performed the ceremony, in which the Rev.
John Branson, an Episcopal priest, took part.
Mrs.
Loomis, 28, is an associate development officer at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
She graduated from the University of Cincinnati, where she also received an M.F.A. degree in arts administration.
She is a daughter of Charles and Joan Neuhaus of Cincinnati.
Her father is the controller of Impak Graphics in Newport, Ky.
Her mother is the controller for the Friends of the School for the Creative and Performing Arts in Cincinnati.


Ms. Chambers, Mr. Gilfillan
Christine Elizabeth Chambers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond G. Chambers of Morristown, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Trainer Gilfillan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John G. Gilfillan 3d, also of Morristown.
The Rev.
Gerard Lair performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of Christ the King in New Vernon, N.J.
Mrs.
Gilfillan, who works in New York, is the executive director of the funding division of the Amelior Foundation, a nonprofit organization that assists urban youth.
Her father is the chairman of the foundation in Morristown.
The bride graduated from the University of Richmond and is studying for a master's degree in public administration at New York University, where the bridegroom is studying for an M.B.A.


Glamorous Ancestors, Movies, Evening Wear
UPTOWN -- The black-tie preview of the Fifth Avenue Art and Antiques Show, a benefit for Save the Children, was held on Oct. 12 at a mansion on East 79th Street that was formerly the residence of the oil magnate Harry Sinclair and Augustus Van Horn Stuyvesant.
It was the perfect setting for distinguished hairdos and lineages.
"My great-great-grandfather's brother was David Belasco," said Cheryl Greene, a British artist who was hoping to sell one of her sculptures, called "Belasco Dancer."


Ashley Cheston, Robert Roden
Ashley Lovering Cheston, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene M. Cheston Jr. of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to Robert Francis Roden, a son of Marcia M. Roden of Rowayton, Conn., and James A. Roden of Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
James A. Kowalski performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Roden teaches English and history at the Greenwich Country Day School in Greenwich, Conn.
She graduated from Gettysburg College.
Her father, who retired as a managing director of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York, is now an advisory director at the investment banking concern.
Mr.
Roden is an associate at CS First Boston in New York.
He graduated from the University of Connecticut and is studying for a master's degree in economics at New York University.
His mother is a coordinator in the quality assurance department at Norwalk (Conn.) Hospital.
His father, now retired, was a marketing researcher at the G.T.E.
Corporation in Stamford.


Jamie O'Connor, S. H. Genereaux
Alison Jamie O'Connor, a daughter of Shirley M. O'Connor-Brothers of Hinsdale, Mass., and Robert J. O'Connor of Prospect, Conn., was married yesterday to Dr.
Stephen Hamilton Genereaux, a son of Cadence A. Genereaux of Bronxville, N.Y., and Peter R. Genereaux of Sandy, Utah.
The Rev.
James Joseph Cronin, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Post Mills (Vt.) Congregational Church.
The Rev.
Brian Brown, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 34, is known as Jamie.
She graduated cum laude from Carleton College and received a master's degree in nursing from the MGH Institute of Health Professions in Boston.
She is studying for certification as a nurse-midwife at the EPA School of Midwifery in San Jose, Calif.


Marie A. Gilbert, Joseph Helms Jr.
Marie Allegra Gilbert, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jackson B. Gilbert of Miami, was married yesterday to Joseph Lee Helms Jr., a son of Barbara Helms of Amherst, Va., and Mr.
Helms of Arlington, Va.
The Rev.
H.
Miller Hunter performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Ivy, Va.
Mrs.
Helms, 27, graduated from American University.
She was until recently an accountant at Mobil Oil in Fairfax, Va.
Her father is the chairman of the Espirito Santo Bank in Madrid and Miami.
Her mother, Maria D. Gilbert, is an interior designer in Washington.


Elizabeth Aldrich, Clinton Elliott
Elizabeth Bayard Hollins Aldrich, a writer, and Clinton Elliott, a composer, were married yesterday in Tyringham, Mass.
The Rev.
Arnold Westwood, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Union Church.
Mrs.
Elliott graduated summa cum laude from New York University, where she taught rhythm in language.
She is a poet based in Tyringham.
The bride is the daughter of the late Elizabeth Wolcott Elkins Holmquist and the late Harry B. Hollins, who headed the World Law Fund in New York and was a founder of The World Paper, an international news supplement in Boston for foreign newspapers.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the wedding of Dr.
Julie Ellen Spivack and Paul Jay Reiferson misidentified the medical school where the bride's father, Dr.
Morton Spivack, is a professor of medicine and pathology.
It is the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York, not the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.


Daring but Dumb: Inside the C.I.A.
Two of the nation's top intelligence officers did something profoundly stupid two weeks ago.
John McGaffin was second-in-command of the Central Intelligence Agency's covert operators.
Frank Anderson was his Near East division chief.
They stole a lot of horses in their day, as the saying goes -- running guns to Afghan rebels, spying on Communist countries' missions to the United Nations, and who knows what else.
They were widely regarded inside the C.I.A. as two of the best spooks in the shop.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
FALL FOLIAGE RUN
Check-in time for the Scarsdale Historical Society's 14th yearly Fall Foliage Run and Walk today is 1 to 2:30 P.M. at the society's headquarters, 937 Post Road.
Tom Kline, a master (over 50) walker, will give a talk on walking and its relation to health at 1:30 P.M.


Representations Of Motherhood
To the Editor:
It is really too bad that Rachel Billington reviewed together, and compared, a popular psychology and culture book, "The Myths of Motherhood: How Culture Reinvents the Good Mother," by Shari L. Thurer, and a book with entirely dif ferent goals, "Representations of Motherhood," edited by Donna Bassin, Margaret Honey and Meryle Mahrer Kaplan (Sept. 11).


Few Chileans Regard Pinochet as a Hero
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 6 news article on the ability of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet of Chile to cling to power might give a false impression of his popularity.
I was on vacation in Chile for what happened to be the 21st anniversary of the general's infamous coup against the democratically elected Government of Salvador Allende in 1973.
While it's true several thousand people (mostly military families) showed up at the military academy to celebrate the coup's anniversary, the sentiment of the rest of the populace was anything but hero worship.
The country was riveted that week by daily student demonstrations all over the country against General Pinochet.
And on Sept. 11, the day of the anniversary, I witnessed a turnout of Chileans estimated at 20,000 (10 times as many as showed up at the military academy) march to the grave of Allende and to a monument for the thousands of victims of torture and murder under General Pinochet's 18-year rule as president.
The first few pages of Chile's major newspapers were given to covering the march to the cemetery, while the military academy gathering was buried in the back pages.
I spoke to dozens of ordinary Chileans, and it was hard to find anyone with anything positive to say about General Pinochet.
The general's ability to remain as army commander seems not a result of popularity but perhaps attributable to the military's loyalty and to his ability to crush a government whose policies he disagrees with.
In this age in which human rights criminals are becoming less tolerated throughout the world, the presence of one of the 20th century's worst human rights abusers in a position of power appears to be a source of frustration to the majority of Chileans.
JOE RUBIN Newton, Mass., Oct. 10, 1994


Battle Over Leaf Blowers Broadens
JOSEPH TINELLI, who usually sees green this time of year -- turf green and money green, that is -- is seeing red instead.
A landscape contractor in Yonkers for 33 years, he said he is fighting mad about the growing number of municipalities in the county adopting bans on leaf blowers.
"It's like taking away the saw from the carpenter," said Mr.
Tinelli, the vice president of the New York Turf and Landscape Association, a Scarsdale-based trade organization representing 300 members in the county.
"We are talking about an essential tool."


Income Can't Replace Time With Children
To the Editor:
Re "Men Whose Wives Work Earn Less, Studies Show" (front page, Oct. 12): I have news for the investment manager who feels free to work longer hours now that his wife has left her job to stay home with their children.
His children are not getting enough "parent time" from him, something extra income cannot compensate for.
Families gain when parents share parenting and financial responsibilities.
LIZ BLOCK El Cerrito, Calif., Oct. 12, 1994 The writer is an educational psychologist.


Anna P. Murray, James D. Herter
Anna Patricia Murray, a daughter of Ann and Francis Murray of Bath, N.H., was married yesterday to Dr.
James David Herter, a son of James L. Herter of Stratford, Ontario, and the late Karen R. Herter.
The Rev.
Charles Irvin officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Francis of Assisi in Ann Arbor, Mich.
The Rev.
D.
Bradley Murray, the bride's uncle, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Murray, who is keeping her name, teaches English at the Detroit Country Day School in Beverley Hills, Mich.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
Her father retired as a vice president of Stanley G. Flagg, a plumbing manufacturer in Stowe, Pa.


When It's Much More Than Just a Game
Terminal Velocity  Charlie Sheen, Nastassja Kinski Directed by Deran Sarafian PG-13 -- -- 102 minutes
A daredevil sky diver, Ditch Brodie (Charlie Sheen), gets entangled in a web of "KG-used-to-B" intrigue when a beautiful parachuting student (Nastassja Kinski) fakes her own death.
It turns out that Ms.
Kinski is an unemployed Russian spy who needs Mr.
Sheen's help to stop a new cold war.
In one helpful gesture, he parachutes out of a plane and struggles to unlock Ms.
Kinski from the trunk of a car plunging earthward.


Forging Peace Between Birds And Airplanes at Kennedy
Three years after officials started shooting gulls at Kennedy International Airport to control the booming bird population nearby, collisions between birds and airplanes have fallen steadily, and fewer birds are being shot.
But officials at the airport and the Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge disagree on how to achieve lasting peace between the two unlikely neighbors.
Figures are now in for the height of the bird season: the airport has recorded 102 bird strikes, or collisions, this year, compared to a high of 391 in 1991, said Jack Gartner, the manager of aeronautical services at the airport.
About 4,000 gulls flying over airport grounds have been shot.
That is well below the 14,000 killed in 1991 and the 6,500 last year.


Getting His Message Across?


As Farmland Shrinks, Crop Yields Increase
DESPITE a continuing decline in overall farmland acreage, New Jersey's fruit and vegetable growers have remained productive.
So much so, in fact, this year's cranberry harvest seems sure to set a record when it is completed in a week or so, growers and agriculture officials say.
Interviews with the growers and agriculture experts showed that the only disagreement was over the size of the record for the cranberry industry, which has been concentrated in the heart of the Pine Barrens since before the Civil War.
Estimates range from 480,000 barrels to 540,000 barrels.
The record of 478,000 barrels was set in 1992.


(Fill In The Blank) Made Me Do It
THE ABUSE EXCUSE And Other Cop-Outs, Sob Stories, and Evasions of Responsibility.
By Alan M. Dershowitz. 341 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Medium cool.
Seeking real-life drama, Fox TV stakes out the emergency room at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 A Harlem-based bank is under pressure as larger banks finally move into its territory: minority neighborhoods.
MOVIE CLOCK 12 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 13 The public art that is showing up around town; jazz in Flushing.
GOOD EATING 14 Fall in the Flatiron: gutsy Spanish-inspired cooking at Bolo; 'restorative' dishes at Gotham.
SOAPBOX 15 Guns, stairwells and the police: One officer's tale.
Plus, Photographer's Journal and letters.


The Seemingly Endless Thought and Talk of a British Painter
ONCE in a while there comes along a show that is virtually review proof.
"James Smetham 1821-1889: Artist, Author and Pre-Raphaelite Comrade" at the Yale Center for British Art is just such a show.
Smetham, the son of a Methodist preacher who was born in Yorkshire, began his schooling indentured to an architect, E. J. Williams.
Among other things, Williams set his pupil to drawing all the figures in the Gothic masterpiece, Lincoln Cathedral.
Smetham enjoyed the task but might have felt differently had he known how accurately it augured his labor-intensive future.


Litchfield's Jail Begins Another Era With Women Hoping for New Lives
THE two connected buildings perched off Litchfield's town green are certainly the most bizarre, and amusing, architectural coupling in the state, if not in the country.
The first building, at 9 North Street, is the old Litchfield County Jail, erected in 1812.
The other, at 13 North Street and dating to 1816, is the First National Bank of Litchfield.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen98.20
100.65
107.07
per Dollar
German Mark1.5200
1.5465
1.6171
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.3547
1.3470
1.3309
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.5940
1.5865
1.5208
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$387.40
$391.00
$364.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Common Plant With Uncommon Blooms
AT this time of year impatiens live up to the name by which they are sometimes known: touch me not.
Children know the reason for this odd quality and look for the impatiens' seedpods.
In response to the slightest touch, swollen pods explode with springlike force.
Giggles and "Let's do it again."
Sometime next July or August, a few of these widespread seeds may pop up in the garden as if to defy any tenderness to cold.
These volunteers are always worth rescuing as they will make splendid plants to fill in bare patches.


BUDDY'S BOYS AND THEIR $100 MILLION TOYS
Instead of pointing out the obvious -- that "the people who own baseball . . . are all multimillionaires," Pat Jordan ("Buddy's Boys and Their $100 Million Toys," Sept. 18) should have noted that professional baseball players are mostly a bunch of .250 hitters that few people have ever heard of and who couldn't carry Stan Musial's or Willie Mays's bag.
They earn an average of $15,000 per hour and have walked away from their jobs and the fans who support them because they want to have more to say about how their employers spend their money than they have any right to say.
PAUL R. HOLLRAH Locust Grove, Okla.


Widows of 3 Killed in Crash Question Senator's Effort to Limit Inspections
On Feb. 24, a twin-engine Cessna crashed while trying to land in a billowing snowstorm in Minot, N.D., killing the pilot and three doctors from the Indian Health Service on a routine trip to a reservation clinic in the northern part of the state.
The accident was first treated by Government officials simply as the kind of tragedy that sometimes happens.
But the doctors' three widows soon discovered that the charter company whose plane crashed had been the center of a complicated dispute among Federal regulators about its safety record.


Long Winter's Night at a Garden
The leaves on the acer saccharum tree (that's sugar maple) have turned burnt orange at the New York Botanical Garden and are beginning, one by one, to fall to the ground.
The petals of the paeonia lactiflora (that's peony) have withered and gardeners have begun cutting back the brown stems and turning them into compost.
On a breezy Wednesday afternoon, Mike Ruggiero, a rugged-looking gentleman with large soil-covered hands, drove a cart around the 250-acre grounds and described with the precision of a scientist when and how the perennials and annuals close down.


Juice or Gravy?
To the Editor:
It was only after I had almost finished Philip Roth's extraordinary account of his stumbling upon the source of the first lines of his books (in sequence, no less) that I realized that this story, which he had never previously revealed, was a work of fiction.


SHOES


Smoke and Mirrors
Right now, the cook teeters on the edge, between the ingredients of one season and the appetite for the next.
Faced with a profusion of late-summer produce, the temptation is to look back.
But there is a flavor -- and a way to cook it -- that can cross the seasonal divide, mitigating the disparity between what is available (and fondly remembered) and what is desired (and increasingly necessary).
Cooking with food that has been cured first, and then preserved in a long, cool smoke, is the perfect technique for such an assignment.
Commercially prepared and often thought of as a convenience (or delicacy), foods like smoked trout, mussels, oysters, salmon, turkey and ham hocks have the capacity, when combined with other ingredients, to make the banal fresh; the summery, autumnal.


Paul M. Belsky and Lee Polikoff
Louise Margaret Polikoff, a daughter of Mrs.
Raymond Troubh and Benet Polikoff Jr., both of New York, is to be married today to Dr.
Paul Marc Belsky, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Marvin Belsky, also of New York.
Rabbi David Posner is to officiate at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
The bride, 26, is known as Lee.
She graduated from Harvard University and recently received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father is of counsel to the law firm of Rosenman Colin in New York.
Her stepfather, an independent financial consultant, is a senior adviser at Salomon Brothers Inc., the New York trading firm.


Q. &amp; A.
Lint From A Laundry Exhaust Q I live in a complex that is attached to other buildings.
My section of the complex is joined to an adjacent building that houses a commercial laundry.
Two of my windows face a courtyard that is shared with this adjacent building.
We also share the same landlord, who owns and operates the buildings.


It Took a Quarter of a Century to Settle This Score
After 25 years, they settled an old lacrosse score in the Hudson Valley this morning -- architects in knee braces, exporters in corsets, insurance executives with reconstructed elbows, athletes whose hairlines had receded with time, even if their determination had not.
For two hours, it hardly seemed to matter that their skills, unlike the autumn foliage, were long past peak.
To everyone's amazement, and without need of an ambulance, the old boys from Trinity-Pawling and Andover huffed and puffed and pulled off a crazy fantasy, even if they also pulled more than a few hamstrings.
After a quarter century, they finally decided which prep school had been the true champion of New England lacrosse back in 1969.


Green Monster


Romantic in Westport, a Place on the Beach
IF there is prettier shoreline restaurant site in Connecticut than that of Beach House in Westport we haven't found it.
The small house hugs the sandy shore of a snug little inlet called Compo Cove.
From anywhere in the sunny L-shaped dining room you can watch the beach action through house-wide windows.
One evening we could see two herons splashing at the shore.
Beach House is on premises occupied for decades by Cafe de la Plage.
Inside, the surroundings seem much improved, with bentwood chairs, delicate watercolors on pale lemon walls, aqua accents in the wood trim and chair covers, a new banquette, romantic lighting and neatly napped tables.


Word for Word/Graham Greene; A Literary Heavyweight Slept Here, At the Heart of Today's Matters
HAITI, Cuba, Mexico, Africa -- you name it.
Wherever the troubled region of the world, the chances are good that it was visited and written about by one of the giants of 20th century literature, the late Graham Greene.
Small wonder: Like few other writers of his stature, the British novelist was acutely attuned to global politics and ranged virtually the world over in gathering the observations for a formidable body of work: in a 60-year career, 24 novels plus short stories, plays, travel books, two volumes of autobiography, essays and criticism.


Topics of The Times; Yesterday's World of Tomorrow
Visitors to the 1939 New York World's Fair lined up for hours to see the General Motors "Futurama," one of the fair's star attractions.
Inside, they cruised on moving chairs for one-third of a mile around a detailed diorama of what the urban-suburban-rural landscape might be in 1960, as it seemed in those hopeful post-Depression days before World War II.
Among the futuristic concepts fairgoers saw there, and doubted they would ever see in the real world, was an automated highway.
Model cars scooted along on a fixed path at a governed speed under external controls, freeing drivers to scan the sky, play cards or whatever.


Paying Tribute To Living Legends
The Landmarks Conservancy holds an awards dinner at the Plaza, Oct. 6.


Tara A. Verkuil, Jeffrey Schaffer
Tara Aldridge Verkuil, the daughter of Paul R. Verkuil of Winter Park, Fla., and Frances G. Verkuil of New York, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Paul Schaffer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Schaffer of La Quinta, Calif.
The Rev.
Hill Riddle performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in New Orleans.
The bride, 27, graduated from Tulane University and from Parsons School of Design in Paris.
She is a designer and the owner of Cirque Designs, a graphic design company in Philadelphia.
Her father is the national president and chief executive of the American Automobile Association in Heathrow, Fla., and a president emeritus of the College of William and Mary.


Hill Dribbling Through a Forest of Expectations
Don Chaney had anticipated the answers before the questions were asked.
The franchise was in need of salvation, and his No. 1 draft choice had "Messiah" invisibly stitched onto the back of his No. 33 jersey.
"I was ready," he said Friday.
You hang around professional basketball 25 years, as Chaney has, and you come to expect the premature anointment of talented rookies.
"But when someone asked me, 'Is this Grant Hill's team?' " Chaney began, "I didn't believe that one.


The Anger: Ever Deeper
It's a rough year for Democrats, for incumbents and for politics generally.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo finds "a harshness and a negativism and a fear out there." So do candidates elswehere; this campaign seems animated most not by a particular issue but by a sullen, surly mood.
The hostility worsens steadily.
When University of Michigan scholars asked people in 1964, "How much of the time do you trust the Government in Washington to do what's right?" 76 percent said most or all of the time.
When the question was asked in 1992, only 29 percent said so.
"People talk as though our political system had been taken over by alien beings," the authors of a Kettering Foundation report found in 1991.
A recent New York Times/CBS poll asked whether members of Congress deserve re-election.
Only 13 percent of the public said yes.


It's A Mad Mad Mad Ad World
IT KNOWS WHAT MAKES YOU SHOP.
It is the nerve center of a company that wants to invade your dreams, shape your desires, make you crave things you never knew you wanted.
It is the new Manhattan headquarters of the advertising agency Chiat/Day.
And it is a remarkable work of art.


When G-Notes Are Small Change
Once upon a time in Russia, consumer goods were scarce, imports were rare, lines were long and prices were relatively stable.
But in the three years since the country started its high-anxiety ride through Free Marketland, goods are usually available and the lines have all but vanished.
Prices, however, have been anything but stable since they were freed in January 1992.
Once people stopped waiting, they started paying more.
Much more.
So employers, helped by the Government -- once the nation's sole employer -- started paying them more.
The resulting inflationary spiral eased this spring and summer, but in the past two months inflation began to return.
Last week the currency markets were thrown into turmoil as the ruble fell off a cliff, its value dropping more than 25 percent in a day.
By week's end, two senior economic officials were out of their jobs, the Central Bank had intervened and the ruble had recovered and was trading at about 3,000 to the dollar.


In Short/Sports
BASEBALL MEMOIR  STRANGER TO THE GAME  By Bob Gibson and Lonnie Wheeler.
Viking, $22.95.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 16, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
2
3
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a man and a woman and for her first lover.
3
4
THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A revised edition of a 1985 novel about a young girl's mysterious disappearance.
4
4
PEARL IN THE MIST, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) The ordeals of a girl beset by a hostile stepmother and a troubled twin sister.
5
4
CHAMPIONS OF THE FORCE, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
6
18
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
7
3
HIDDEN FIRES, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $5.99.) A 1982 novel about a Texas preacher's daughter who is tricked into marriage.
8
16
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
9
13
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.
10
9
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Love and hope -- plus recipes -- on a Mexican ranch.
11
7
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
12
1
THE FIRES OF HEAVEN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $6.99.) The fifth volume of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.
13
8
GONE, BUT NOT FORGOTTEN, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) The wives of several Portland, Ore., businessmen disappear.
14
17
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's daughter.
15
9
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
4
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
5
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
3
3
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
4
40
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
5
7
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
6
571
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
7
2
FIVE PATIENTS, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A 1970 book about the practice of medicine and the ways of hospitals.
8*
2
LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Fawcett, $6.99.) The country singer's memoirs.
9
40
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
10
21
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
11*
87
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
12*
3
DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great Plains.
13
7
YOU BELONG TO ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $6.99.) Six true-crime cases.
14*
23
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A memoir of mental illness.
15*
24
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
16*
22
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their effects.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
2
HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
187
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
8
GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.) The witticisms of a fictional slow-witted man.
4
4
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 1, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


I.R.A. and Protestant Leaders Expected to Join Forum on Peace
Representatives of the Irish Republican Army and Protestant political and possibly paramilitary groups are expected to meet within a month for their first formal talks.
The talks, probably in Dublin, will be an important step -- psychologically, at least -- toward broader talks on a settlement of the 25-year-old conflict between Protestants and Catholics in the British province of Northern Ireland.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
Long Island  TROJANS STOPPED AT 49: The last time GARDEN CITY lost a regular season game was 49 games ago against LEVITTOWN DIVISION, on Oct. 1, 1988.
Yesterday, the Trojans did not lose to Division, but their 49-game regular-season winning streak came to end, when they tied Division, 7-7.
Both of the teams' scores came as a result of long drives.
Patrick Rock capped a 18-play, 75-yard drive, with a 2-yard burst to account for Division's (2-1-1) score.
Garden City (3-0-1) scored on a 3-yard run by Patrick Murphy, who put an exclamation mark on the Trojans' 13-play, 67-yard drive with 8 minutes and 46 seconds remaining in the game.
SANTORO WHIPS TIGERS: Tom Santoro rushed for three touchdowns and 140 yards on 9 carries as MASSAPEQUA (4-0) cruised past HEMPSTEAD (2-2), 26-0.
Cornerback Mike Sheridan (1 interception), linebacker Sal Alosi (12 tackles, 1 sack), and tackle Mike Shelly (10 tackles) were all instrumental in blanking the Hempstead Tigers.


Colorado Makes Its Bid By Routing Oklahoma
Colorado 45, Oklahoma 7
Knowing that Florida had been upset in the afternoon, Colorado made its bid for No. 1 ranking last night by overwhelming Oklahoma, 45-7, in Boulder, Colo.


Brooklyn Fire Kills One and Injures Eight
A roaring fire engulfed the bottom floors of a three-story building in downtown Brooklyn last night, killing one person and critically injuring another, the Fire Department said.
At least four residents were safely evacuated from the burning building at 426 Atlantic Avenue.
But seven firefighters were injured, none of them seriously, while fighting the blaze that broke out about 6:52 P.M., said Firefighter Cosmo Romeo, a Fire Department spokesman.


The Executive Life; Some Reverberations From a Speakerphone
THE speakerphone has become so ubiquitous in executive suites that it now rates an entry in Letitia Baldrige's office-etiquette bible -- as "an odious contraption."
"The echoing in your ear, the strange sound of the voice coming at you, and the unpleasant feeling that four people in that person's office are also listening . . . can make you feel ill at ease or, worse, compromised," complains the manners mavin in "Letitia Baldrige's New Complete Guide to Executive Manners" (Macmillan, 1993).


New Tactics Urged in Fight Against Crime
After curbing tuberculosis decades before a vaccine was discovered and helping save lives lost in motor vehicle accidents, a public health approach is being advocated as a way to slow the epidemic of violence troubling America.
Officials of the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention here say scientific research could identify the causes of violence, leading to programs to stop it before it occurs.
The traditional solution relied on the police and prisons to punish criminals after they had committed violent acts.


Ann A. Shaar, Andrew N. Bazos
Ann Alexis Shaar, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rashad Shaar of Carson City, Nev., was married last evening to Dr.
Andrew Nicholas Bazos, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Bazos of Longmeadow, Mass.
The Rev.
Robert G. Stephanopoulos performed the ceremony at the Greek Orthodox Cathedral of the Holy Trinity in New York.
The bride, 28, was until recently an associate photography agent for Art and Commerce, artists' representatives in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Southern California.
Her father retired as a manager at Harrah's Hotel and Casino in Lake Tahoe, Nev.


RECORD BRIEFS
Korngold: Violin Concerto, 'Much Ado About Nothing' Suite; Barber: Violin Concerto  Gil Shaham, violinist; Andre Previn, pianist ("Ado") and conductor; London Symphony Orchestra.
Deutsche Grammophon 439 886-2; CD.


Museum Mile Still Growing
Up and down Museum Mile, there's a big show of architectural works in progress on exhibit -- the major renovations and expansions of the museums themselves.
Nearly every institution on the strip is involved, and the capital projects total hundreds of millions of dollars.
The projects are low profile compared to the grand but controversial additions in the 1980's and early 90's.
That symbolically ended when opposition helped kill a Whitney annex.


A Corner of Sri Lanka Tires of Living Under Siege
After years under siege, this old colonial city in a far corner of Asia has become a sad vestige of blasted buildings and ripped-up railway lines, of flickering kerosene lamps and tinkling bicycle bells.
For nearly five years, the 750,000 people who live in the windswept Jaffna peninsula on the northern tip of Sri Lanka, almost all members of the Tamil ethnic group, have lived without electricity, without telephones, and with scarce supplies of food and fuel.


The Good Life After Goldman
IT is Wall Street's most elite club, and every two years its new members are selected, capping months of anxiety with elation for the chosen ones.
They are the new partners at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the last major investment banking partnership in America.
Goldman added to its inner circle last week, when the firm named 58 new partners, a record crop.
They are mostly in their 30's, and nearly all men, plucked from the ranks of the firm's more than 9,000 employees.
The partners do assume risk because, as owners, they share in losses as well as profits -- and this year has been a tough one for Goldman and the rest of Wall Street, as rising interest rates brought spectacular trading losses.


Among the Cadavers
THE BODY FARM By Patricia Cornwell. 387 pp. New York:  Charles Scribner's Sons. $23.


The Homesexual Pedigree
THE SCIENCE OF DESIRE The Search for the Gay Gene and the Biology of Behavior.
By Dean Hamer and Peter Copeland.
Illustrated. 272 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


Elusive Audience
To the Editor:  I am the unnamed "headhunter" (we prefer recruiter) referred to in Edward Rothstein's article "Looking for Clones in All the Wrong Places"  [ Sept. 25 ] .


Wrinkled, Even Puckered, But Still Glories Of Mississippi Mud
THE POTTERY WONDERS THAT George E. Ohr wrought with Mississippi mud have never been equaled.
The wrinkled necks, snakelike spouts, noodle-thin handles and pitted surfaces on his exuberant, gloriously colored vessels reveal an impressive command of the forms and glazes possible in ceramics.
Ohr, who worked at the turn of the century, turned out expressive and sometimes erotic pieces that still evoke strong reactions among viewers.
For this reason, "After the Fire: The Later, Greater George Ohr," an exhibition at the Kurland-Zabar Gallery in Manhattan, through Nov. 12, is especially welcome.


N.A.A.C.P. Sets Outside Audit of Officers' Spending
Responding to accusations that its chairman had engaged in financial improprieties, the board of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People voted today to hire an outside auditor to investigate spending by the organization's chief officers.
The chairman, Dr.
William F. Gibson, said the audit would cover roughly the last five years -- from Jan. 1, 1989, to this Aug. 31 -- and would deal with his own spending as well as that of the N.A.A.C.P.'s last two executive directors, its last two presidents, its treasurer and the officers of the N.A.A.C.P.
Special Contributions Fund, the organization's tax-exempt fund-raising arm.


Journal; The Fear Game
It's a dirty job but some fool had to do it.
Enter Guy Molinari, the Staten Island Borough President, who declared last week that New Yorkers must not elect "an admitted lesbian" as attorney general.
Mr.
Molinari's own Republican candidate, Dennis Vacco, is behind by more than 15 points in the polls, so why not bash the sexual orientation of his opponent, Karen Burstein, to try to narrow the gap?
The ruse could backfire.
A new poll finds that 72 percent of New York's voters say a candidate's sexuality makes "no difference" and that 88 percent believe gay people deserve equal job opportunities.
Mr.
Molinari's own 67-year-old homosexual brother, no less, piped up to The Daily News: "It doesn't matter what orientation a person has if a person is qualified to do the job. I don't see why you have to go into it, except for political points."


Under a Tent For a Cause
Benefiting the AIDS Care Center, a party outside Mortimer's, Oct. 4.


In Brooklyn, a Day of Celebration That Never Stops
Amid a blare of honking horns on the Eastern Parkway, Peterson Exil, a 22-year-old Brooklyn student, burst out with a chant he had waited three years to sing.
"Li rive! Li rive! Li rive!" he said in Creole. "He has arrived!"


Ms. Gitter, Mr. Michon
Meryl Lori Gitter and Christopher Michon, television producers in New York, were married on Friday at the Loews New York Hotel.
Judge David Z. Nisnewitz, an administrative law judge for the Federal Government in Flushing Meadows, Queens, officiated.
Mrs.
Michon, 34, is a producer at "Full Disclosure," a news magazine program now in development at the Fox Television Network.
She graduated from Ramapo College of New Jersey.
The bride is a daughter of Blossom Gitter of Pomona, N.Y., and the late Gerald Gitter.


'Keely and Du': The Battle Over Abortion
IF there's a sizzling play of the moment, it's "Keely and Du," with productions of the pro-choice/pro-life war of words popping up all over the regional theater map.
But it couldn't be easy to find one as adept at transmuting the play's verbosity and polemics into high-octane theater as Wendy Liscow's interpretation for the George Street Playhouse.


Walton's Homecoming Succeeds Despite a Loss
Giants Stadium, where the Jets play, was over there somewhere to the northwest, out of sight, out of mind.
This game, this scene, was "what football is supposed to be all about," said Joe Walton.
The 58-year-old coach was glad to be here, not there.
Joe Walton's here yesterday was a small-college campus, Wagner's, atop Grymes Hill on Staten Island, the grass field framed by autumnal trees of green, red and yellow, the capacity crowd of 5,000 spilling out of the wooden stands on homecoming day.
It was indeed a golden scene on a heavenly day.


Second Hamptons Festival Ready to Roll
THIS time last year, as the Hamptons International Film Festival prepared for its inaugural season in East Hampton, the question that many people were asking was whether the world really needed another contender in the crowded and increasingly competitive arena of film festivals.
As preparations move into high gear for Act II, five days of screenings, seminars and celebrations starting on Wednesday, the survival of the festival, which attracted 14,000 people to its debut, is no longer in question.
The people attended, the press was largely enthusiastic, and the sponsors, apparently pleased, have for the most part returned, with new ones joining.


Bus Route Stirs an Elegant Street's Ire
When planners at the New York City Transit Authority pored over their maps early this year to determine how to extend the M60 bus route, officials at Community Board 9 strongly warned them away from Claremont Avenue.
The route ran from La Guardia Airport to 125th Street, and the West Side extension would bring it to 116th.
"I told them then that if they decided to put it down Claremont, they were going to have a small revolution on their hands," said Theodore P. Kovaleff, the board's chairman.
"It's always been very quiet there and people prize their peace."


Hurley Is Back
BOBBY HURLEY, seriously injured in a car accident last December, is back on the court, and looking good, too.
The Sacramento guard had 21 points and 5 assists -- both team highs -- Friday night in Honolulu in his first game since being suffering chest and leg injuries.
His performance wasn't enough as the Kings lost to the Los Angeles Lakers, 110-103, but he said: "I was very pleased to be out there."


Jeanette C. Chan, Gregory C. Aaron
Jeanette Cecile Chan, a daughter of Drs.
Pablo and Angeles Chan of Ambler, Pa., was married yesterday to Gregory Charles Aaron, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry G. Aaron Jr. of Oklahoma City.
The Rev.
Gregory Chervenak officiated at St.
John the Evangelist Roman Catholic Church in Philadelphia.
The Rev.
John L. Walch, an uncle of the bridegroom, took part in the ceremony.


A Blues-Shouting Bartender Who Never Changed His Style
EVEN FOR A MAN WHO stood 6 feet 2 inches tall and weighed better than 250 pounds, the blues singer Big Joe Turner, whose booming voice propelled 1950's classics like "Honey Hush," "Flip Flop and Fly" and "Shake, Rattle and Roll," cast a giant shadow.
Of all the pioneers who blazed the rock-and-roll trail, only Turner could boast that he hadn't had to change his style one iota since his days as a 1930's blues-shouting Kansas City bartender to be considered one of rock's standard-bearers.
Considering the sizable role he played in creating both that shouting style of blues singing and the raucous, dance-oriented rhythm-and-blues that succeeded it in the 1940's, it's probably not surprising that Turner was one of rock's chief architects.
And one of its most notoriously lusty instigators.
As early as 1946, on the boogie-woogie hit "Sally Zu-Zazz Blues," Turner was concocting lyrics like "It takes a rocking chair to rock, a rubber ball to roll/ A long tall baby makes my blood run cold."


World Markets; Quebec Traders Unfazed by Separatism
FIVE weeks ago, Quebec voters elected a new government that wants to pull the province out of Canada.
Such a development would normally rattle investors worried about risks in an uncertain political environment.
Yet stocks on the Montreal exchange have since approached their highest levels for the year, the Canadian dollar has strengthened, and most Montreal stock traders are bullish.
"There has been little impact," said Dominik Dlouhy, president of Investissements Dlouhy Inc., a Montreal investment house.
"The dog barked, but didn't bite."


Corrections
An article on page 13 of the Arts and Leisure section today about three film versions of "Uncle Vanya" misstates the opening date for "Vanya on 42d Street." It is this Wednesday, not Friday.


Tracy Williamson, Daniel J. Dart
Tracy Lee Williamson, a marketing coordinator at Waverly, the manufacturer of decorative fabrics and wallpaper in New York, was married yesterday to Daniel Joseph Dart, a senior vice president of Alliance Capital, an investment management company in New York.
Msgr.
John A. Simonin performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Church in Charleston, S.C.
Mrs.
Dart, 25, graduated from Converse College.
She is a daughter of Millicent T. Williamson of Charleston and Terry B. Williamson of Summerville, S.C.
Her father is an instructor pilot on the McDonnell-Douglas C-17 in Charleston and a professor of aeronautical science at the Embry-Riddle Aeronautical Institute in Charleston.
Her mother teaches business education at Fort Dorchester High School in Charleston.


Providing Creature Comfort on Halloween
WHAT would Halloween be without doughnuts and cider?" This question introduces a recipe for apple doughnuts in "Doughnuts" by Dorian Leigh Parker (Clarkson Potter).
A book of doughnut recipes is not like the latest low-fat vegetable cookbook.
You set it aside, waiting for the right moment to indulge in the rich treats it promises.
The moment finally came a couple of weeks ago when the weather snapped to attention, and the thermometer took a decidedly autumnal plunge.


Common Plant With Uncommon Blooms
AT this time of year impatiens live up to the name by which they are sometimes known: touch me not.
Children know the reason for this odd quality and look for the impatiens' seedpods.
In response to the slightest touch, swollen pods explode with springlike force.
Giggles and "Let's do it again."
Sometime next July or August, a few of these widespread seeds may pop up in the garden as if to defy any tenderness to cold.
These volunteers are always worth rescuing as they will make splendid plants to fill in bare patches.


Habitats/Edgemont, N.Y.; A 'Cotswolds' Romp
SHELLY SMILES piloted the big Mercedes Benz through the winding streets here like a native, which indeed she almost is, having living here most of her adult life, through a first marriage that left her widowed young and now, in a new house, in her second marriage.
Taking a corner while waving to a woman pushing a baby carriage, she passed one hilltop Tudor-style mansion after another, pointing out their similarities: their pointed Tudor gables, their leaded glass windows, their chimney pots and red slate roofs and half-timbered facades.


Defending the Territory
IN a small storefront on West 23d Street in Manhattan, a cadre of young men and women have labored 12-hour days for weeks now, hunched over computer printouts with phones at their ears.
Their mission: getting out the vote.
But in this campaign has no connection to any candidate or party.
This vote pulling is in behalf of the Carver Federal Savings Bank, and it is stock proxy ballots that these workers are after, part of an effort to take the Harlem-based bank public.


POSTINGS: A 'Fresh Eye' Wanted; Counsel Leaving Landmarks Panel
Dorothy Marie Miner, the counsel who guided the Landmarks Preservation Commission through stormy legal straits and intricate technical thickets over 19 years, is to leave at the end of the month at the request of the new chairwoman, Jennifer J. Raab.
"She has certainly played a very large and important role," Ms.
Raab said last week.
"It was Dorothy who helped establish the legal right to designate landmarks." (She worked on the case that led the United States Supreme Court in 1978 to uphold the landmark status of Grand Central Terminal against claims that the designation amounted to an unconstitutional taking of property.)


Marcy B. Joseph, K. J. Markowitz
Marcy Beth Joseph, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur H. Joseph of Teaneck, N.J., was married last evening to Kenneth John Markowitz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Markowitz of Cranford, N.J.
Rabbi David Feldman performed the ceremony at the Jewish Center of Teaneck.
Mrs.
Markowitz, 29, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
She is the director of business development for the Global Advanced Technology Corporation in New York, a developer of computer software for portfolio management.


Jacqueline Carroll, Thomas Thorp Jr.
Jacqueline Ann Carroll, a daughter of Mrs.
George Franklin Rand 3d of Buffalo and the late V. Sumner Carroll, was married yesterday to Thomas Joseph Thorp Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thorp of Glenmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
Patrick S. L. Flanagan, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Alumni Chapel of Niagara University in Niagara Falls, N.Y.
Mrs.
Thorp, a Niagara alumna, is a sales representative at the General Binding Corporation, a bookbinding company in New York.
Her father, a lawyer in Niagara Falls, was a state and Federal labor mediator from 1950 to 1980 and an assemblyman in the New York State Legislature.
Her stepfather, the late George Franklin Rand, was the chairman of the Rand Capital Corporation, a venture-capital company in Buffalo.


Gene Katzenberg, Richard Kane
Gene Katzenberg, an advertising and marketing consultant in Stamford, Conn., and Richard Kane, the national sales manager of Tienshan Inc., a dinnerware manufacturer and distributor in Norwalk, Conn., were married on Sept. 25.
Rabbi Joshua Hammerman officiated at Temple Beth El in Stamford.
Mrs.
Kane is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Walter Katzenberg of New York.
The bride's father retired as a stockbroker with Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company in New York.


Laraine Balk, John N. Hope
Laraine Balk, a publishing executive, and Dr.
John Nicholas Hope, a molecular biologist, were married yesterday in New York.
The Rev.
Phillip A. C. Clarke performed the ceremony at the Park Avenue United Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Hope, 39, is the vice president of operations and business affairs at the Grolier Educational Corporation, a publisher and distributor of reference books in Danbury, Conn.
She graduated magna cum laude from Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in management from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Phyllis and Alfred Balk of Syracuse.
The bride's father retired as the editor and publisher of World Press Review in New York, a monthly digest of features from foreign publications.
Her mother retired as a nurse at the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company in New York.


Something Felt Wrong . . .
To the Editor:  After reading the letters about the inappropriate flora and fauna in various films  [ Oct. 2 ] , I went to see "Princess Caraboo." This film is identified on screen as a true story and is supposed to be set in and around an English country house in 1817.


When It's Much More Than Just a Game
The Scout  Albert Brooks, Brendan Fraser, Dianne Wiest, George Steinbrenner  Directed by Michael Ritchie PG-13 -- -- 101 minutes
Just when you thought you wouldn't get to see the Yanks in the World Series, a movie comes along.
A New York Yankees scout, Al Percolo (Mr. Brooks), gets shipped off to the deepest recesses of Mexico as a punishment for a disastrous rookie he has signed.
There he finds Steve Nebraska (Mr. Fraser, who children may know as Encino Man), possibly the best player ever.
With echoes of "King Kong," Nebraska is brought to New York as a new wonder of the world, albeit one with some problems to sort out.


The Old Elevator On Gramercy Park
To the Editor:
I read with great sadness your story on the retirement of the old hydraulic elevator at 34 Gramercy Park East ("The City's Oldest Elevator Is Being Replaced," Aug. 14.).


Anthony L. Jamison, Lisa E. Davis
Lisa Ellen Davis, a partner in Frankfurt, Garbus, Klein &amp; Selz, an entertainment law firm in New York, was married yesterday to Anthony Louis Jamison, a freelance film editor in Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Paul Smith performed the ceremony at First Presbyterian Church in Brooklyn Heights.
The bride, who is keeping her name, graduated from Harvard University and received a law degree from New York University.
She is the daughter of Gwen Webb of Roosevelt Island and Nathaniel Davis of Manhattan, and the stepdaughter of Arnold Webb.
The bride's father is a jazz pianist in New York.
Her mother retired as an administrator at the New York City Board of Education in Brooklyn.


After Piano and Fortepiano, the Synthesizer?
THE AUTHENTICITY MOVEMENT WAS born under the sign of the avant-garde, all manifesto and rebellion.
It is coming to an end in quiet maturity.
Indeed, in a recent series of Beethoven piano sonatas played on early instruments at Merkin Concert Hall, the greatest revelation was that there was none.
At least in the eight sonatas I heard, Malcolm Bilson's stated ambition "to open new paths of thought" was only modestly fulfilled.
Mr.
Bilson, the godfather of the eight-concert, seven-pianist, four-piano series was, as usual, a consummate musician, playing with intelligence and verve, and some of the other pianists were insightful as well, but was anything established that we did not already know?
Over the years, modern pianos have proved how inadequate their historical rivals are, and historical instruments have returned the insult.
They are both correct.
We know, for example, that some of Beethoven's pedal markings can be executed only approximately on contemporary instruments and that his sharply etched dynamic changes can sound artificial on the modern Steinway.
On the other hand, Russell Sherman's penetrating Beethoven performances heard recently at the Miller Theater on the campus of Columbia University and Richard Goode's ever-deepening Beethoven interpretations, to be presented in part later this month at Avery Fisher Hall, would be inconceivable on the lovely five-octave replica of a 1790 Anton Walter fortepiano used at Merkin Hall.


North's Commander
To the Editor:
Re "North Draws Fire for Comments on Clinton Military Policy" (news article, Oct. 11): When Oliver L. North, Republican candidate for the United States Senate from Virginia, said "Bill Clinton is not my Commander in Chief" and then explained that he only meant he is no longer a Marine officer on active duty and so did not report to the President, he once again ignored the truth.
As a retired Marine officer, he is on individual ready reserve status, and as such he is under the command of the President of the United States.
DAVID ROCKWELL New York, Oct. 11, 1994


Vaunted Signs of Economic Recovery Aren't Real to a Lot of Us
To the Editor:
"Economic indicators" come out once a month.
They give pertinent facts about the economy.
The latest indicators show total United States output to be up, unemployment claims down, industrial production up and business sales up.
At first glance, this is very salutary.
But the economic indicators are prepared by the President's Council of Economic Advisers, whose chairwoman, Laura D'Andrea Tyson, was appointed by President Clinton.
Ms.
Tyson appears frequently on national television and obviously strives to present Administration economic policies in the best possible light.


First Ski Show Coming to County Center
WHEN autumn comes, can winter be far behind?
Unofficially, winter will make its debut in Westchester Oct. 28 to 30 at the New York Ski Show sponsored by Princeton Ski Shops at the County Center in White Plains.
"It's a first for Westchester," said Peter Makris, the show's coordinator and owner of the Princeton Ski Shop in Elmsford.
"The show is patterned after the Giants Stadium Ski Show in New Jersey that we have been doing for 20 years. We've been wanting to duplicate the show in Westchester for years, but we couldn't find the appropriate space. Finally last year, we were able to book the County Center for the October dates, which kicks off this ski season. We are going all out to make the show an annual happening."


You Could Look It Up
To the Editor:
Avery Corman, in his review of Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns's "Baseball: An Illustrated History" (Sept. 18), relates that the quotable Yogi Berra once did say, "I really didn't say everything I said."


BUDDY'S BOYS AND THEIR $100 MILLION TOYS
The appearance of Pat Jordan's piece on the day that Ken Burns's "Baseball" began may or may not have been calculated, but if their juxtaposition was coincidence -- it sure wasn't a happy one.
Taken together they just highlighted the infamy of this season's cancellation.


Perry Reports Elite Iraq Army Is Set to Retreat
Defense Secretary William J. Perry said today that new intelligence reports indicated that elite Iraqi troops in southern Iraq were preparing to resume their retreat north and that the immediate danger of war seemed past.
Mr.
Perry warned on Friday that the United States would take military action against Iraq if the elite Republican Guard forces did not move north of the 32d parallel.
Up to a division of those forces were reported to be near Nasiriya, a southern town on the Euphrates from which American officials contend Iraq could threaten Kuwait.


Memphis Blues Again
TAFT By Ann Patchett. 305 pp. Boston: A Richard Todd Book/ Houghton Mifflin Company.


On Sunday; Back in Action: One Car Pool And a Steinway
IT was a mess, but it was a Steinway.
It had survived the Civil War, hidden under a haystack in a Kentucky field to escape the Yankees, but clearly not the mice who left gnaw marks on some of the ivory keys.
Sympathizing with such endurance, Franz Urich has come out of retirement to join in resurrecting not only piano No. 2166 (each of the half-million Steinways ever made has a pedigree number) but the old car pool of fellow retired craftsmen, Rudolph Heike and Stephen Szemes.
The three, with more than a collective century of piano making over and done with at the Queens factory, thought they had seen the last of the insides of a Steinway.


Hormone Helps AIDS Patients Gain Weight
Daily injections of a human growth hormone have reversed the severe loss of weight and muscle common in AIDS patients, a study by researchers at the University of California at San Francisco says.
Dr.
Morris Schambelan, a professor of medicine at San Francisco General Hospital, which is affiliated with the university, said patients who received the hormone also showed improved endurance.


Data Bank/October 16, 1994
Data Bank/October 16, 1994
Producer Prices
Sept.
Aug.
July
Monthly percent change
-0.5
0.6
0.5
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.2
-0.1
0.5
Sales at Retail Outlets
Monthly percent change
0.6
1.1
0.0
Industrial Production Index
Monthly percent change
0.0
0.7
0.3
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of capacity
84.6
84.8
84.4
Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
Friday spot price, per barrel
$18.39
$17.58
$20.30
Weekly Jobless Claims
Oct. 7
Sept. 30
Sept. 23
In thousands
314
317
310
3 Month Treasury Bills
Oct. 14
Oct. 7
Sept. 30
Rate in percent
4.84
4.89
4.64


Allison Ames, William Treanor
Allison Derivaux Ames, a daughter of Ruth Derivaux Ames of Woodcliff Lake, N.J., and the late Paul V. Ames Sr., was married yesterday to William Michael Treanor, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William J. Treanor of Convent Station, N.J.
Msgr.
Carl D. Hinrichsen, the bride's cousin, officiated at Sacred Heart Church in Bay Head, N.J.
The Rev.
Boniface Treanor, the bridegroom's uncle, and the Rev.
Donald Derivaux, the bride's cousin, both Roman Catholic priests, also took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Treanor is the director of strategic planning for corporate publicity and special events at Saks Fifth Avenue in New York.
Her father was a real estate broker in Lyndhurst, N.J., at Cushman &amp; Wakefield, the commercial real-estate leasing company.


Killing of Immigrant Stuns a Brooklyn Area
For as long as the golfers, boccie players and handball buffs can remember, Dyker Beach Park has been a popular hangout among the residents of largely Italian-American neighborhoods of southern Brooklyn where the most violent incident is caused by the occasional flying boccie ball that knocks a spectator in the head.
In recent years it has also become a gathering place for Ecuadoreans and Mexicans who come from all around the city on Tuesdays and Thursdays to take advantage of the pristine, rolling fields of grass perfect for soccer and volleyball.
The two worlds co-exist, it seems, separately but peacefully.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


For Aristide's Followers, Every Step Is a Dance, Every Cheer a Song
At the moment of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide's arrival today every step suddenly became a dance step, every side street a direct route to the palace, every car and truck and jeep a parade float jammed with people, and every crowd a wild, gyrating, single-voiced celebration.
Several blocks from the presidential palace, Arnold Placid, the 30-year-old head of a youth group that disbanded after being repeatedly harassed by paramilitary groups, created a viewing theater outside his house.


The People's Guide to the Opera
A CENTURY ago, aristocratic New Yorkers arrived at the opera house in gilded broughams for lengthy performances of "Faust" or "Lohengrin," installing themselves stiffly in red and gold boxes.
Instead of watching the drama unfold, many trained their opera glasses on their neighbors (who was that woman in the third parterre box, and why was her dress so plain?).
It was a world both gaudy and guarded, its doors closed to all but a privileged few.
Opera's elitist image lingers, and in 1994, many New Yorkers still shun the art form as stuffy and inscrutable.
But these days, the tuxedo-and-diamond set shares the Metropolitan Opera with denim-clad students and blue-collar suburbanites.
Opera companies complement traditional repertory with unusual productions -- this season the New York City Opera is staging "Harvey Milk," about San Francisco's first gay mayor.
Even the dreaded language barrier is cracking.
Many theaters are using supertitles -- translations projected above the stage -- to decode non-English operas, and the Met is planning to experiment next year with translations on tiny seatback screens.


Question of Logic
To the Editor:  In a lyric about AIDS, the rock rebel Tom Robinson refers to "bigots who think it's the judgment of God"  [ "The Mellowing of a Gay Punk Rebel," Sept. 4 ] .


Sewing Love Into Quilts for Babies in Need
THE steady hum of sewing machines and the sibilant hiss of steam irons was punctuated by the tearing of fabric as a dozen women pieced together child-size quilts for hospitalized youngsters.
One recent Sunday afternoon here, the Pins and Needles sewing store sponsored an all-day "quiltathon" to provide 30 or so quilts for abandoned babies, H.I.V.-infected babies and other needy children confined in hospitals nationwide.
The quilts, made entirely with donated materials and volunteer labor, are distributed through a grass-roots organization, ABC Quilts.


Defense Rescues Penn St. on a Roller Coaster Ride
They knew they would become important again.
They would have to, sooner or later, for this year at Penn State to end with any chance of becoming that championship season.
The defensive players at the place glorified for years as Linebacker U. had become considered a weak link, a backdrop for a spectacular offense.
But the Nittany Lion defenders understood they would have to share responsibility for a victory because that task is a signature of the Joe Paterno era, a part of their identity as proud as the screams of the Blue Band: "We Are Penn State."
Today was that day.
Brian Miller's interception of a fourth-down pass by Michigan quarterback Todd Collins, with 1 minute 26 seconds left to play, secured a 31-24 Penn State victory over the Wolverines at Michigan Stadium.
Miller's play, after Collins, under pressure, had failed to immediately spot wide receiver Mercury Hayes open along the sideline, saved a game that had appeared to be slipping away.


Lynne Schulte, Paul DuVivier
Lynne N. Schulte, the daughter of Florence A. Schulte of New York and the late Barney Schulte, is to be married today to Paul T. DuVivier, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul F. DuVivier of Hunt Valley, Md.
Gail Noble, a justice of the peace of New Canaan, Conn., is to officiate there at Waveny Manor.
Mrs.
DuVivier, 36, owns the Creative Factor, a sales promotion and premium company in Westport, Conn.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father was a supervisor for the Postal Service in New York.
Her mother retired as a home economics teacher at Intermediate School 126 in Astoria, Queens.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: The President Comes to Town; Clinton Tours Connecticut With Willing Democratic Nominee
President Clinton came to town today and gave this state's Democratic candidate for governor, William E. Curry Jr., an oratorical bearhug.
Wonder of wonders, Mr.
Curry hugged him back.
Few Democrats have sought Mr.
Clinton's embrace so far this fall.
But at a wind-whipped appearance at the city airport, Mr.
Curry and Connecticut's senior Democrats mobbed the dais with the President, praised him elaborately and allied themselves with his crime bill, his foreign policy and even his budget package of tax increases and spending cuts.


Sports of The Times; The Locker Room Was Less Hospitable Than Hanoi
THE DAY she threw the wad of tape back at the football player, Kristin Huckshorn knew it was time to get out.
Athletes had often lobbed missiles at her and made remarks, but she had assumed it was their quaint way of expressing befuddlement at seeing a female reporter in the locker room.
Now she had to move on.
Huckshorn became a news reporter for The San Jose Mercury News in 1988, and recently she became the first American certified as a foreign correspondent by the postwar Vietnamese Government.


Support for Cuomo
Candidate: Gov. Mario M. Cuomo
Producer: The Garth Group, New York


Sound Bytes; 'Spamming' on the Internet
LAURENCE A. CANTER and Martha S. Siegel have been the focus of criticism on computer networks since April 12, when they posted an advertisement offering their immigration legal services on thousands of Internet bulletin boards, called Usenet news groups.
Their action, called "spamming" in Internet slang, set off a five-alarm outbreak of nasty electronic responses, accusing the Phoenix couple of violating the global network's code of behavior and self-enforced ban on widespread advertising.


The Man Who Would Be Wotan
"WHY IS EVERYONE SO INTERESTed in Wotan?" asked the Welsh bass-baritone Bryn Terfel with an uncharacteristic touch of coyness.
Well, Bryn, here's why, as if you didn't know already.
This strapping young man, who turns 29 next month, has for several years been the most talked-about singer of his generation in the music business (though not among the broader public, at least not yet; Cecilia Bartoli holds that crown).


From Your Mailbox to Your VCR: More Ads
LAST May, Oliver North had a problem.
Running hard for the Republican nomination for a Senate seat from Virginia, he needed to get his message across to a select group of voters -- the 20,000 or so delegates to the party's nominating convention in Richmond.
Airing commercials on local TV would have been expensive and scattershot.
Mailing campaign literature was no good either: it would get lost in the blizzard of mailed political brochures during primary season.


The Reluctant Policeman Is Still Picky About His Beat
WATCHING Americans revel in the apparent success of its military operations in Iraq and Haiti last week, it was easy to think that the United States had finally pinned on its badge and become the thing it least wanted to be: policeman of the world.
American troops, after all, had been put in harm's way in two elaborately publicized missions.
The United States had declared itself fed up with (or at least wise to) two dictators known for their brutality.
And the welcomes accorded the G.I.'s by dirt-poor Haitians and filthy-rich Kuwaitis seemed to cheer the American people, encouraging them to do this kind of thing again.


In America; Want a New Face In Albany?
The weariness of New York voters with Mario Cuomo is palpable.
We know him and his idiosyncrasies too well.
He has begun to seem like a pontificating brother-in-law who has remained on the premises too long.
There is a longing to show him the door, to enjoy the peace of his absence.
After shaking hands with Mr.
Cuomo at the New York Sheraton Hotel last week, a woman named Muriel Hedges said, "I was married 10 years, had two kids, and now I'm divorced -- and he's still Governor!"


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL  Tarpley Returns as Kidd Debuts  Dallas' Roy Tarpley returned to the National Basketball Association, Jason Kidd debuted as a professional and Jamal Mashburn returned to Rupp Arena in Lexington, Ky., last night, but the Mavericks still lost, 121-103, to the Chicago Bulls in an exhibition game.
Mashburn scored 30 points in the building where he starred for Kentucky.
Tarpley had 5 points, 5 rebounds and a block in 14 minutes in his first game for the Mavericks since he was banned for drugs in October 1991.
Kidd, the No. 2 pick in the N.B.A. draft, was credited with 3 points and 7 assists. (AP)


'All's Fair'
To the Editor:
That the Book Review would dignify "All's Fair" with a front-page review is indeed discouraging.
And by Gore Vidal!


Out of the Mouths of Moguls
To the Editor:
In his review of "The Kid Stays in the Picture," by Robert Evans (In Short, Sept. 18), Barry Gewen leads off with the statement that "the old Hollywood moguls like Harry Cohn and Jack Warner were notorious tyrants and vulgarians, but they did possess at least one virtue: they kept their mouths shut. Not so with the new breed."


Linda Colizzo, Edmund Milano
Linda Susan Colizzo, a daughter of Geraldine Susan Colizzo of Newton, N.J., and the late Dr.
Francis P. Colizzo Jr., was married yesterday to Edmund Francis Milano, a son of Patricia Milano and Dr.
Michael R. Milano of Teaneck, N.J.
The Rev.
Donald Brouillard performed the ceremony at St.
Jean Baptiste Roman Catholic Church in New York.
Mrs.
Milano, 29, graduated from Albright College.
She is an associate producer with McCann-Erickson, the advertising agency in New York.
Her mother is director of volunteer services at Newton (Mass.) Memorial Hospital.


The Ladies' Room
The last act of "The Women," which has an all-female cast, is set in the large Art Deco bathroom of a restaurant called the Casino Roof.
Back in the 30's, this was a way to explore complications that involved men without showing the men themselves.
Nowadays this would never work.
In "Miller's Crossing," Gabriel Byrne storms into the ladies' room, changing the whole palette of the movie from brown to pink.
In "Basic Instinct," which tries to cross all sorts of lines, Michael Douglas actually hunts down Sharon Stone in a stall.
Once, in what used to pass for my real life, I found myself in the women's bathroom of a downtown club having a conversation with a male stranger that was so boring I would never have tolerated it elsewhere.
But the Waldorf?
Where politicians gather?
The ladies' room on the main floor has an Art Deco anteroom smaller than, but similar to, the one in "The Women." It even features a stagey set of steps that leads to a labyrinth of individual rooms in back.
I was recently coming down the stairs, returning to the anteroom, when I saw a man who looked like a shorter version of Gorbachev holding his fedora by the brim and staring into the empty fireplace.


At Work; The 'Hillary Factor' in Health Care
HAS the suddenly elusive Hillary Rodham Clinton slunk off, as some would suggest, to contemplate the sin of pride, to wit, imagining that through intelligence, reason and Ira Magaziner, she and her husband could tame a gaggle of competing interests and reform the American health care system?
A new survey of health benefits indicates the First Lady would be perfectly justified in proclaiming herself the unslinkable HRC.
"Health Benefits in 1994," an annual report from the compensation and benefits consultants KMPG Peat Marwick, says a widespread fear in the insurance industry of the "Hillary factor," or "unwieldy and profit-eating health care reform legislation," has been a major brake on increases in the cost of employers' health care premiums.
After several years of double-digit increases, the rise in premiums slowed to 4.8 percent from the spring of 1993 to the spring of 1994 from 8 percent the year before.
The rate, said KPMG, is the lowest since 1986.


In Short/Sports
PRO FOOTBALL  BRINGING THE HEAT  By Mark Bowden. Knopf, $25.


How Much Is His Fault?
Americans pick a President every four years," said Adlai Stevenson, "and for the next four years we pick him apart." It didn't take long for us to begin picking Bill Clinton apart, and we are showing no signs of letting up. Why are we being so tough on him? And, for that matter, why have we been so tough on most all of our recent Presidents?
Midterm elections are rarely America's finest hour.
The guns of the out-of-office party pound away at the President.
Then he fires back.
This is, of course, part of the tribal ritual in which the "outs" trash the "ins" and the "ins" retaliate by castigating the obstructionist opposition, the mean-spirited media and the selfish special interests who are depicted, of course, as all thwarting "progress" -- progress, at least, as defined by those in the White House.


Carol Beth Levy, Andrew Garfinkle
Dr.
Carol Beth Levy, the daughter of Barbara and Richard Levy of New York, is to be married today to Andrew Steven Garfinkle, a son of Sharna Garfinkle of Cheltenham, Pa., and Dr.
William Garfinkle of Ambler, Pa.
Rabbi Arthur Nemitoff is to officiate at Stillington Hall in Gloucester, Mass.
Dr.
Levy, 30, is the director of the South Bay Mental Health Center in Fall River, Mass., and practices psychology in Brookline, Mass.
She graduated from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., and received a Ph.D. in psychology from the University of Denver.
Her father retired as a sales representative in New York for Encore shoes.
Her mother is a certified financial planner in New York.


Never Mind the Log Cabin
IN feudal times, the guys with the money, the barons and other assorted noblemen, also had the political power.
That was still pretty much the case in 18th-century America; Presidents like Washington, Jefferson and Madison were wealthy Virginia plantation owners.
But the wave of populism that brought Andrew Jackson to power changed all that, and in the mid-19th century Abraham Lincoln created a powerful new political myth -- that of the boy born poor but honest who climbed to great heights.
For more than 100 years, Americans sought political leaders not so much in the plutocracy or aristocracy, but in the ranks of tinkers and tailors and soldiers.


A Hollywood Recipe: Vision, Wealth, Ego
Hours after attending a White House dinner for President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia on Sept. 28, Steven Spielberg and Jeffrey Katzenberg were in a passionate discussion in Mr.
Spielberg's hotel suite over the final details of their secret plan to form a new Hollywood studio.
Even though it was 1:30 A.M., they decided to call their partner, David Geffen, who after the dinner had been invited by President and Mrs.
Clinton to spend the night as their guest in the White House Lincoln Bedroom.
As three of show business's most powerful players spoke, they quickly realized that weeks of personal uncertainty had vanished: they felt ready to announce their plans for a multibillion-dollar studio and entertainment company.


When It's Much More Than Just a Game
The River Wild  Meryl Streep, Kevin Bacon, David Strathairn Directed by Curtis Hanson PG-13 -- -- 108 minutes
A troubled marriage, a young boy and two murderous robbers aboard a bouncing river raft makes for white-water adventure.
Meryl Streep, a former river guide with an uninterested husband, is forced to help two desperate men make their escape downstream and through a deadly stretch of rapids.
The film is by the director of "The Hand That Rocks the Cradle," but here the real excitement is not so much human melodrama as the battle with the river.


After Tough Start, Bank Seeks New Image
When it was founded in 1981, the United Orient Bank became one of New York's first Chinese-American Banks.
But almost immediately it was riddled with scandals.
In 1984, its former vice chairman and director, Edward (Eddie) Tse Chiu Chan, was named by Federal authorities as a Chinese crime boss.
Rumors of seizure of his assets set off a run on the bank, and panicky depositors withdrew $5 million in less than a week.
And then in 1989, Ka Chiu Leung, a former president and chairman, was convicted of money laundering.
Years of neglect and mismanagement left the bank with problem real-estate loans and a string of quarterly losses.
Now, in an effort to reverse the trend and create a new image, the new owners have hired a former high-ranking New York State banking official, Yungman Lee, as president and chief executive.


In the Region/Westchester; For Commercial Leasing, '94 Has Been a Good Year
WHEN Mastercard made it official last month that it would move its headquarters from Manhattan to a former I.B.M. building in Purchase, brokers predicted the move would result in a sharp decrease in the year-end office vacancy rates and an overall market rebound that might last into the middle of 1995.
Mastercard is expected to complete the purchase of the 472,000-square-foot building at 2000 Purchase Street by Nov. 30, said Michael H. Siegel, executive director of the Westchester/Fairfield offices of the Edward S. Gordon Company of White Plains, which is handling the sale for the International Business Machines Corporation.


Where Are The Verities?
To the Editor:  I agree with Robert Redford that "Quiz Show" is a modern morality play and not a documentary.
At the end of his article  [ "For $64,000, What Is 'Fiction'?," Sept. 4 ] , Richard Bernstein asks, "Will moviegoers be left with the impression that the larger issues are right?"


HER PECULIAR CAREER
If Meryl Streep is a "genius" and a great actress, why is she working exclusively in the movies?
Everyone knows that the truly great roles are to be found in the theater, not in Hollywood.
Isn't Streep primed to play in "Antony and Cleopatra" and "The Seagull?" In Pirandello and Racine?
What is she waiting for?
She's not getting any younger.
A whole range of roles is hers for the asking, if only she can get beyond the myth that most successful actors are movie actors.
STEPHEN WASSERSTEIN Monroe, N.Y.


Where the Noted Rest, a Tour Guide Roams; Retired Officer Relates a Who's Where of Occupants of Brooklyn's Green-Wood Cemetery
On his own tombstone, John Cashman envisions an ornate engraving of himself poised before a tombstone, pointing to his "show-and-tells."
It would be a fitting memorial, Mr.
Cashman feels, for someone who spends an inordinate amount of breathing time in graveyards around the world and, particularly, in the old and fabled Green-Wood Cemetery in Sunset Park, Brooklyn.


Jill A. Epstein, Mark Krieger
Jill Ann Epstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Epstein of Woodbury, L.I., was married last evening to Mark Krieger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Krieger of New York.
Rabbi Daniel Fogel officiated at Glen Head Country Club in Glen Head, L.I.


Ilana Zablozki, Mark E. Amir
Dr.
Ilana Ann Zablozki, the daughter of Alexander and Dr.
Vera Zablozki of Brooklyn, is to be married there today to Mark Ehud Amir, a son of Yair and Lea Amir, also of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Leonard Goldstein is to perform the ceremony at Temple Beth-El.
The bride, 27, is a resident in physical medicine and rehabilitation at the Kessler Institute of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, in West Orange.
She graduated from Lehigh University and received her M.D. from the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in Camden, N.J.
Her father is a consulting engineer.
Her mother is a neurologist in Brooklyn.


BUDDY'S BOYS AND THEIR $100 MILLION TOYS
Pat Jordan tells us that the baseball owner Calvin Griffith is the namesake of John Calvin, "who preached that a man's earthly success was proof that he was one of God's elect."


Richard Cronin, 69, Priest and Professor
The Rev.
Richard J. Cronin, a Jesuit priest who was a professor of theology at St.
Peter's College in Jersey City, died on Oct. 7 in an infirmary at Fordham University in the Bronx.
He was 69 and had been a resident of the college's Jesuit community residence in Jersey City.
He was in ill health for some time, said Nancy Haiduck, the spokeswoman for the college.


When One Person's Civil Rights Are Another's Moral Outrage
LET'S say you live in a small, tight-knit community of churchgoing Christians and the house next door becomes vacant.
An openly homosexual couple wants to rent it.
You feel that, as a conservative Christian, you should be able to live in a neighborhood that excludes people because of behavior that you find immoral.
Should you, on that basis, have a right to discriminate against the would-be homosexual tenants?
Should the state be able to compel you to accept your gay neighbors?
The Colorado Supreme Court last week gave an answer to those questions.
Two years ago, several communities passed laws banning anti-gay discrimination in jobs and housing.
Those were repealed when voters approved a referendum that prohibited laws extending civil rights protections specifically to gay men and lesbians.
Now, in a decision hailed as a major victory by gay-rights advocates, the Colorado court has effectively repealed the repeal.


Nina Anastos and Gregory Floyd
AROUND the Hudson River Valley towns of Rhinebeck, Red Hook and Woodstock, Nina Anastos and Gregory Floyd are so well known that nearly everyone from grocery-store owners to the local shad fishermen knew their wedding date.
Ms.
Anastos and Mr.
Floyd are the co-anchors for the evening news at WTZA, a small television station in Kingston, N.Y., where they report on everything from lost pets to the economy to murders.


The Brief Half-Life Of Celebrity
WALTER WINCHELL.
THERE WAS a time when that name would have hit the ear with the same crisp report as Garbo, Cagney, Bogart or Presley.
It was a name that once would have instantly conjured the image of a bantam in a snap-brim gray fedora and summoned a voice, high and staccato, firing words like a tommy-gun.
Every American knew Winchell.
His syndicated gossip column and weekly radio broadcast reached an estimated 50 million readers and listeners out of an adult population of roughly 75 million.
He starred in movies, inspired songs, stirred controversies.
He was at the very apex of celebrity.
Today, less than 25 years after his death, Winchell is one of a legion of celebrities who were once household names and then faded into oblivion -- people like the playboy Mdivani brothers, the journalist Arthur Brisbane, the movie stars Tommy Meighan and Tom Mix, even the cracker-barrel wit Will Rogers, who is remembered now more as the protagonist of the Broadway musical "The Will Rogers Follies" than as one of America's top movie box-office attractions and leading political pundits.


In Contradistinction To Jejune
I'm glad you asked that question," President Clinton said at a news conference, "in contradistinction to the one you asked right afterward."
What's the difference between distinction and contradistinction?
The Latin distinguere means "to make distinguishable to the eye as something discrete, separate." A distinction is a separating; a contradistinction is a sharper separation, using contra, "against," as an emphasizer.
However, a native speaker does not say "in distinction to"; that thought would be expressed as "as distinguished from."


U.N.L.V. Dialing
JIM WEAVER, the Nevada-Las Vegas athletic director, made only one call yesterday to try to find the university's new basketball coach.


To Live and Die and Do Your Banking in L.A.
BROTHERS AND SISTERS By Bebe Moore Campbell. 476 pp.
New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $22.95.


Circle Line Has a New Port of Departure: Hoboken
WITH little fanfare and without even a ceremonial blast of a ship's horn, Circle Line's sightseeing cruises -- which has been a New York City institution for 49 years -- has quietly sailed into this resurgent Hudson River harbor city starting what could become a spirited battle with competitors for the New Jersey tourist market.
Not even the shooting on Sept. 12 of a German tourist aboard a Circle Line boat has diminished interest in the two new daily cruises that depart from the Hoboken pier on Newark Street and the Hudson River


Germany Will Survive Its Confusion
Judged a likely loser last year, then viewed as a certain winner only six months ago, Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany heads into his most confusing and least predictable election today.
His problem is not with his Christian Democratic Party, which is leading in the polls.
His problem rather is the possible collapse of his indispensable junior coalition partner, the Free Democrats, whose votes have assured Mr.
Kohl's parliamentary majority since he first became Chancellor in 1982.
Fortunately there are enough brakes in Germany's federal Constitution so that a lurch toward real instability seems highly unlikely.
Americans can watch with interest, not alarm, as 60 million Germans choose a government in a newly unified country now pulling out of economic doldrums.


Rutgers Wins With Rushing by Willis and Presley
Although it wasn't a blowout, as some had expected, there were a few positives for Rutgers in their 14-9 triumph over winless Cincinnati in today's homecoming before a crowd of 37,220 at the new Rutgers Stadium.
The most encouraging development for the Scarlet Knights was the fact that Terrell Willis and Bruce Presley, their top runners, rushed more than 100 yards each for the first time this season.


Foundations Give 'Extras' To Schools
A GROWING number of Long Island communities are forming tax-exempt educational foundations to finance projects and programs for their school districts, which have lost substantial state aid in recent years and are barred by law from raising their own money.
One of the first, the Rockville Centre Education Foundation, has raised more than $100,000 since 1989, according to an assistant superintendent, Joseph Dragone.
The foundation was an outgrowth of a panel that had been looking for ways to reduce taxes, he said, adding:


A Lot Happens at a Convenience Store
A YEAR AND A HALF AFTER Kevin Smith moved his camera, crew and cast into the tiny Quick Stop convenience store here to shoot a feature film, this community near the Jersey Shore will finally get a chance to see "Clerks."
A black-and-white comedy about a day in the life of a convenience store cashier, the film will open on Wednesday in New York -- and at a multiplex not far from Leonardo, population 5,500.


Vaunted Signs of Economic Recovery Aren't Real to a Lot of Us; What to Think?
To the Editor:
What a world we live in!
If the indexes point to a strong economy, the stock and bond markets decline.
If a weak economy is predicted, the markets surge.
Should millions of stockholders secretly hope for a recession?
And what to think if you're part of the work force that's laid off -- that the rest of the country will be tickled pink?
EDWARD SILVER New York, Oct. 9, 1994


Brittany's Church Towns
BRITTANY has its own saints, some of whom can be found in the established Celtic canon (St. Yves, or Ives in English), and some not (St. Milio, or Miliau in French).
It has its own language, similar to other Celtic tongues in its luxuriance of consonants and oddly placed apostrophes, but again, not exactly like any of them.
And it has its own church architecture, the parish enclosure, which draws the many strands of Breton history and faith into an architectural ensemble unique to this province of France -- if that is appropriate terminology for local people who refer to Brittany and France as if they were neighboring countries.
That attitude may reflect the fact that over the centuries Brittany's ties with its neighbors across the Channel to the north were often as close as its ties with France to the east.
In the early Christian era, the founding saints of many Breton towns came originally from Cornwall and Wales.
During the French Revolution, French royalists exiled themselves in England, planning their return to Quiberon, where they hoped to join forces with Breton royalists and crush the revolt..
In our own time, thousands of British and French troops were evacuated from the Channel ports of Brittany just before the fall of France, and four years later, in August 1944, the Americans recaptured the Breton port of St.-Malo, extending the beachhead established against the Germans by the Allied landings in Normandy.


POSTINGS: Restoring an 1862 Building; A Role in the Arts for Flushing's Old Town Hall
Among the sounds coming from Flushing Town Hall lately have been jazz on Thursday evenings, polyphony by New York's Ensemble for Early Music and rushing water from a multimedia sculpture by Choong-Sup Lim.
Plus a daily cacophony of banging, sawing and drilling.
The 1862 Romanesque Revival structure at 137-35 Northern Boulevard, at Linden Place, is swathed in scaffolding for a $6 million interior-exterior restoration.
"We're saving an old building and making it viable," said Jo-Ann Jones, executive director and founder of the Flushing Council on Culture and the Arts, which took over the abandoned building in 1991 after its proposal for adaptive reuse was accepted by the city, which still owns the building.
"It's very exciting. There's a lot of energy, progress and tension in meeting the needs of construction, our artists and staff."


Tale of Red Tape
To the Editor: I laughed and cried at Pamela J. Petro's article "A Woman Without a Country, Twice" (Sept. 11), but feel she got off much easier than I did with my harrowing Ethiopian experience last winter.
As a 69-year-old widow, I've traveled far and wide in the world with small groups.
But the unbelievable happened in the Hilton Hotel Addis Ababa Tuesday night before we were to leave on Thursday.
I had been out to dinner, returning to my single room at 9:30 P.M. (My room was on the first floor, with a balcony overlooking shrubs and the parking lot -- about seven feet off the ground.) I went into the bathroom to change and wash.
Unlike previous nights, I didn't pick up my pocketbook with the passport folder to put in bed with me, but left it on the desk at the foot of my bed.
In the passport folder was not only the passport, but also two credit cards, two personal checks, $10 for my exit fee and $5 in birr.


Providing Creature Comfort on Halloween
WHAT would Halloween be without doughnuts and cider?" This question introduces a recipe for apple doughnuts in "Doughnuts" by Dorian Leigh Parker (Clarkson Potter).
A book of doughnut recipes is not like the latest low-fat vegetable cookbook.
You set it aside, waiting for the right moment to indulge in the rich treats it promises.
The moment finally came a couple of weeks ago when the weather snapped to attention, and the thermometer took a decidedly autumnal plunge.


Jansporters Don't Say Sorry And Other Tales of Incivility
To the Editor:
Ahh!
Robert Lipsyte, you don't really want sorry, however sincerely emoted.
Sorry merely wants absolution.
Let's say you're galloping down 43d Street to make a deadline when you bowl over a 70-year-old woman who crashes to her knees.
You are truly, truly, sincerely SORRY.
But that little old lady doesn't want your sorries.
She is in pain and needs help with no thought of giving you the absolution you seek.
So Your first words need to be: "Are you O.K.? Can I do anything to help you?"


Kirsten Bohuny, Bolt LaMotte
Kirsten Ellen Bohuny, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce G. Bohuny of Franklin Lakes, N.J., was married yesterday in Newport, R.I., to William Mitchell LaMotte Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
LaMotte of Winnetka, Ill.
The Rev.
Arthur Doring, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony at the Newport Congregational Church.
Mrs.
LaMotte, 30, is the manager of sports marketing and promotions at Sports Illustrated magazine in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father owns Brooks Ltd., a land development company in Wyckoff, N.J.
Her mother, Judith Bohuny, owns the Box Tree, an interior design concern there.


BENEFITS
For the National Victim Center  TODAY -- The National Victim Center will benefit from an evening that will include a performance of "Show Boat" at 3 P.M. at the the Gershwin Theater.
A dinner-dance is to follow at 6:30 P.M. at the Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street.
Beverly Sills will be the evening's host.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 735-0736.
A Tap Dance Evening  TODAY -- The tap dancer Clayton (Peg Leg) Bates will be honored in an evening of performance and spoken tributes, 4 to 6 P.M. in the Haft Auditorium of the Fashion Institute of Technology, 227 West 27th Street.
Chuck Green, Jimmy Slyde and Tarik Winston will dance, and Geoffrey Holder is expected to be among those paying tribute to Mr.
Bates.
The event will raise money for the New York Committee to Celebrate National Tap Dance Day, which is held nationally on May 25.
Tickets, $20, $25, $30 and $35, from (212) 279-4200.
Parker Meets Porter  MONDAY -- The members of the Actors' Company Theater will be joined by the singer Karen Akers in a performance that will feature the writings of Dorothy Parker and the music of Cole Porter.
The event, a fund-raiser for the company, will begin with a cocktail buffet in the Cole Porter suite in the Waldorf Towers, 100 East 50th Street.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 719-9594.
For Breast Cancer Awareness  MONDAY -- The Mount Sinai Medical Center will hold a black-tie evening at the Pierre to benefit its breast resource program.
A 7 P.M. cocktail party will be followed by dinner and dancing to two musical groups, Forever Plaid and the Kit McClure All Women's Band.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 241-6288.
Navratilova to be Honored  MONDAY -- Martina Navratilova, the tennis player, will be honored at a dinner celebrating the 20th anniversary of the Women's Sports Foundation, which provides scholarships and training grants worldwide.
The evening at the Waldorf-Astoria begins with a 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception, followed by dinner.
Black tie.
Tickets, $600, from (212) 921-9070.
For Leukemia Research  MONDAY -- The singers Cissy Houston and Maureen McGovern, Skitch Henderson and the New York Pops and the songwriting team of John Kander and Fred Ebb are among the performers to appear at a Carnegie Hall benefit for the Lauri Strauss Leukemia Foundation.
The program, which begins at 8 P.M., will be followed by a cocktail reception with the performers.
Tickets, $150, or $50 for the concert alone, from (212) 696-1033. 1994 Human Rights Awards  TUESDAY -- The Lawyers Committee for Human Rights will honor Paul Fireman, chairman of Reebok International, and others who have demonstrated a commitment to furthering human rights.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception at the Waldorf-Astoria will be followed by dinner and the awards.
The singer Richie Havens will perform.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 629-6170 For the New York City Opera  WEDNESDAY -- The New York City Opera, celebrating its 50th anniversary, will hold a black-tie dinner-dance at the New York State Theater.
The evening, at which Beverly Sills will be host, will begin with a champagne reception at 6:30 P.M.
Guests will view a private dress rehearsal of the second act of "La Boheme" at 8 P.M.
At 9 P.M., there will be dinner and dancing to Lester Lanin and His Orchestra.
Tickets, $500, or $150 for the reception and dress rehearsal alone, from (212) 972-2268.
A Party for Families  WEDNESDAY -- The American Museum of Natural History, celebrating its 125th anniversary, will hold a party for families to benefit the museum's science literacy program.
Guests will tour several of the galleries.
The party, from 6 to 8 P.M., will feature a buffet and there will be performances of Native-American and African music, origami folding, fossil rubbing and a treasure hunt.
Tickets are $75 for adults, $35 for children or $200 for a family of four, from (212) 769-5166.
An Antiques Show Preview  WEDNESDAY -- A preview of the Fall Antiques Show at Pier 92, West 52d Street at the Hudson River, will benefit the programs of the Museum of American Folk Art.
The cocktail reception and advance viewing of the exhibits will be from 5:30 to 9:30 P.M.
The antiques show opens to the public on Oct. 20 and runs through Oct. 23.
Tickets, $150, or $50 for those 30 and under, from (212) 977-7170, or $175 and $75, respectively, at the door.
American Craft Dinners  THURSDAY -- The American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street, is holding a preview of a new exhibition on the evolution of American crafts, followed by a series of dinner parties to be held in several private Manhattan homes.
The preview will begin with cocktails at 6 P.M., followed by the dinners at 8 P.M.
Tickets, $300, or $75 for the cocktail party and preview alone, from (212) 956-3535.
A Studio School Dinner-Dance  THURSDAY-- The New York Studio School of Drawing, Painting and Sculpture is celebrating its 30th anniversary with a dinner-dance at its landmark building at 8 West Eighth Street.
The event will begin with cocktails at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner at 8 and dancing at 9:30.
Dominic Kanza and the African Rhythm Machine, a musical group from Zaire, will perform.
Tickets, $350, or $50 for the dance, which begins at 9:30, from (212) 777-0742.
For Housing People with AIDS  THURSDAY -- A cocktail reception, 7 to 9 P.M. at the Contemporary, an exhibition space at 45 Greene Street (near Grand Street), will benefit the building fund of Friends House, a residence for people with AIDS, under construction at 130 East 25th Street in Manhattan.
A silent art auction featuring works donated by 120 artists including the sculptor Richard Serra, the painter Sol LeWitt and the photographers Nan Goldin and Andres Serrano.
Tickets, $20, at the door.
Information: (212) 255-0831.
For Women in the Arts  THURSDAY -- A private viewing of an exhibition of art works by Victorian women at the Forbes Magazine Galleries, 60 Fifth Avenue at 12th Street, will help support the National Museum of Women in the Arts, in Washington.
The event, from 6 to 8 P.M., will begin with a cocktail party.
Tickets, $125, from (202) 783-5000.
A Woodlands Ball in Brooklyn  SATURDAY -- Prospect Park will be the setting for a fund-raising ball sponsored by the Prospect Park Alliance, which is seeking to preserve Brooklyn's last forest, a 250-acre stand of trees in the park.
Following cocktails at 6:30 P.M., several dance performances will be presented under a tent near the Prospect Park Carousel.
There will be a seated dinner and dancing to the Manhattan String Orchestra.
Black tie.
Tickets, $200, from (718) 965-8945.
Under the Big Top  NEXT SUNDAY -- The actors Vanessa Williams and Christopher Reeve will be the guest ringmasters at a special 4:30 P.M. performance of the Big Apple Circus, in Damrosch Park.
The event will benefit the therapeutic horseback riding programs for mentally and physically disabled children and adults that have been organized by the Brewster, N.Y., division of Green Chimneys Children's Services and Pegasus Therapeutic Riding in Darien, Conn.
There will be a post-performance dinner beginning at 6:45 P.M. at the Radisson Empire Hotel, 44 West 63d Street (at Broadway).
Tickets, $250, or $100 for the show alone, from (914) 279-2995, extension 203, or (203) 356-9504.
Aiding Children  NEXT SUNDAY -- Matilda Raffa Cuomo and Geraldine Ferraro will be among those honored in the Rainbow Room at Rockefeller Center at a fund-raising dinner-dance for the Manhattan Guild and its medical treatment programs for children.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani are expected to attend.
The evening will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets, $400, (212) 888-6767.


Pity the Poor Bond Market
To the Editor:
Regarding Susan Antilla's column on proposals to require greater disclosure by the bond industry ("Keeping Mum About Bond Prices," Wall Street, Sept. 11), I find it hard to refrain from shedding a compassionate tear over the plight of these upstanding individuals who, after all, are only trying to spare me the bewilderment and confusion I am bound to experience upon learning that bond traders are not quite what they seem to be.
At the same time, I find it even harder to grasp what is so sacrosanct about private-sector and municipal debt that only a relative handful of corporate issues are traded on the Big Board and reported in daily newspapers.
ELEANOR WILLIAMS HALL  Mercer Island, Wash., Sept. 11  The writer is a retired officer of an international banking company.


Washington Really Is in Touch. We're the Problem.
THE problem with Washington, conventional wisdom has it, is that it is out of touch with the real America.
Madison's citizen-legislators who came to the capital every so often to do the people's business have been supplanted by a corps of professional politicians, living in splendid isolation.
Public servants come to the capital full of pure intentions and then, it is said, fall into the orbit of special interests and develop a tin ear to the cries of constituents.
The latest Congress, known primarily for blocking almost any idea in its path, is but the most striking example of a system gone haywire.
It is a simple and compelling explanation of what ails the republic.
But it is almost certainly wrong.


Up Against the Wall in a No-Curse Zone
OH, sugar.
Oh, fudge.
Gee whiz.
Darn it all.
In Raritan, N.J., the town that banned cursing, saying something stronger than those words is now punishable by a $500 fine and three months in jail.
Last week Raritan prohibited "rude or indecent behavior," including profanity or "making insulting remarks or comments to others" on the borough's quaint and quiet streets.
The measure, an amendment to the borough's disorderly conduct law, also forbids "unnecessary congregating in groups . . .  to the annoyance of other persons." It sounded like an anti-loitering ordinance.
It also sounded unconstitutional.


Guess Who's Hoping Conseco Buys Kemper
LET'S get one thing straight.
When an investment banker says he is "highly confident," he does not mean his confidence was derived from some mind-altering drug.
It just seems that way.
Investors in the Kemper Corporation have been growing more and more worried that Morgan Stanley's confidence may have been misplaced when it said it could sell $750 million in bonds to help finance Conseco's takeover of Kemper.
Conseco Chairman Steve Hilbert says there is nothing to worry about, and adds that Conseco has been in the market buying depressed Kemper shares.


Too Many Funds; Too Many Headaches
To the Editor:
Your article "Pitfalls in Holding Too Many Funds" (Mutual Funds, Sept. 25) discussed many reasons not to over-diversify, but another must be added: it often becomes a tax and accounting nightmare.
If you have a reinvestment plan (most mutual fund shareholders do), every dividend distribution, interest payment and capital gain requires a recalculation of your cost basis at the time of a sale or partial redemption.
This can become a long and time-consuming process if mutual funds are held over a number of years.
While tax and accounting considerations shouldn't guide investment decisions, they should be considered.
JERROLD M. NEWMAN  Manhattan, Sept. 26  The writer is an independent financial adviser and a longtime investor in funds.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo; Tie to D'Amato Could Turn Pataki Victory Into Tumult
If the Republican Party wins the governorship of New York for the first time in a generation, George E. Pataki will be the man of the hour.
But the man just behind him for days and weeks and months now has been Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, and therein lies a paradox:
A Republican triumph would at last make Mr.
D'Amato, the wily survivor who has endured repeated investigations into his ethical conduct, the King of the Hill.
Yet the price of victory would be a passel of internal party feuds and rivalries, most of them growing out of Mr.
D'Amato's very sponsorship of Mr.
Pataki, a freshman State Senator from Putnam County, whose nomination he engineered.


Juice or Gravy?
To the Editor:
Philip Roth's "Juice or Gravy? How I Met My Fate in a Cafeteria" (Sept. 18) is yet another miraculous front-line dispatch on the creative process from the most consistently satisfying American literary presence of our time.


Aristide Can Speak, But Can the U.S. Hear?
IN Haiti's 200 years as an independent nation, no president deposed in a palace coup had ever been restored to office before the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide arrived here Saturday after three years in exile.
As befits a man of the cloth whose long-suffering followers call him "ti pwofet," or the "little prophet," his return was celebrated with a fervor that was almost religious in its intensity and as an occasion that offered the promise of deliverance after a generation in the wilderness.
But Father Aristide owes his extraordinary political resurrection less to the moral force of his ideals and his supporters than to the presence of foreign troops, 19,000 at the moment.
He must now prove that he can speak the pragmatic language of his American patrons -- and they in turn are going to have to adapt to his quintessentially Haitian style of discourse.


Letter From a Judge? Or Neighbor?
When is a letter from a judge not a letter from a judge?
Federal District Judge Richard Owen wrote a letter to the Transit Authority urging a change in a bus route in front of his apartment on Claremont Avenue.
While he says it was not written on official stationery, the name of the court and his title are embossed on the top, above a notation, "Personal and Unofficial."


JUSTICE SOUTER EMERGES
Justice Souter Emerges" is excellent reading.
However, I found the picture on page 42, of the 1993-94 Supreme Court, more insightful.


Iraqi Officials Say Military Won't Attack
Iraqi officials said today that Iraq has no intention of attacking Kuwait and that neither the Iraqi Army nor the economy could sustain such a military operation.
"Even if you think Iraq is extreme, we are not crazy," said a senior Government official who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
"With what were we expected to attack Kuwait? We don't have much air power and we are not going to send ground troops out there without air cover."


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
FLUSHING For Jazz, a Place for Quality, Not Just the Biggest Names
No need to come into Manhattan to hear great jazz.
Actually, "the New York jazz scene is dead," says G. Randall Wright, program coordinator of the Flushing Council on Culture and the Arts.
The reason, he says, is that "unless you make a name for yourself, you can't get a gig."


Marla Weinstein, Craig Wasserman
Marla Jo Weinstein, a daughter of Stan and Rita Weinstein of Hollywood, Fla., was married there last evening to Craig Mitchell Wasserman, the son of Bert and Sandra Wasserman of Old Westbury, L.I.
Rabbi Robert Frazin performed the ceremony at Temple Solel.
Mrs.
Wasserman, 26, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, from which she also received a law degree.
Until recently, she was a clerk to Chief Judge Edward Cahn of Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia.
Next month she is to become an associate at Friedman &amp; Kaplan, a New York law firm.


I Am Not a Camera
All my working life, my pencil, pen, typewriter or laptop has shared my protection under the First Amendment. ("Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom . . . of the press.") Where I went, my tools went -- as a matter of right and law.
So I came to believe that the rights enjoyed by my writing implements logically belonged also to television cameras.
They also serve reporters and, sad to say, they bring news to more people than all newspapers combined.
Although the Founding Fathers failed to anticipate Jennings, Brokaw and Rather, the TV cameras, like my pencils, seemed to qualify as evolutionary descendants of Ben Franklin's quill.
No longer.
After watching the Simpson hearings with morbid fascination, I have a new sense of relationships: my pencil is to a television camera as Judge Ito's courtroom is to Titus's Colosseum.


The New Catechism and The Best-Seller List
To the Editor:
Since the new Catechism of the Catholic Church has sold more than a million and a half copies in English, how come it doesn't appear on your best-seller list?
GERTRUDE H. BEST  Long Island City, Queens The editor replies:
The United States Catholic Conference decided to allow 15 companies to publish the book.
The editions (some in paperback, some in hard cover) are exactly the same.
The New York Times best-seller list counts each publisher's edition as a separate title.
No single edition has qualified for the list.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


In Business for Profit; Imagine That?
NEWHOUSE All the Glitter, Power, and Glory of America's Richest Media Empire and the Secretive Man Behind It.
By Thomas Maier.
Illustrated. 446 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $24.95.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Finally, a Manhattan Store For Manhattan Bagel Chain
The Manhattan Bagel Company, which has never had a store in Manhattan, is finally coming to New York City.


Amy Jill Shulman, Kenneth Feldman
Amy Jill Shulman, the United States advertising manager of HMV Record Stores in Stamford, Conn., and Kenneth Charles Feldman, a marketing consultant in New York, were married last evening at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.
Rabbi Melvin Sirner performed the ceremony.
The bride, 29, graduated from Syracuse University.
She is the daughter of Barbara and Harold Shulman of New Rochelle, N.Y.
The bride's father is the president of Shulman, Cohen, Furst, Kramer &amp; Rosen, an accounting corporation in New York.
Her mother is an academic counselor at Adelphi University in Garden City, L.I.


Gabrielle Larew, Stewart Wallace
Gabrielle Ruth Larew, a daughter of Lillian K. and John R. Larew of Roanoke, Va., was married yesterday to Stewart Unger Wallace, a son of Joyce and John J. Wallace 3d of Richmond.
The Rev.
Dr.
Donald Jones performed the Episcopal ceremony at Rocklands, near Gordonsville, Va.
Ms.
Larew, who is keeping her name, recently received a certificate of advanced international studies from the Graduate Institute of International Studies in Geneva.
She graduated from Drew University and received a master's degree in international relations from Columbia University.
Her father is the manager of equal opportunity employment at the Appalachian Power Company in Roanoke.
Her mother retired as a librarian in the Roanoke city schools.
Mr.
Wallace is a managing director and the country manager for the Chemical Banking Corporation in Prague.
He graduated from Wake Forest University.
His father retired as a manager in the international division at E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, in Richmond.


Susan Toffler, Thierry Imbot
Susan Caryl Toffler, the daughter of Doris Toffler of Jericho, L.I., and Dr.
Allan Toffler of Glen Cove, L.I., was married last evening to Thierry Imbot, a son of Gen. and Mrs.
Rene Imbot of Caseneuve, France.
Cantor David Shneyer officiated at the Four Seasons in Washington.
The bride, 32, is the Washington producer for "CNN &amp; Company," a cable television news program.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father is a gastroenterologist and a former chief of medicine at North Shore University Hospital, both in Glen Cove.


Judith B. Herron, Peter F. Goldstein
Judith Bell Herron, an assistant vice president at Citicorp in Long Island City, Queens, and Peter Fox Goldstein, a staff editor with the Television section of The New York Times, were married yesterday in Blauvelt, N.Y.
The Quaker ceremony took place at the Rockland Friends Meeting House.
Ms.
Herron, 35, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from New York University, from which she also received an M.B.A.
She is a daughter of Elizabeth Lloyd of North Bergen, N.J., and Dr.
William G. Herron of Woodcliff Lake, N.J.
Her father, a clinical psychologist, is a professor of psychology at St.
John's University in Jamaica, Queens.
Her mother retired as a music teacher in Nyack, N.Y.
The bride's stepmother, Dr.
Mary Jane Herron, is a psychotherapist in Woodcliff Lake.


Ms. Fried, Mr. Greenberg
Lisa Robin Fried, an assistant district attorney in the Bronx, was married last evening to Michael Jay Greenberg, a lawyer and accountant in Manhattan.
Rabbi Abraham Mandelbaum officiated at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
The bride, 29, graduated from Clark University and received a law degree from American University.
She is the daughter of Arthur and Goldie Fried of Woodmere, L.I.


Steel Rails Tour


Kohl Holds a Slender Lead as Germans Prepare to Vote Today
With campaigning for Sunday's German elections completed, a final public opinion poll showed Chancellor Helmut Kohl and his party leading the opposition, but not by enough to win a fourth four-year mandate on its own.
An Allensbach Institute poll published in the daily Frankfurter Allgemeine forecast 41 percent of those who have decided how they will vote planned to cast ballots for Mr.
Kohl's Christian Democrats and 7.5 percent for their Free Democratic coalition partners, compared with 35.5 percent for the opposition Social Democrats and 8 percent for the environmentalist Greens.


Quest for Wholeness in the Grand Gesture
THE Northern Westchester Center for the Arts has moved here from Goldens Bridge, where it was born 16 years ago.
In its new home -- the former Patent Trader building at 272 North Bedford Road -- the center is poised, ready to become, in the words of Bira Rabushka, the executive director, "one of the most significant cultural and arts education hubs in the nation."
To mark its opening, the center has staged in the ground-floor art gallery a group show by six Westchester artists aptly titled "Visions on a Grand Scale." The other group show under review is "Drawing and Sculpture" at the Schoolhouse Galleries in Croton Falls.


Nebraska Crushes Wildcats' Offense
After a week of sunny skies and cheerful optimism, Kansas State was pummeled into a deep, purple funk this afternoon by a Nebraska team that, among other things, seemed irritated by the Wildcats' pesky pre-game demeanor.
The Cornhuskers (7-0), who started a walk-on at quarterback and temporarily lost Lawrence Phillips, their leading rusher, to a hand injury, overcame the losses with a crushing defensive performance and earned a 17-6 victory in front of 42,817 at K.S.U.
Stadium.


Opera Ain't Over Till All the Ladies Sing
WHERE would opera be without women?
Sly and bewitching at one moment, doomed and suffering the next, women give opera its soul and tragic focus -- a focus dreamily fixed on the past.
Eons away from the stultified, self-immolating characters she portrays, however, the modern diva is not pining for her Pinkerton; she is more likely desperate for good child care.
Hardly the sequestered goddess enshrined by Bellini or Delibes, she is instead a woman of the world, patiently waiting for the roles that may never come -- the ones that reflect the life she really lives.


Why Hiroshima Still Haunts America's Psyche
To the Editor:
The controversy over the Smithsonian Institution's atomic bomb exhibition will not subside any time soon, on the evidence of "The Curators Cave In" (Op-Ed, Oct. 9) and your Oct. 11 letters.
The dispute exposes the raw nerve that is Hiroshima in America.
Nearly half a century after the fact, Americans still experience pain, confusion and anger over the use of the bomb against Japan.
It has never been easy to reconcile dropping the bomb with a sense of ourselves as a decent people.
This conflict remains unresolved, so it continues to provoke strong feelings.


Fall in the Flatiron: A Chef's Roundup
Below, The City focuses on new fall menus, but provides the restaurant's rating from its last New York Times review.
AN AMERICAN PLACE *** (212) 684-2122; 2 Park Avenue, entrance on 32d Street; $$$$; all major credit cards


Nancy Sargent, Frank S. Capozza
Nancy Whitney Adams Sargent, a daughter of Joan and Harold Adams Jr. of Naples, Fla., is to be married today to Frank S. Capozza, a son of Samuel J. Capozza of Mountaintop, Pa., and the late Alice P. Capozza.
The Rev.
Harold Boehmke, a Baptist minister, is to perform the ceremony on the Mohegan Bluffs of Block Island, R.I.
Mrs.
Capozza graduated from Hollins College.
She is a sales representative at Wheaton Industries, a specialty glass manufacturer in Millville, N.J.
Her father, now retired, was the executive vice president at Freudenberg/Nok, a manufacturer of automotive parts in Detroit.
She is a descendant of Presidents John Adams and John Quincy Adams.


Judith H. Kramer, Kevin M. McEvoy
Judith Hope Kramer, an associate art director at Computer Shopper magazine in New York, was married last evening to Kevin Michael McEvoy, a vice president and the controller of McCabe &amp; Company, an advertising agency in New York.
Naomi Fiske, a minister of the World Fellowship Congregation, performed the ceremony at a house rented for the occasion in Santa Fe, N.M.
Mrs.
Kramer McEvoy, 33, graduated from Parsons School of Design.
She is the daughter of Ellen and Burton Kramer of North Palm Beach, Fla.


Victoria Morey, Norman Petty Jr.
Dr.
Victoria Ann Morey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert A. Morey of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Norman Holmes Petty Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Petty Sr. of Weddington, N.C.
The Rev.
James Petty, a cousin of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at the Rye Presbyterian Church.
Dr.
Petty, 27, is a resident in obstetrics and gynecology at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.
She graduated cum laude from Penn, from which she also received her M.D. degree.
Her father is a senior partner in Ernst &amp; Young, the accounting firm in New York.


Ten Little Houses and How They Grew
THE BUILDING OF NEW MU- seums was a major architecture story of the 1980's.
Learning how to use them is turning out to be one of the big stories of the 1990's.
In the past few years, a new generation of architecture and design curators have joined the staffs of American museums.
They are only beginning to figure out how these institutions can best serve architecture.
It is not going to be an easy process, to judge from "House Rules," a show of residential architecture at the Wexner Center for the Arts in Columbus, Ohio.
This is a flawed exhibition.
But it is also just the kind of experimental venture that museums with a serious commitment to architecture must support.
Up to now, the Wexner Center has presented only traveling architecture shows initiated by other museums.
With "House Rules," it initiates its own architectural program, and perhaps it is not surprising that the show has much in common with the architecturally ambitious building in which it is presented.
Designed by Peter Eisenman, the Wexner theoretically provides a cultural bridge between the ivory tower and the city beyond.
But Eisenman's cryptic meanings probably escape those who don't work the academic side of the street.


President Aristide Returns
For the overwhelming majority of Haitians, the return of Jean-Bertrand Aristide is a joyous occasion.
For a small but important minority, particularly among the economic and military elite, it is a nightmare come true.
For President Clinton, it is a foreign policy victory but by no means an undiluted one.
It took three years, many policy reversals and finally a dubious use of U.S. military force to get to this point.
The road ahead could be even more militarily treacherous and politically complicated than the recent past.


The Oil-Futures Bloodbath: Is the Bank the Culprit?
IT'S a classic mystery twist: No sooner do the police arrest the obvious suspect than a brainy private eye comes on the scene and says that they've got the wrong guy -- the real villain is innocent-looking Mr.
X.
That's more or less the latest turn in a real life financial whodunit involving a $1.3 billion loss from trading in oil futures, Germany's most powerful bank and the New York subsidiary of one of Germany's largest industrial concerns.


Death Before Dying
RECESSIONAL By James A. Michener. Illustrated. 484 pp. New York: Random House. $25.


Their Fellow Americans
SNOW FALLING ON CEDARS By David Guterson. 345 pp.
New York:  Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $21.95.


Tenafly Journal; Suit Says Cheerleaders Are Just Too Loud
A NOISY dispute has broken out between cheerleaders who attend schools in the working-class community of Bergenfield, and some residents of Tenafly, its mostly white-collar neighbor.
The contention is over the noise made by 5- to 12 year-old girls practicing cheers on Pony Field, which abuts a row of houses in Tenafly.
The girls, some of whom also play soccer games in the field, say the noise seems just about right to them.
Not surprisingly, the homeowners think differently.


Suzanne J. Katz, Ronald J. Lewittes
Suzanne Jo Katz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Katz of Lancaster, Pa., was married last evening to Ronald J. Lewittes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Lewittes of New York.
Rabbi Haskel Lookstein performed the ceremony at Congregation Kehilath Jeshurun in New York.
Mrs.
Lewittes, 30, is a director of marketing at the American Express Travel Related Services Company in New York.
The bride and her husband graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is an anesthesiologist at the Lancaster Surgical Center in Lancaster.


Deals and Discounts
PACKAGE TO RUSSIA The Russian Travel Bureau has a series of eight-day tours to Russia through May with prices starting at $794 a person, double occupancy.
The itinerary includes two nights in Moscow, overnight first-class sleeper train, two nights in St.
Petersburg and a night in Helsinki.
The package includes round-trip air fare from New York on Finnair, hotel with private bath, full breakfast and dinner daily in Russia, sightseeing in each city and other extras.
For departures November through March, the price ranges from $794 to $999; in May, it is $1,197.
For more details contact the company at (212) 986-1500 or outside New York at (800) 847-1800.


Sex Shops Opening Up to Beat Proposed Moratorium
Although Mayor Giuliani's call for a one-year moratorium on new sex-oriented businesses is still just a proposal, some community leaders say it is already having an effect: a rash of new places opening to beat the anticipated deadline.
"Three places opened up just within the last month" in Chelsea, said Tom Gay, co-chairman of Community Board 4's Quality of Life Committee.
He listed the Figure 8 striptease club at 412 Eighth Avenue near 31st Street, an adjacent video shop and the Unicorn video store at 275-C West 22d Street.
"I think we're going to see a lot more trying to get in under the gun," he said.


Truly Gross Economic Product
Suppose you consume about 10 pounds of food and drink a day.
If you live to be 80, then a total of 146 tons of consumables will have swilled down your gullet.
Enough to turn the scale against two M1A1 Abrams tanks.
Nature averts such portliness with the equivalent of a built-in thermostat that keeps that body at a more or less fixed weight.
Considering the torrents of high-calorie food that flood through every day, this device works with amazing accuracy.
Unfortunately, its settings are easily deranged by greed, genetics and the influences of culture.


INSIDE
Questions About Influence
A plane crash in February has raised questions about whether Senator Tom Daschle went too far in lobbying for the owner.
Page 28.
Hopes to Heal Israel Talks
Israeli and Palestinian leaders said they want to restart peace talks but that it will take time after the fatal kidnapping of an Israeli.
Page 14.
Audit for Rights Group
After allegations of financial abuse, the N.A.A.C.P. has decided to have an outside auditor look at spending by the group's officers.
Page 22.
Inside a Public Utility
As a state senator, she hounded New York's power companies.
But real trouble didn't begin until she became a utility's lobbyist.
Page 37.


Charity Begins At Thrift Shops
IT is Saturday and in the charity thrift shops on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, the hip are engaged in the sport known as thrifting.
Amy Fine Collins, the style editor at Harper's Bazaar, is working the clothing racks at the Irvington Institute thrift shop in hopes of bagging a Geoffrey Beene.
She pauses briefly before suits with Chanel and Lacroix labels, then shakes her head.
"I'm almost monogamous with Mr. Beene," she murmurs.


Whose Gain From Whose Pain?
To the Editor:
In "Long-Term Riches, Short-Term Pain" (Viewpoints, Sept. 25), Paul Krugman ignores a factor that is likely to extend short-term pain to the long term.
The world's resources cannot sustain unlimited economic global growth for another century.
Lester Brown of the Worldwatch Institute estimates that by 2030, China will have an annual shortage of 615 million tons of grain because of its expanding economy.
Similar shortages will occur throughout most of the developing world, and the relatively small surpluses predicted for the West will be totally inadequate to compensate.


Jansporters Don't Say Sorry And Other Tales of Incivility
To the Editor:
In regard to the Sept. 18 Coping column by Robert Lipsyte -- "Can't Anyone Say 'I'm Sorry,' With Feeling?" -- I'd like to add three items that make me boil.
1.
Getting whacked by people wearing Jansport bags on their backs.
I've never heard a sorry from those folks.


When Fate Is Calling The Tune
FATE PLAYED A STARRING ROLE AT THIS year's New York Film Festival, figuring prominently in a surprisingly large number of films on the schedule.
Destiny may have a firm hand in shaping any story, but it doesn't always call attention to itself as insistently as it did in these selections, both fiction films and documentaries.
Beginning with "Pulp Fiction," the thermodynamic miracle that is both the hottest and coolest film of the year, fate made its presence felt.
The unusual chronology of Quentin Tarantino's film accentuates the way his characters' decisions can change their destinies, even as their futures are seen falling into place.
Circular in structure, the movie closes with the image of a man who is fated to die -- earlier in the film, we have already seen his death occur -- because he has not understood how to save his own life. (Following another character along a newly adopted path of righteousness would have made all the difference in the world.)


Heard But Not Seen
To the Editor:  I found the culprit!
I found the one responsible for the onslaught of loquacious moviegoers.
It's your own Patricia S. McCormick.
In her review of "Quiz Show"  [ "Taking the Children," Oct. 2 ]  she says, "Try to go when the theater is not crowded so you can comfortably answer their questions." She's the one who's encouraging every parent and child to talk at the movies.
I don't suppose she has ever tried to teach her wards that they're supposed to sit and watch a movie, a show, any performance, and ask questions later.
I remember going to see "2001: A Space Odyssey" with my eighth-grade class in 1968.
Try to sit through three hours of Strauss waltzes in outer space ending with a floating embryo today.
Ms.
McCormick would probably recommend bringing crates full of pogs to keep up their amusement if they are easily confused by monoliths.
I apologize to parents and children I may have rattled in theaters for jabbering on.
I didn't realize they were being encouraged by outside sources.
BRUCE N. BRESLAU  North Hollywood, Calif.


Bruising


Emotions at Play
To the Sports Editor:
Ira Berkow missed the point ("Calloway O'ersteps the Line," The Times, Oct. 4).
It seems to me what the Giants' Chris Calloway was expressing was a raw emotion -- feisty competitiveness.
Forget about the audience.
Pretend the game was on a sandlot.
Your team is down, rookie captain, you make a great comeback play.
The exhilaration of the moment overtakes you: "We're not going down that easy!"


Restoring Looks, and Lives
The cosmetics industry's Dream Ball, at the Pierre, Oct. 6.


Washington Memo; The C.I.A.'s 'Old-Boy' Camaraderie: Deeply Ingrained and Slow to Change
R.
James Woolsey, the man who runs the Central Intelligence Agency, has vowed to "change the culture of the C.I.A," especially the deeply rooted old boys' network of the agency's covert operators.
But he says he is hearing skeptical reactions at headquarters, like: "Good luck. The culture is too ingrained."
A dozen present and former intelligence officers and outside overseers offered some insight into the intricacies of the secret society that shapes the 5,000 or so spies who work at C.I.A. headquarters, at a few domestic posts like the United Nations and at more than 100 foreign stations -- the people who spend their days and nights stealing secrets, suborning foreigners and digging up dirt on everyone from socialists in Sri Lanka to guerrillas in Tajikistan.


Setback for Australians
The California Superior Court in San Diego has denied an Australian bid to delay an Oct. 18 yacht-racing hearing about the America's Cup.
The syndicate founded by JOHN BERTRAND, One Australia, wanted the court to prevent a committee of America's Cup trustees from making a decision that would affect the Australians' boat-building plans.


Breakthroughs That Conquer Space
COMPLETELY hemmed in by their two young children's large plastic cars and plastic make-believe Dutch door and plastic house and pile of strollers, Lynda and Steve DeLott wait eagerly until they can knock a door through to their neighbor's apartment, which they have a contract to buy.
As their older son sleeps a few feet away, in what was once the dining alcove, they whisper: "Only three more days until we close, and then the adults are taking back the living room."


The Education of an Operagoer: 10 You Really Should See
If you're looking for real life, go to the mall.
Opera -- or at least a lot of opera -- is the big issues of existence blown up on giant billboards.
Things are larger than you're used to, including the sopranos.
Get used to being patient.
Music moves more slowly than acting and words; don't mind people standing around on stage.
Overlook a lot of plot and staging.
Much of the music is permanently attached to theatrical values that may have worked 150 years ago but seem kind of silly now.
The truth is in the music.
If you can't believe what your eyes are seeing, listen: your ears can.
It's a world with a reality all its own.
Here is a starter list for newcomers:
1.
"La Boheme" by Puccini.
Starving artists in love.
Deserves its popularity.
CITY OPERA, Oct. 22, 25, 28; Nov. 2, 5; April 14, 18, 22.
MET: Oct. 20; March 8, 11, 14, 18.


RECORD BRIEFS
Rzewski: 'The People United Will Never Be Defeated'  Stephen Drury, pianist.
New Albion NA 063; CD.


In Danbury, Musicians at Work
AS a result of Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s designation of October as Arts and Humanities Month in Connecticut, the Danbury Music Center has decided to hold open rehearsals of its principal performing groups.
One of the center's directors, Dale Miller, said that it could be fascinating to what goes into producing a public concert, and invited the public to "listen as the musicians work to perfect the music they will be performing in November and December."


With the Falcons, Mathis Is Getting Quite a Big Reception
Every now and then, just for the sheer enjoyment, Terance Mathis of the Atlanta Falcons glances at the individual standings in the National Football League to look at his name at the top of the list of receivers.
With 46 receptions Mathis has more catches than such notables as Jerry Rice, Michael Irvin, Sterling Sharpe and his teammate, Andre Rison.
"It's kind of wild," said Mathis, whose 46 receptions have gone for 478 yards and 4 touchdowns.
"It's really kind of fun to look at once and a while. I'm having fun playing football. I feel really blessed."


Belmont On a High, And So Is Smith
Belmont Park will close its 40-day autumn meeting today with Mike Smith riding high and with a 2.3 percent increase in attendance that reverses the trend of recent seasons at most race tracks.
And some history will be marked on Tuesday when the New York racing scene shifts to Aqueduct in Queens, 100 years after the gates first opened.
Smith has been making the winner's circle regularly all year as the rider on major horses like Sky Beauty, Devil His Due, Lure and Holy Bull, the leading candidate for Horse of the Year.
None of those horses were running on Belmont's final weekend, but Smith was riding and closing in on more of the titles and honors that made him the nation's leading jockey the last two years.


Bosnia Crisis Looms Again for U.N. as Serbs Defy Deadline
Already mired in debate over how to respond to Saddam Hussein's recent show of force near Kuwait, the Security Council will have to turn some attention to Bosnia in the coming week.
Today, a deadline for the Bosnian Serbs to agree to a peace plan passed, and the United States is pledged to react with a resolution that at least threatens to lift an arms embargo on the Muslim-led Bosnian Army.
This week, 50 United States senators representing both parties wrote to President Clinton warning that if the Administration did not press the Security Council to terminate the arms embargo on a definite date, Congress would take up the issue again this year.


When Birds Migrate, Central Park Is the Spot
GREAT waves of migrating birds are moving over Central Park this month.
The peregrine falcons are striking off from Greenland, riding the northwest winds, heading for South America.
Anything could happen.
A loon might stop down on the reservoir.
A golden eagle might soar over the Great Lawn.
A grasshopper sparrow might be spotted up on Cherry Hill.


Smile for the Camera!
Dentists' offices, like automobiles, may be turning into home entertainment centers in which the sound system is more important, say, than the transmission -- or the drill.
Some dentists now offer a choice of compact disk or cassette for listening pleasure.
Others provide movies on virtual reality goggles.
And now comes the intra-oral camera.


The Australian Ballet: A New Generation
Whether time flies or marches on, it comes as a jolt to realize that the Australian Ballet's ranks now include the children of principal dancers who appeared with the company on its first United States tour in 1970-71.
The main draw at that time was Rudolf Nureyev, starring as a guest in his own version of Petipa's "Don Quixote." Yet if Nureyev used the troupe from Melbourne (founded in 1962) mainly as a backdrop, he also made possible a glimpse of some impressive home-grown talent in a still-young company.


Will Workfare Work?
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's plan to put able-bodied, childless New York City welfare recipients to work rings with optimism.
The plan, his senior advisers say, will place idle enrollees in useful jobs, like cleaning parks and other public spaces, saving taxpayers $80 million a year.
Maybe so.
But the record of "workfare" around the country has been uneven.
Most workfare programs have been expensive to run and have rarely cut welfare rolls or eased recipients into private jobs.
Mr.
Giuliani points to a successful workfare program in Westchester County as the model for his proposal.
Westchester's program is certainly worth looking at.
Whether it can be replicated in New York City remains to be seen.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY  Alex.


Boise Cascade Corp.(BCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bad Back Puts Anthony in Precarious Position
As if Greg Anthony did not have enough to think about, he has been bothered by a sore back throughout training camp.
Anthony is one of four New York point guards fighting for playing time, and either Anthony or Doc Rivers is the most likely to be traded if the Knicks make a deal.
Anthony would like to stay in New York, which makes this preseason one of the most important of his career.


Iraq Signals Acceptance Of U.N. Move
The Government-controlled news media indicated today that Iraq was willing to comply with the United Nations resolution demanding that it withdraw its troops from the Kuwait border area and warning Baghdad against any "hostile or provocative" actions that would threaten its neighbors.
In an unusual move, all the details of the resolution, which the Security Council approved unanimously Saturday night, were read on radio and television news bulletins.
Such frankness here startled diplomats and some Iraqis.


In a Bitter Campaign Season, a Candidate Rejects the Politics of Cynicism
In a year when many political challengers are resorting to negative, poll-driven campaigning, Bob Massie, a 38-year-old Episcopal minister and Harvard Divinity School teacher, has been waging a no-frills, no-sound bites, no-polling crusade against cynicism.
Though Mr.
Massie, a Democrat, is running for the low-visibility job of lieutenant governor in a race that has been all but ceded to the incumbent Republican ticket, he has moved people like Rob MacLean.


Restart the Rights Clock in Indonesia
The Clinton Administration is having a hard time deciding whether to impose modest trade sanctions against Indonesia for denying workers their basic rights.
First it demanded changes by February 1994.
Then it let that deadline pass and dropped formal scrutiny of Indonesia's performance for six months.
Now it seems ready to delay any action until after President Clinton visits Jakarta next month for the Asia-Pacific summit meeting.
Such protracted delay helps no one.
The Administration should tell Indonesia now what it still needs to do and set a firm deadline for doing it.


Patents; Regulators Brace for Spirited Testimony From Biotechnology Companies on Application Delays
ALTHOUGH the testimony is not expected to be as heated as it was at the software hearings the agency held last year, Patent and Trademark Office officials expect an earful from industry representatives at a hearing on biotechnology today in San Diego.
"I don't think we're going to have to erect a shield to protect ourselves from having 'FlavrSavr' tomatoes thrown at us or anything," said Jeff Kushan, the Patent Office official coordinating the hearing, referring to the genetically engineered produce.
"But there is a lot of frustration over the way we're handling cases right now."


First Commerce Corp.(FCOM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ex-Soviet States Need All-Purpose Union
To the Editor:
In "What Does Russia Want?" (Op-Ed, Oct. 9), Grigory A. Yavlinsky tries to please both mainstream Russians and anti-Russian Western analysts.


DANCE
Browsing in the 20th Century Both Delicately and Grimly  Miller Theater
For almost 20 years, the Schoenberg String Quartet has invested its principal assets in the Second Viennese School of Berg, Webern, Zemlinsky and, of course, the quartet's namesake.
The program on Friday night divided its time between upholding this venerable 20th-century movement and proselytizing for a couple of the quartet's Dutch colleagues, Klaus de Vries and Louis Andriessen.


Tactics in the Battle Over Hasidic Boy Push the Case Toward Melodrama
Until now, an emotionally charged case of a teen-ager who vanished for two years has raised substantial issues of family and religious values to mull over.
Is a 13-year-old mature enough to decide that he wants to convert to a rigorously religious life?
Where is the line between helping a young teen-ager extricate himself from a deeply troubled family setting and criminally removing him from that setting?


Crestar Financial Corp.(CF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Some short- and long-term marriages are ending for companies and their agencies.
THREE advertisers are ending relationships with their agencies that ranged from almost two years to almost six decades on accounts with total billings estimated at $90 million to $110 million.
Trans World Airlines and Bates Worldwide in New York, which had worked together since January 1993, said they had mutually agreed not to renew their global advertising contract that expires at the end of December.
Estimates of billings on the account of the beleaguered airline, which will change agencies for the third time in five years, ranged from $45 million to $60 million.


Russell Corp.(RML,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
ABC Rail Products Corp., Chicago, 1 million shares. Wertheim Schroder &amp; Co.


U.S. Says Iraq Appears to Resume Pullback From Kuwait Border
United States officials said today that Iraq appeared to have resumed moving troops out of southern Iraq, but President Clinton continued to threaten Saddam Hussein if he fails to follow through on that withdrawal.
"They're moving north," said Lieut.
Col.
David Sims, a Defense Department spokesman.
"They're moving past the 32d parallel. But they're not completely across yet."


Mark Twain Bancshares Inc.(MTWN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


I.B.M. Plans to Cut PC Lines to 4 From 9
In an effort to reduce confusion and thin its product line, I.B.M. will announce today that it has cut its personal computer lines from nine to four and introduced several new models.
It will also say it is bringing back the brand name that became a household word: IBM PC.
The consolidation of the International Business Machines Corporation's sprawling personal computer business is the work of G. Richard Thoman, a former executive with RJR Nabisco and the American Express Company, who has headed the division for nine months.
The division will now comprise four lines: IBM PC for commercial desktop machines, IBM PC Server for larger computers used on networks, Thinkpad for portables and Aptiva for the home market.


Ryan's Family Steak Houses Inc.(RYAN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Some Doubt U.S. Ability To Fight Wars On 2 Fronts
America's latest military showdown with Iraq, at a time when United States forces are in Haiti, is raising questions about the Pentagon's ability to meet its strategy to win two major wars at nearly the same time.
With about 20,000 troops in Haiti, the United States involvement barely ranks as a minor contingency.
And the more than 30,000 Americans in or bound for the Persian Gulf now, as well as the 155,000 additional ground troops on alert, are a far cry from the more than 500,000 who fought the 1991 gulf war.


Republicans' Campaign Trail Turns Right, Toward Reagan
Recall the glory days of Ronald Reagan.
Attack Bill Clinton.
Forget George Bush.
Avoid troublesome social issues like abortion.
Attack Washington.
Move to the right.
Six years after Mr.
Reagan left the White House and two years after Mr.
Bush lost the party's hold on it, Republican candidates around the country are once again trying to revive Mr.
Reagan's legacy and, to some degree, his conservative legislative agenda.


Kigali Journal; The Rock That Crumbled: The Church in Rwanda
The vicious political and ethnic warfare that killed untold tens of thousands of Rwandans this spring and summer also shook the foundations of one of the country's most revered institutions: the Roman Catholic Church.
The church lost not only scores of priests and other religious workers, but also the confidence of many of the faithful whose families were hacked to death in churches and who believe that the church hierarchy betrayed them.


Kimball Intl(KBALB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Inland Steel Industries(IAD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lautenberg Running Late and Tough
It was barely three weeks before Election Day and Senator Frank R. Lautenberg was winding up his first full-tilt week of campaigning with a news conference on a kindergarten playground, sandwiched between a jungle gym and a set of swings.
It was an unusual setting for a political event, but an appropriate venue for a bare-knuckle campaigner like Mr.
Lautenberg, who used it to pick a schoolyard fight with his Republican rival for the Senate.


E. John Lewis, 78, Network Founder, Dies
E.
John Lewis, a founder of the Pacifica radio network, died of a heart attack on Tuesday at his home in Plandome, L.I., his son Robert Lewis said.
He was 78.
In 1949, Mr.
Lewis helped create the Pacifica Foundation and its flagship station, KPFA in Berkeley, Calif., which were the brainchild of his friend Lewis Hill.
Mr.
Lewis served as the treasurer for Pacifica, which quickly became known for its liberal and pacifist bent, and as the public affairs director for KPFA, the first listener-sponsored radio station in the country.


Mercantile BanksharesCorp.(MRBK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Study Criticizes Objectivity Of. U.S. Accounting Agency
The Government's watchdog agency, the General Accounting Office, has strayed from its original fact-finding mission and tarnished its reputation for objectivity by becoming an advocate for policy changes, an independent evaluation of the agency says.
The study, in effect an audit of the Government's top auditors, was issued last week by a panel of experts from the National Academy of Public Administration, a nonprofit organization chartered by Congress to increase the effectiveness of Federal, state and local government.


KEEPS SMALL EDGE
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's 12-year-old governing coalition suffered heavy losses on Sunday in Germany's national election but held onto a narrow majority over the combined opposition, according to preliminary results counted early today.
With 100 percent of the votes counted, Mr.
Kohl's Christian Democratic alliance and its Free Democratic coalition partners had 48.4 percent, good for 341 seats in the 672-seat Parliament, a 10-seat majority that Mr.
Kohl called "workable." In 1990, in the first elections after unification, they won 54.8 percent of the vote.


High Doses of a Heart Drug Are Found to Be Dangerous
Two studies to find the most effective dose of a widely used drug for treating heart attack patients have found that a high dose can unexpectedly prove unacceptably dangerous.
The trials, sponsored by drug companies, were halted in April because of an unexpectedly high risk of paralyzing and fatal strokes, but doctors are to be publicly warned of the danger only on Monday.


A Sunday on the Campaign Trail


What Makes the Dolphins Run? Parmalee
In the frenzy of overtime today, the Miami Dolphins' game plan against the Los Angeles Raiders turned playground simple.
It became Bernie Parmalee left and Bernie Parmalee right.
"It was basic football," center Jeff Dellenbach said.
"We'd knock 'em off the ball and let Bernie run."


Marvelous in the Meadowlands: Jets Wind Up Turning Challenge Into Triumph
The Jets have lived with insults for so long, surely another barrage couldn't faze them.
But today, the New England Patriots taunted them so much -- daring the Jets' defenders again and again to stop them on fourth down -- that it turned into a cause.
And the Jets are a club that seems to need a cause.


Houghton Mifflin (HTN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INSIDE
Danger Found in Heart Drug
A common heart drug, heparin, was found in April to pose a danger of fatal strokes in studies using large doses, but doctors are being told of the risk only today.
Page A14.
Criticism for Watchdog
The General Accounting Office has strayed from its fact-finding mission and become an advocate for policy changes, an independent evaluation said.
Page B10.
Getting There Is the Battle
The current American military actions raise the issue of preparedness for two wars at once.
There are enough troops, but the problem could be getting them there.
Page A9.


Hasbro Inc.(HAS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


DANCE
The Smiles Turn Wan; Enter the Grotesque  City Center
Paul Taylor is a superb choreographic entertainer.
But he disturbs as well as delights.
He can turn sweet sentiments sour and toss monkey wrenches into monkeyshines.


Hampton Can't Fix A Failing Offense
The Giants thought that a healthy Rodney Hampton would make a difference.
They thought their offensive problems -- too numerous to count at this juncture -- would somehow decrease dramatically once Hampton got back on track.
They were wrong.


Nothing Doing On N.H.L. Ice
The National Hockey League's second opening night passed this weekend with no season or labor pact in sight.
The games on the schedule this weekend went unplayed, just like the 75 games of the schedule's first two weeks.
The season originally had been scheduled to begin Oct. 1, but Commissioner Gary Bettman locked out the players and postponed the opening until Saturday night.
Then, last Tuesday, he announced that the season would not begin until the league and its players settled their dispute.


Delchamps Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Magazines
DESPITE a walkout earlier this month by eight members of the editorial staff at The Source, a spokesman for the hip-hop magazine said the December issue would be published on time.
Temporary staffers have been hired.
"It's business as usual," the spokesman, Paul Freundlich, said.


Mercantile Bancorp (MTL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
Players from the Netherlands have made a very visible mark in international competition in recent years, including a victory in the 1993 Bermuda Bowl in Santiago, Chile.
The latest among numerous successes by Dutch women players came in Albuquerque, N.M., on Oct. 1.
The field in the World Women's Pairs was the strongest ever, and Bep Vriend and Carla Arnolds captured a title they had come close to winning four years earlier in Geneva.
Another Dutch pair, Elly Schippers and Marijke van der Pas, finished fourth after winning a battle of wits on the diagramed deal.
After a three-spade opening from West, Schippers landed in a good six-diamond contract.
This would have been easy after a spade lead, allowing the spade queen to score in the dummy.
A passive lead in a red suit would have done no better: After drawing trumps South would have finessed the club queen, expecting, if this failed, to develop dummy's fifth club as the 12th trick.


Teleflex Inc.(TFX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Rubbermaid Inc.(RBD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Treasury To Sell Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.84 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 5.25 percent.


DANCE
When Ordinary Objects Become Extraordinary  Dia Center for the Arts
Steve Gross is an eloquent poet of a choreographer with an unself-conscious gift for making ordinary objects and gestures glow.
"Crush &amp; Glitter," presented on Thursday night, was created for performance in Mr.
Gross's apartment.
A powerful, luminous bit of haiku, it recreates daily life and passion in intensely concentrated form in an hour's worth of what one might be tempted to call a duet were it not for the constellation of objects through which Mr.
Gross and RoseAnne Spradlin move.


President's Judicial Appointments: Diverse, but Well in the Mainstream
While running for office two years ago, Bill Clinton promised to reshape the character of the Federal courts, reversing the trend to the right under the Reagan and Bush Administrations.
But given the opportunity to choose more judges in his first two years than any President in history, Mr.
Clinton has made selections that are not expected to change the ideological hue of the bench, although they have won high praise for their diversity and quality.


Commerce Bancshares (CBSH,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Executive Quits Bates Worldwide
Andrew Cracknell, who held several top positions at Bates Worldwide and its agencies in the United States and Britain, has resigned, effective immediately, because of what Bates described as a "yet unresolved contractual dispute."
Mr.
Cracknell, 48, had been vice chairman and executive creative director of Bates Dorland in London for six years before being appointed to the additional duties of worldwide executive creative director in November.
In January, he was also named vice chairman and executive creative director of Bates USA in New York, but seven months later he relinquished his New York duties to spend more time in London.


U.N. Council Unanimous In Condemning Iraq Move
After more than 12 hours of posturing, bickering and compromising, the Security Council unanimously approved a resolution on Saturday with a clear signal to Iraq that despite differences over how to deal with President Saddam Hussein, Council members were united in condemning his renewed threat to the Persian Gulf region.
When the vote, 15 to 0, was announced less than 30 minutes before midnight, it was evident that Iraq had lost its gamble that disagreements among Western allies or between the United States and Russia would paralyze action in the Council.


First Tennessee National Corp.(FTEN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Voters in Manhattan Have Another Choice
To the Editor:
This year there is an independent candidate in the race in Manhattan's 14th Congressional District.
I am on the ballot on the Green Party line.
In a time when polls show serious dissatisfaction with politics as usual, I am trying to challenge the corrupt system of big-money politics.


2 Slain by Attaches on Aristide's First Full Day Back
At least two people were beaten and hacked to death here today when paramilitary auxiliaries opposed to President Jean-Bertrand Aristide attacked some of his supporters who had just emerged from hiding.
The incident marred the first full day of Father Aristide's second turn as President of Haiti, which he spent quietly and in privacy as his allies took to the pulpit to preach the reconciliation and justice he has promised will be the hallmark of the rest of his term of office.


Cure Worse Than a Cold
To the Editor:
The attempt to "cure" a cold by using a drug that suppresses the immune system in conjunction with another drug to "kill" the virus that causes the cold seems to be counter-productive (news article, Oct. 9).


Chock Full O'Nuts (CHF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


World Economies


After a Court Fight, Old Totems Return to an Alaskan Village
A set of Indian totems considered a great treasure of the Northwest and eagerly sought by East Coast museums, has been returned to its native home but now lies unseen there in a storage shed.
A decade ago, the artworks were secretly taken from the tiny Tlingit Indian village of Klukwan by the Indian family that possessed them, but after a long legal battle, they were returned to their ancestral village on Oct. 3.


American President Cos.(APS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 23


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Inventory-Sales Ratio . . .
Aug.
Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Balance of Trade . . .
Aug.
Thursday  Housing Starts . . .
Sept.
Building Permits . . .
Sept.
Personal Income . . . 2d Qtr.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  None


Union Files a Complaint For Joffrey Dancers
The American Guild of Musical Artists has filed a demand with the American Arbitration Association on behalf of the dancers of the Joffrey Ballet.
The union, which announced the action late Friday, has charged the ballet company with non-payment of two weeks of work in the spring season this year and in the 1986-87 and 1987-88 seasons, as well as medical reimbursements for the 1993-94 season, severance pay, pension contributions and salary and overtime adjustments in the last three years.
The company is also charged with failure to pass along to the union the dues deducted from the dancers' paychecks.
"We felt for a very long time there has been a big coverup about the financial troubles of the company," a spokesman for the dancers, who are on tour in Hawaii, said yesterday.
"The Joffrey's biggest fear has been that no one would give money to a financially troubled company. But it seems nobody's giving money anyway to a company that is supposedly in good health because of 'Billboards.' The Joffrey has been living a lie in many ways."


Cameras in the Simpson Trial
Angry over an inaccurate news report about the O. J. Simpson murder case, Judge Lance Ito has suggested that he may not allow cameras at the trial.
The law gives the judge broad power to forbid or control courtroom cameras, but it would be most unfortunate for justice if he let his anger decide the issue.
This celebrated case, however much glitz has attached to it, needs to be televised.
With or without camera coverage of the trial, the Simpson case is plagued by global attention and pretrial publicity that complicates the process of picking an impartial jury.
The fame of the accused and the grisly killings of his former wife Nicole and her friend Ronald Goldman make widespread coverage inevitable regardless of how the courtroom action is covered.
But even the inaccurate and damaging news stories argue for camera coverage, not against.


Trying to Make a House Into a Home
High on the list of this season's series trends are orphans and dogs.
"Party of Five," on Monday nights at 9 on Fox, has both.
These orphans are five siblings, 11 months to 24 years, whose parents have been killed in an accident caused by a drunken driver.
Determined to stay together, the Salinger brood agrees to let the eldest, aimless Charlie (Matthew Fox), move back into the house as their legal guardian.
Thurber, the English bulldog, is played by 2-year-old Bull's-eye.
Yes, the premise is at best sticky: still another television youth-stroking exercise suggesting the dispensability of parents.
And, yes, this being Fox, home of "Beverly Hills 90210," now the lead-in to "Party of Five," each and every one of these brothers and sisters is adorable in standard America-the-beautiful fashion.


The Labor Scorecard: Closures 2, Creativity 0
The owners don't understand why the players don't understand.
"It must have some impact to have 28 baseball owners and 26 hockey owners saying we have to change the system," said John McMullen, owner of the New Jersey Devils and former owner of the Houston Astros, discussing the mutual labor problems of both sports.


Dexter Corp.(DEX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Grainger (W.W.) Inc.(GWW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THEATER
Telling Precious Secrets Just as Children Do  Theater at St. Clement's
A sister and brother, Chinese-Americans approaching 60, seem to be playing elaborate conversational games in "Arthur and Leila" by the San Francisco playwright Cherylene Lee.
In fact they are exploring their affection for each other at a time when each feels increasingly alone in a strange world.


Atrocious in Anaheim: Giants' Fuel Gauge Is Now Pointing to Empty
When things go bad during a streak like this, or "bad wrong" as Giants Coach Dan Reeves likes to say, they go bad in a hurry.
Three straight victories.
Now three straight losses.
If anyone has any answers -- because the Giants don't -- the team will be fielding calls at 1-900-GOING-DOWNHILL.
Downhill and downhill fast.
This has gone beyond the Giants' trying to work hard to make it right.
Or correctable mistakes.
Or staying together as a team.
After losing to the Los Angeles Rams today, 17-10, before 40,474 at Anaheim Stadium, this is beginning to enter the realm of panic.
When the coaches don't have the answers, when the players shake their heads as if someone asked them to explain the theory of relativity when they were simply asked to explain what's gone wrong, something is indeed bad wrong.


Hilton Hotels Corp.(HLT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Israel Says Peace Effort Will Continue
Ready for a fresh start, Israel said today that it would resume negotiations that it had broken off with the Palestine Liberation Organization and also reopen the Gaza Strip, blockaded for nearly a week because of the kidnapping of an Israeli soldier by Islamic radicals.
Spokesmen for Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said new talks on Palestinian elections in the West Bank and Gaza would begin on Tuesday in Cairo, and Gazans would once again be allowed on Monday to leave for jobs in Israel.


No Headline
"I am not sure whether the coalition will have a majority of one, two or three seats, but it is still a coalition of losers." -- RUDOLF SCHARPING, conceding defeat in the German national election.  [ A1:6. ]


Woof! Ka-boom! Zoom! Neon Lights Up the Day
Deion Sanders's return to the Georgia Dome was greeted with the warmth reserved for a sneering banker who has just foreclosed on an orphanage.
He was booed during the warm-ups and hissed at during the player introductions.
Sanders provided thrills for the fans of Atlanta for five years as a cornerback and returnman, and signed with the 49ers as a free agent two weeks into the season.
He returned here as the villain and he played it for everything it was worth in the 49ers' 42-3 rout of the Falcons.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Added Jeff Manto, third baseman, and Cesar Devarez, catcher, to the 40-man roster.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
ORLANDO MAGIC -- Re-signed Anfernee Hardaway, guard, to a 10-year contract.
Hockey  National Hockey League
DALLAS STARS -- Sent Jarkko Varvio, right wing, to HPK of the Finnish Hockey League.
Bought out the contract of Mike Needham, right wing.
NEW YORK ISLANDERS -- Traded Jason Zent, left wing, to the Ottawa Senators for a fifth-round pick in 1996.
East Coast Hockey League
DAYTON BOMBERS -- Waived Derek Edgerly and Pat Meehan, forwards, and Greg Godbez, defenseman.
WHEELING THUNDERBIRDS -- Traded the rights to Darren Schwartz, left wing, to the Tallahassee Tiger Sharks for cash and future consideration.


Hollywood Falls Hard for Animation
Hollywood executives, once more, are predicting a Golden Age of film animation in the 1990's, with virtually every major studio putting together an animation team that it hopes can replicate the success of the Walt Disney Company.
One of the most provocative challenges to Disney's dominance could come from Jeffrey Katzenberg, who in the last decade brought Disney's animation operation to its peak, left the company when he was passed over for promotion and is now forming a new Hollywood studio in partnership with Steven Spielberg and David Geffen.


CHRONICLE
Just before Rosh ha-Shanah last month, GILBERT LEVINE , conductor laureate of the Cracow Philharmonic Orchestra in Poland, learned that POPE JOHN PAUL II had chosen him for a papal knighthood.
Ten days later, on his way to Yom Kippur services, he received a scroll confirming his elevation to the Equestrian Order of St.
Gregory the Great.
"Talk about timing," Mr.
Levine, who lives in Manhattan and Paris, said the other day.
"This is the first time a Jewish person in the United States has ever received a papal knighthood, and I will be only one of four Jews in the history of the papacy to be knighted."


Evidence Re-examined: A special report; Questions Raised In One Conviction In Blast at Towers
All through his trial in the World Trade Center bombing case, it was clear that Ahmad M. Ajaj was in a different category from his three co-defendants.
Unlike the others, he could not have been part of the actual bombing, since he was in prison at the time.
Furthermore, there was no evidence that he had even previously known any of the other men on trial.
But the Government convinced the jury that Mr.
Ajaj -- who did not testify in his own behalf -- had played a role in the early stages of the conspiracy, helping, in the prosecution's version of events, the mastermind to get into the country with military manuals.
After the jury returned its guilty verdict, he was sentenced as an equal partner with the others -- to 240 years in prison.


Israeli's Death: Atrocity or Act of War?
When Nahshon Waxman, the Israeli soldier killed after being abducted by Islamic militants, was buried Saturday night, thousands of Israelis poured into the darkness of the Mount Herzl military cemetery at midnight to mourn a man they considered their latest martyr.
A Palestinian mother of four in this refugee camp near the West Bank town of Ramallah saw things in a different light today.
She preferred to focus not so much on the violent outcome -- three kidnappers and another Israeli soldier also died in the rescue attempt -- as the stated aim of the hostage-taking: to force the release of Palestinian prisoners from Israeli jails in return for the soldier's life.


Jabil Circuit Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Leveling Charges: Character Question
The Cuomo campaign accuses State Senator George E. Pataki of lying during a debate.
Mr.
Pataki, in turn, accuses his opponent of trying to divert attention from the issues.
The dispute is just one example of how character has emerged as a prime focus in New York's gubernatorial race.
It started with a news conference on Saturday, when officials of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's campaign charged that Mr.
Pataki had been paid by his law firm during the 1980's even after he had promised to give up such income to avoid a conflict of interest.


Matsushita's Chief May Meet on MCA
Masaharu Matsushita, the chairman of the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, may attend a meeting tomorrow with top-level executives of MCA in Hawaii to discuss the issue of management control at MCA, the film and entertainment subsidiary of Matsushita.
MCA's chairman, Lew R. Wasserman, and president, Sidney J. Sheinberg, both plan to fly to Hawaii, several people with knowledge of the meeting, said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  GERMAN LEADER HOLDING ON
With 100 percent of the vote counted in German elections, Chancellor Helmut Kohl suffered heavy losses but his coalition held on to a narrow majority.
A1


Gay Sailor Claims a Victory As Court Case Deadline Passes
A homosexual sailor who has waged a two-year legal battle against his discharge by the Navy said today that he had prevailed because the Government allowed a legal deadline to pass on Friday without challenging an appeals court decision in his favor.
Lawyers for the Navy flight instructor, Petty Officer Keith Meinhold, said the Government did not file a required notice seeking a review of a Sept. 1 decision by a panel of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in San Francisco.
The judges ruled that the Navy could not discharge Mr.
Meinhold merely because he is gay.


Kansas City Power &amp; Light Co.(KLT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Golden West Financial Corp.(GDW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Explosive Emotions Recalled in Tranquillity
"There are moments that redefine an afternoon, and there are moments that redefine a life," a character tells the audience in Israel Horovitz's "Unexpected Tenderness." There are also plays that get away with lines like that one through sheer sentimental momentum, and there are plays that do not.
This latest effort by the prolific Mr.
Horovitz, directed by Steve Zuckerman at the WPA Theater, does not.
A by-the-book, reminiscence-framed portrait of a Jewish blue-collar family living in the shadow of an abusive father in the 1950's, "Unexpected Tenderness" is descended from a long, weary line of works portraying explosive emotions recollected in philosophical tranquillity.


Investment Broker Is Fatally Shot On the East Side
An investment banker who had just had dinner with friends was found dying of a gunshot wound early yesterday on a walkway near the Mayor's residence on the Upper East Side, the police said.
Detectives said they had no motive in the death of Robert J. Kase, a managing director of Furman Selz Inc., who staggered up to a man about 2 A.M. on a path of Carl Schurz Park and said he had been shot.
The park overlooks the East River at 84th Street.


A 'Wild Child' Conflict: Science vs. Compassion
The child at issue in tomorrow night's absorbing offering from "Nova" is Genie, a teen-ager who was taken from her parents in 1970 after spending most of her life in a sort of solitary confinement, strapped to a potty chair.
Her father seems to have been at best a lunatic, at worst a sadist; her mother was apparently weak and frightened.
When Genie (a pseudonym) was found at the age of 13, she could not speak and behaved in some ways like an animal.
In addition to stirring the compassion of Los Angeles child psychologists, Genie presented them with an opportunity for what was known as the "forbidden experiment." The hope was that her sad condition would enable researchers to test the thesis that the ability to speak a language must be learned by puberty if it is to be learned at all. (The perfect test, to keep a normal baby isolated during the so-called critical period before puberty, is of course forbidden.)


Diebold Inc.(DBD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Gentle Art of Those Who Preserve Art
Curators hang it, viewers flock to it, scholars study it.
But the people who know art most intimately are the people who preserve it.
In a large room with clear northern light at the Museum of Modern Art, Antoinette King, the museum's director of conservation, gently touches a small tubular sculpture sitting on a worktable.
"This is one of 18 related pieces by Eva Hesse that came to the museum soon after her death in 1970," she said.
"We knew from a photograph taken during the artist's lifetime that they were supposed to be white. But they'd sat in the back of her studio for a few years and by the time we got them they were dark gray. Obviously, they had to be cleaned, but we couldn't do anything until we knew what they were made of."


Paine Webber Reported Near Deal for Kidder
The General Electric Company has agreed in principle to sell the bulk of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company to the Paine Webber Group for about $670 million in stock, people involved in the negotiations said yesterday.
A final agreement is expected today.
Both sides were said last night to be hammering out terms of the deal, which would create the fourth-largest brokerage house.


Chargers 6-0 on Means's Legs and Carney's Foot
Chargers 36, Saints 22
Coach Bobby Ross wants the San Diego Chargers to know one thing about their perfect record -- it's just a beginning.


Sports of The Times; The Blitzes That Battered Bledsoe
THE word is derived from blitzkreig, when Hitler's tanks rumbled through Poland and France and Belgium in the early years of World War II, but in football it's simply known as a blitz: when a linebacker or a defensive back tries to assault the quarterback.
As the Jets and the Patriots did yesterday.
"It was a tough day for a quarterback," Boomer Esiason was saying after having been sacked six times.
"I think Drew Bledsoe would attest to that. They started blitzing and we started blitzing."


Bombing Conviction Is Raising Questions
Ahmad M. Ajaj was convicted in the World Trade Center bombing case and sentenced to spend 240 years in prison.
Yet he was in prison at the time of the attack, and there was no indication that Mr.
Ajaj had previously known any of the other three men who were convicted and sentenced with him.


Evidence Re-examined: A special report; Questions Raised In One Conviction In Blast at Towers
All through his trial in the World Trade Center bombing case, it was clear that Ahmad M. Ajaj was in a different category from his three co-defendants.
Unlike the others, he could not have been part of the actual bombing, since he was in prison at the time.
Furthermore, there was no evidence that he had even previously known any of the other men on trial.
But the Government convinced the jury that Mr.
Ajaj -- who did not testify in his own behalf -- had played a role in the early stages of the conspiracy, helping, in the prosecution's version of events, the mastermind to get into the country with military manuals.
After the jury returned its guilty verdict, he was sentenced as an equal partner with the others -- to 240 years in prison.


With Embargo Lifted, Haitians Scramble for Trade
In the mad math of this country in the final hours before commerce restarts its engines after months of a tightened embargo, gasoline reached $30 a gallon today -- when it could be found.
With supplies of smuggled fuel dwindling, black-market entrepreneurs dispatched street vendors to prey on hapless drivers puttering along on almost empty tanks.


Defense Dept. Plays Shell Game in Office Move
To the Editor:
Re "Study Says Military Bases Survive Plan to Shut Them" (news article, Oct. 10):


Appearance by North Korean Heir Apparent Quiets Speculation
Kim Jong Il, the son of North Korea's former leader, appeared in public today for the first time in nearly three months, partly allaying suspicions that he is ill and raising expectations that he will soon complete the process of formally succeeding his father, who died in July.
Mr.
Kim appeared this afternoon in Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, at a ceremony to mark the end of the 100-day mourning period for his father, Kim Il Sung.


Polaris Industries Partners L.P.(SNO,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Perry Visit Seeks to Rebuild Ties With Chinese Military
The Clinton Administration began a new effort today to rebuild ties with the Chinese armed forces as William J. Perry became the first American Secretary of Defense to visit China since the military's crackdown against democracy supporters at Tiananmen Square in 1989.
The high-level visit, which has become a matter of contention in Washington, is taking place against the backdrop of expanding economic relations between the United States and China as well as differences over Chinese weapons sales, nuclear testing and human rights abuses.


Micro Warehouse Inc.(MWHS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hubbell Inc.(HUB.B,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Warning Sounded on Russian Airline Safety
A joint Russian-American report says safety standards on Russian airlines will soon fail to meet international standards unless the Government takes swift action to retrain personnel and improve its supervision.
The report, compiled by more than 50 Russian and American experts and issued on Friday, found Russia "minimally meets" safety levels of the International Civil Aviation Organization, a United Nations agency that sets air standards.
But the experts said there were potentially serious shortcomings in the Russian civil aviation system.


Rowan Cos.(RDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
NATALIE CUMMINGS, 5 years old, is used to seeing her mother, MAUREEN McCORMICK , project a fresh-scrubbed, nice-girl image.
Ms.
McCormick is, after all, the actress who portrayed Marcia, the oldest sister on "The Brady Bunch" in the early 1970's.
So it came as something of a shock to Natalie when Ms.
McCormick showed her daughter a tape of the movie version of "Grease!" and told her that she would be playing the "bad girl" role of Betty Rizzo.


Despite a Resurgence in Advertising, Newspaper Stocks Are Languishing
With advertising returning to newspapers in most parts of the country, much of the financial news for the American newspaper industry is good.
But the stock market does not seem to have noticed.
The share prices of most big newspaper companies have remained listless recently.


A Dispute About Disks; U.S. Tries to Keep Secrets That Aren't Any More
The cold war is over but the Government has drawn a new line in the sand to control military exports: Technological information can be sent abroad if it is found in a book, but not if it is on a computer disk.
In an action that illustrates the difficulty of preserving the nation's military export controls in the information age, the State Department has denied the request of a California engineer to export a computer disk that has samples of some powerful and widely used software encoding formulas.


Baltimore Bancorp (BBB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Job Crisis for a Comic Menagerie
What, exactly, lies beyond "The Far Side"?
For the next two months, this rather unsettling question will haunt millions of newspaper readers worldwide.
Another slightly less cosmic riddle to ponder at the breakfast table: what happens to a sizable literary and merchandising empire when its whimsical creator suddenly decides to lay down his pen and take it easy for the next 30 or 40 years?
The cartoonist Gary Larson announced this month that he was retiring and would stop drawing new installments of "The Far Side," his deeply idiosyncratic, wildly popular, single-panel comic strip.
Beginning Jan. 2, his repertory company of talking cows, addled entomologists, joy-riding extraterrestrials, accident-prone deer, garrulous amoebas and others, will disappear from the more than 1,900 publications that carry Mr.
Larson's work.


Fifth Third Bancorp (FITB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CCB Financial Corp.(CCBF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Essay; What To Run Against?
At 29, Mike Herson of Middletown, N.J., is the youngest Republican candidate for Congress.
With a law degree from Rutgers and a master's in national security affairs from Georgetown, this determined young man put in a couple of years at the Pentagon and then went home to challenge a standard Republican pol in the primary.
To everyone's surprise, Herson -- running on shoeleather and a shoestring -- whipped the establishment candidate nearly two to one.


Teacher Salaries
Public-school teacher salaries in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut have leveled off after rising faster than the rate of inflation earlier in the decade.
Salaries rose as efforts to improve education focused attention on the problems of the nation's public schools.
Teachers in the region are still among the best paid in the nation but tightening state budgets and contentious collective bargaining have held down pay raises.
The region still devotes a greater share of its school budgets to teacher salaries compared with other parts of the country.
Nationally, the share of school budgets that went for salaries was 52 percent in 1964; this year it was down to 39 percent.


Asian Investors Create A Pocket of Prosperity
As California struggles to pull out of its economic slump, one smoggy corner of Los Angeles County has found, quite by chance, a reliable economic engine: large-scale Asian investment.
The area, the San Gabriel Valley just east of Los Angeles, managed to avoid the worst of the economic downturn of the last few years because it relied less than other communities on the now-collapsing defense and aerospace industries.


Dauphin Deposit Corp.(DAPN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Accounts
*
Dial Corp., Phoenix, to LCF&amp;L, New York, to introduce Dial dishwashing liquid and automatic dishwashing detergent.
The agency already handles other Dial Corp. brands like Renuzit air fresheners and Spirit soap.
Billings were not disclosed.
LCF&amp;L was also named to handle new-product assignments in Dial's laundry and food divisions.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The belief that the United States economy cannot deliver the higher pay that American workers want must confront a new fact: Most of the 5.5 million jobs the economy has added in the last two and a half years are in occupations that pay more, not less, than the average.
This year alone, 72 percent of the 2.5 million new jobs have been for managers and for professionals.  [ Page A1. ]


Killer Serving 100 Years Is Held in Death of Inmate
A man who is serving a 100-year sentence for murdering a Federal witness and three CBS technicians in New York City in 1982 killed a fellow inmate at Auburn Correctional Facility yesterday, a state prison official said.
Investigators believe that the man, Donald Nash, 58, used a foot-long piece of wood imbedded with several side-by-side razor blades to attack the other prisoner, Roy Tucker, 46, as the two men were preparing breakfast for other inmates.


This Week, at Least, the Voters Favor Penn State
The predictable, tired question is suddenly, breathlessly, more relevant for Penn State.
Joe Paterno has faced the issue of the polls -- "Where do you deserve to be ranked?" -- for a long time, so long that one of his undefeated Nittany Lion teams lost a chance to win a national championship when a football fan named Nixon proclaimed Texas the champion a quarter-century ago, well before the current players were born.


Ex-Soviet States Need All-Purpose Union; Justified Fear of Russia
To the Editor:
How noble that Grigory A. Yavlinsky proposes a voluntary integration of Russia's neighbors as a counterweight to Russia's own neo-imperialist extremists like Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky (Op-Ed, Oct. 9).


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  Schumacher Wins in Spain, His 8th Title  Michael Schumacher came back from a two-race suspension with a victory yesterday in the European Grand Prix in Jerez, Spain.
In winning his eighth title this season, the German looked anything but rusty, averaging 113.43 miles per hour and lapping all but three of 26 cars in the race.
Damon Hill, in a Williams-Renault, was 24.689 seconds behind in second place and fell 5 points back in the standing. (AP) FOOTBALL  Rice Finally Finds a Way to Beat Texas
After losing 28 years in a row to Texas, Rice finally put the streak to rest last night in Houston.
Behind a a swarming defense and two touchdown passes by Josh LaRocca, the Owls beat the Longhorns by 19-17.
Texas, ranked No. 13 by the Associated Press and No. 18 by The New York Times computer, the favorite to capture the Southwestern Conference title, had dominated the series since losing to the Owls, 20-17, in 1965.
The Owls (3-2, 2-0) were ready from the start.
They scored nine points before Texas (4-2, 1-1) ran an offensive play.
Rice drove 74 yards with the opening kickoff for a 24-yard field goal by Matt Huelsman.
When Josh Sumner bobbled the following kickoff, Jay Lamy recovered at the Texas 33.
LaRocca needed only one play to find Byron Coston for the touchdown. (AP) GOLF  Els Adds World Title to U.S.
Open Victory  A day before his 25th birthday, Ernie Els defeated Colin Montgomerie, 4 and 2, in the final of the world match-play championship in Virginia Water, England.
Els won the United States Open this summer and his victory yesterday earned the South African the biggest golf paycheck in European golf history -- $240,000.
Montgomerie, a Scot, failed to hole three short putts for pars on the outward nine and failed to make any putt from more than 10 feet in the 34-hole match. (AP) First Victory: Bob Estes, buoyed by a four-stroke lead entering the final round, shot a one-under-par 70 yesterday to win the Texas Open in San Antonio for the first title of his seven-year PGA Tour career.
Estes won by a stroke, covering the tight, tree-lined Oak Hills Country Club course in 19-under 265.
Gil Morgan and Don Pooley each closed to a stroke, but neither could catch Estes.
Morgan finished second at 266 after a bogey-free round of 67.
Pooley (68) was another shot back at 267. (AP) TENNIS  Ivanisevic Defeats Chang at Super Seiko  Top-seeded Goran Ivanisevic had forehand and backhand winners to add to his usual supply of aces and volleys for a 6-4, 6-4 victory over sixth-seeded Michael Chang yesterday in the Super Seiko final in Tokyo.
Chang was playing in his first tournament since the United States Open. (AP) ASIAN GAMES  China Takes 41 Percent of Gold Medals  China won four track events on the final day of the Asian Games in Hiroshima, Japan, yesterday and wound up with 137 -- or 41 percent -- of the 337 gold medals at stake in the competition.
Uzbekistan, a games newcomer, defeated China in the gold-medal soccer game, 4-2, in the final event of the Asiad.
China finished as the leader in golds and overall medals for the third straight time.
South Korea finished with 63 golds, and Japan was third with 59. (AP) YACHT RACING  Autissier Slows Down, but Still Holds Lead  After five days riding the coattails of a windy low-pressure system in the South Atlantic Ocean, the solo sailor Isabelle Autissier entered an area of calms yesterday that slowed her pace.
Still ahead by nearly 800 miles over her next closest rival, Autissier leads 19 lone skippers in the B.O.C. single-handed around-the-world yacht race.
David Scully, of Chicago, a competitor whose tactical errors have left him seventh in the fleet, rallied yesterday by covering 194 miles, the longest distance of the day.


Militant Killed, 7 Held in Cairo In Hunt for Novelist's Attackers
The police fatally shot a Muslim militant and arrested seven others suspected of having been behind the attempt to kill the novelist Naguib Mahfouz, the Interior Ministry said today.
Mr.
Mahfouz, 82, who won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1988, was stabbed in the neck several times as he sat in a car outside his Cairo home on Friday.
He is recovering from emergency surgery.


STATISTICS REVEAL BULK OF NEW JOBS PAY OVER AVERAGE
The notion that Americans are working more for less pay is firmly embedded in public rhetoric.
And it is practically gospel that the growing American economy cannot deliver the higher pay that American workers want.
No doubt many Americans are losing ground economically.
But in fact most of the 5.5 million jobs the economy has added in the last two and a half years are in occupations that pay more, not less, than the average, which is now about $15.50 an hour.


Hunt (J.B.) Transport Services Inc.(JBHT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Making Workfare Work: It Doesn't Come Cheap
IF the Giuliani administration is serious about putting able-bodied welfare recipients to work, the Mayor might want to take a close look at his neighbor downtown, the Port Authority.
It has, in cooperation with the city and the state, employed people on welfare for about two years and by all reports, it has done so successfully.
But it takes time, money and effort.


Cuomo Tactic And the Risk
As New York's gubernatorial campaign enters its final phase, officials in both campaigns say a key strategic question is whether Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo can succeed in discrediting State Senator George E. Pataki in the minds of undecided voters.
The answer, they say, will be influenced not just by Mr.
Cuomo's attacks but also by Mr.
Pataki's response to them.
So far, Mr.
Pataki has concentrated on attacking Mr.
Cuomo, while providing an incomplete picture of himself and his agenda.


Louisiana-Pacific Corp.(LPX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Credit Unions Throw a Lifeline to the Poor
To the Editor:
In "Better Than Cash" (Op-Ed, Oct. 12), James R. Barth and R. Dan Brumbaugh Jr. propose a Federal mutual fund to serve the bill-paying needs of the poor.
This, they say, will render obsolete "community development banks -- small banks financed by Government subsidies and situated in poor neighborhoods."


Many 125th Street Vendors Say They Will Resist Move
At first glimpse, it was a typical Sunday of bustle, energy and rhythm along 125th Street, Harlem's main commercial thoroughfare.
A young couple returning from church stopped to listen to a gospel tape at one vendor's table.
An older German man and his daughter bought from another vendor a huge, blue sweatshirt with one bold yellow word -- Harlem -- across the front.
And a young man, his hair in dreadlocks, patronized another vendor, buying a pair of jeans that, in line with current fashion, was of a size much wider than his own waist.


Pentair Inc.(PNTA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ask a Tired Father Why He Earns Less
To the Editor:
As disadvantaged groups go, fathers in dual-profession families do not rank high on most people's lists.
Nevertheless, as a parent of young children, the husband of a medical resident and an associate at a law firm, I was glad to see some attention to the topic in "Men Whose Wives Work Earn Less, Studies Show" (front page, Oct. 12).
You overlook an important reason for the inescapable proposition that male professionals in this position are generally less productive than their counterparts in single-career marriages: child care is a lot of work.
While I doubt that most employers are prejudiced against dual-profession fathers, I suspect that the careers of these fathers lag for a variety of reasons, many of them best understood by dual-profession fathers themselves.
To describe the disparity as a "daddy penalty" misconstrues the issue.


METRO DIGEST
CUOMO ON THE ATTACK: ASSESSING RISKS
As New York's gubernatorial campaign enters its final phase, officials in both campaigns say a key strategic question is whether Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo can succeed in discrediting State Senator George E. Pataki in the minds of undecided voters.


A Victory for Rams, but Not for Los Angeles
On weekdays, the Los Angeles Rams are wined and dined by Baltimore and St.
Louis.
Today, they chewed on New York.
Their fans have departed, their roster is depleted and their owner, Georgia Frontiere, can't bear to look at her bank statement, but the Rams still had enough in their repertory this afternoon to handle the Giants, 17-10.


Correction
An obituary on Sept. 22 about Arthur B. Krim, former chairman of United Artists, associated him incorrectly with one film.
"Heaven's Gate," a financial disaster, was commissioned by the mangement group that followed him at United.


Eagles Get Clever, and It Costs Them
Maybe it is unfair to say that the Dallas Cowboys sometimes look bored, but you could at least say that this regular-season stuff is like an appetizer for the Cowboys.
You sense it.
They sometimes need an attention-grabber to reach their highest level.
When a team has won two straight Super Bowls, it has played in bigger games than the one today.
In each of the last two seasons, the Cowboys have frolicked in Pasadena and Atlanta in the season's final game, and they have every intention of doing the same in Super Bowl XXVIIII in Miami this January.


Hard Life Is Getting Harder For South Africa's Domestics
A desperate call came into the drab offices of the domestic workers' union here one recent afternoon.
It was from a maid who had worked 10 straight years without a day off and was being dismissed after asking for a day to herself.
A roomful of domestics, in their third-hand clothes and trademark berets, overheard the conversation.
They were tired and far from their homelands and had not seen their families since Christmas.
They ate, slept and talked to their children at the pleasure of their employers.
Some fretted that they had to get back to make supper for the bosses and wash their dishes and pick up their shoes.
Some could lose their jobs if their employers knew they were dallying with the union.
Indeed, some already had.


For Pats, Going for It Has Its Ups and Downs
Going for it on fourth down is usually the mark of a desperate team.
But today, the New England Patriots said they had no other choice.
The Patriots, who had run eight fourth-down plays in their first six games, nearly doubled their season output here against the Jets.
Trailing almost from the outset, New England lined up for a play on the final down eight times this afternoon.
Seven times, the Pats got the play off (the Jets jumped offside on the other).


The Gossip Is a Hiccup, but the Book a Banquet
THE WESTERN CANON The Books and School of the Ages  By Harold Bloom  578 pages.
Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $29.95.
The gossip surrounding Harold Bloom's new work of literary criticism, "The Western Canon," has mostly focused on the section that ends the book and quirkily predicts which contemporary American writers are likely to endure.
This is good grist for parlor games and hurt feelings.


EG&amp;G Inc.(EGG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Family Dollar Stores Inc.(FDO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Glass's 2d Symphony Has World Premiere
Standing midstream is a very different experience from surveying the course of a river from a safe height, and on Friday night at the Brooklyn Philharmonic's first concert of the season, I felt as if I had waded into some peculiar compositional currents.
It was often difficult to discern exactly where the three compositions, all commissioned by the orchestra, were leading and where they fit into the traditions they each invoked.
There was plenty of movement, but little sense of direction.
The greatest frustration at the Brooklyn Academy of Music was inspired by the world premiere of Philip Glass's Second Symphony.
Two years ago, I felt some excitement at the premiere of his First Symphony.
Mr.
Glass had taken the woozy, alienated music of David Bowie's "Low" album and transformed it into a highly original, lyrical meditation.
He used the tools of Minimalism to give a different spin to the American symphonic heritage.
Over the course of 50 minutes, the music sustained a narrative that stitched different esthetics together into a convincing whole.


Market Place; Solid, not sexy, Beneficial is seen as an 'all-weather' investment.
INTEREST rates are still feeling upward pressure and debt levels are moving back into precincts not seen since the late 1980's, but a number of Wall Street analysts say this is still a good time to invest in companies whose primary purpose is lending money to consumers.
Not only are consumer loan companies trading at low multiples relative to their earnings, but changing borrowing trends and superior asset and liability management have made a few of them fairly immune to cyclical turns.
Perhaps the best example, they say, is the Beneficial Corporation, a $13 billion financial services company in Wilmington, Del., that is the largest independent consumer loan company in the United States.


A Futuristic Prison Awaits the Hard-Core 400
A pastel penitentiary of mirror-glass gun towers and hermetic cells opens its steel doors next month as the first Federal prison ever custom-built for the 400 most "predatory" convicts in the nation's booming penal system.
The new $60 million Administrative Maximum Facility glints here at the foot of the Rockies as impressive evidence of society's wrath and penology's adaptability as America's rate of imprisonment continues to rise to five times that of Western Europe's.


New Editor at Observer
The New York Observer, the weekly newspaper, said yesterday that the former political editor of Rolling Stone, Eric Etheridge, had joined the publication as executive editor.
Mr.
Etheridge previously held positions at 7 Days, Harper's and The Nation.
The Observer also said Michael Lewis, author of the book "Liar's Poker," would write a regular column on business, power and New York culture.


JAZZ
A Tribute to Count Basie Reflects Big-Band Glories  Carnegie Hall
The second half of a tribute to Count Basie by the Carnegie Hall Jazz Band on Thursday night consisted of a long, fragmented piece by the trombonist Dennis Wilson called "One More Time: Seven Years." Mr.
Wilson worked with Count Basie for seven years, and in this piece the music was interspersed with fragments of his recollections read by a narrator.


Cuomo Visits Black Churchgoers in Queens as Pataki Sets Up a New Base in Rockland
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo played to his political base yesterday, warning black churchgoers in his old neighborhood in Queens that a Republican governor would care less about them than he does.
Later in Manhattan, he crossed paths briefly with United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the man behind the man who would unseat him, at a breezy ground-breaking ceremony for the Holocaust museum.
The two men shook hands politely and walked on.
"We said hello -- sure, it's a beautiful day," said Mr.
D'Amato, the political patron of State Senator George E. Pataki, the Governor's Republican rival.
"I said, 'Hello, Mario.' He said, 'Hello, Al.' And this is a magnificent day and a great memorial."


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Cultural Center Opens With a World Premiere  Hostos Community College
Hostos Community College in the Bronx celebrated the opening of its new Center for the Arts and Culture on Friday night with the world premiere of Roberto Sierra's "Bayoan," an oratorio for voices, small chorus and orchestra.
Juan Manuel Rivera's libretto is based on a novel by Eugenio Maria de Hostos, the 19th-century Puerto Rican writer and patriot for whom the college is named; it tells the story of a descendant of the Arawak Indians, original inhabitants of the Antilles, who goes on a sort of reverse journey of exploration, seeking not his homeland but the soul of his colonial occupiers.


JWT/West Official Adds Role at Parent
Steve Darland, executive vice president and general manager of JWT/West in San Francisco, has been named to the additional new position of worldwide brand communications director for the parent J. Walter Thompson Company.


New Campaigns For Three Brands
Three big national marketers are introducing advertising that is significantly different from their previous efforts.
Anheuser-Busch Inc. is ending the "Proud to be your Bud" campaign for its flagship Budweiser brand, which was introduced in April 1993 but had been absent from television for the last several months.
Commercials carrying a new theme, "It's always been true . . . This Bud's for you," began running on Saturday.
That theme echoes a popular Budweiser slogan, "This Bud's for you," which ran from 1979 to 1990.
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in St.
Louis is the Budweiser agency.


Jogger Raped In the Park; 11th Victim This Year
A woman running laps around the reservoir in Central Park Saturday night was seized from behind and raped by a man wielding a knife, a few blocks from where another jogger was beaten and raped by a gang of youths in 1989, the police said.
Saturday's attack came with sexual assaults in Central Park already sharply on the rise.
The police said this was the 11th rape in the park this year, up from 9 in all of 1993 and 4 in 1992.


DANCE
From Classical Training Into Jazz's Fragmentation  Merkin Hall
Jazz and classical music have meshed on countless occasions in the 20th century, but the line between the two genres has perhaps never been so thin as in the work of the free-jazz pianist Marilyn Crispell, who gave a concert on Thursday night as part of the Knitting Factory's uptown series.


Trade Pact Side Deal Bears Little
Nine months after the North American Free Trade Agreement took effect, a side accord intended to safeguard the environment has shown virtually no results.
Two new agencies dealing with the Mexican border lack general managers and no cleanup projects are even close to starting.
Some environmental groups say the delays confirm their fears that increased commerce under the agreement will further damage the earth, water and air in Mexico and on the United States side of the border.


Cullen/Frost Bankers (CFBI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Camden's Aquarium Risks Ignominy; Drab Exhibits a Problem as Complex Fails to Lift Waterfront
Boston's aquarium has coral reefs.
New York's has breeding whales.
Baltimore's has dolphin shows.
Camden's has brown fish from New Jersey.
Sound like a sales problem?
The $53 million aquarium opened here in February 1992 after a wave of advertising featuring Caribbean music and pictures of brilliantly colored tropical fish darting around a coral reef.
But the aquarium has relatively few such fish, and no reef.
And while other aquariums nationwide are flourishing with a crowd-pleasing blend of education and entertainment, the Camden aquarium is struggling just to stay open.


First of America Bank Corp.(FOA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Central Fidelity Banks (CFBS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Abroad at Home; Can Peace Survive?
"I don't remember an incident when we were all so deeply involved," an Israeli friend said.
"People felt that something happened in their own family."
She was talking about the kidnapping of an Israeli soldier, Cpl.
Nahshon Waxman, by Hamas terrorists -- and his murder by them as an Israeli force unsuccessfully stormed the West Bank house where he was being held.
All of Israel had seen the videotape made by Hamas, with the young man pleading for his life, and all mourned his death.


Honda Set to Play Catch-Up in Mini-Van Market
The Honda Motor Company will try to plug a major hole in its product line on Thursday when it introduces its first mini-van.
The name of the van, Odyssey, couldn't be more appropriate.
That is because the Odyssey is only the first step in what is likely to be a long journey for Honda, as it tries to catch up in a booming part of the vehicle market that it has ignored for years.


Boatmen's Bancshares Inc.(BOAT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Potlatch Corp.(PCH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
In a stunning departure from royal tradition, PRINCE CHARLES is barring his soul in an authorized biography that says his overbearing father forced him into a loveless marriage with PRINCESS DIANA , The Associated Press reported yesterday.
"How could I have got it all so wrong?" Charles, 45, lamented in 1986, five years after his marriage, in one of the letters quoted in the book, "The Prince of Wales," which The Sunday Times is serializing.


Despite Rivals' Chip Speed, Intel Still Leads PC Market
Evidence continues to mount that rival chips keep getting faster and faster than those made by the Intel Corporation.
Yet Intel continues to hold more than 90 percent of the chip market for desktop personal computers -- because popular software is largely available only for Intel-compatible machines.
At an industry conference to be held here this week, MIPS Technologies, Advanced Micro Devices, Hewlett-Packard and I.B.M. will all offer details of their next-generation microprocessors, each of which will more than double the speed of today's fastest desktop computers.
All these chips are based on the RISC approach, which stands for reduced instruction set computing.


No Headline
"No one lost, no one won, we all won." -- YITHAK RABIN.  [ A12:1. ]
"Between us, hopefully, it's a fresh beginning, a fresh start." -- KING HUSSEIN.  [ A12:1. ]


National City Corp.(NCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Yanks' Key Set for Surgery
Jimmy Key will have arthroscopic surgery on his left shoulder tomorrow to determine whether the chronic weakness that he has endured since the second half of the season can be alleviated.
General Manager Gene Michael said yesterday that Key has been bothered by weakness in his shoulder that flares up when he makes certain movements.
A magnetic resonance imaging test performed last week found rotator tendinitis and inflammation.
The surgery will be performed by Dr.
James Andrews tomorrow in Birmingham, Ala.


Giants Have Found Their Proper Level: .500
The Giants win their first three games of the season, all against division rivals, and their supporters are convinced they are the greatest team since the Canton Bulldogs.
They lose their next three games and the now unsupportive supporters are convinced they would lose to a 1950 Ivy League 150-pound team.
As always, the truth lies somewhere in the middle.
These Giants are not a great team.
They are not an awful team.


Japan Plans to Conquer Sea's Depths
NO part of Japan is more than 75 miles from the sea.
With its fish catch three times that of the United States, its shipyards some of the world's most innovative and its Emperor a marine biologist, the land of nearly 7,000 isles in the past few years has quietly honed its technological skills to become a global leader in probing the depths of the world's seas and working hard to unlock their secrets.
It is an effort of no small moment, as the deep encompasses more than half the earth.


City's Advice on Central Park: Take a Friend
As he moved into the pale wash of a lantern alongside the Central Park Reservoir at 8:30 last night, Sammy Busby had the long straightaway on the western side of the reservoir jogging track to himself.
Despite the eerie solitude, despite the much-publicized rape on Saturday of a woman who was jogging on the same track, Mr.
Busby, an actor, said he did not feel threatened.
"I'm a pretty big fellow," he said, adding: "The women seem to be the victims."


U.S. Jets Fly Dry Runs on Iraq Targets to Show 'We're Here'
Comdr.
Charles Hautau of Branchville, N.J., wolfed down a meatball hero aboard this huge floating airfield, the newest of the Navy's nuclear-powered aircraft carriers, and talked about how he had spent his morning.
Precisely at 9:45 A.M., he said, he shot across the Kuwaiti border into Iraq in his A-6 Intruder, a Navy bomber.


Peoples Heritage Financial Group Inc.(PHBK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Beaten Officer Goes Home
A transit police officer who was brutally beaten by a group of young men in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, two weeks ago was released from Bellevue Hospital Center yesterday The officer, Detective Sgt.
Louis Cosentino, had been awakened early Oct. 2 by a disturbance in front of his apartment.
When he confronted about 10 youths, they took his gun and beat him unconscious, breaking most of his facial bones.
Nine youths have been arrested in the attack.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Advertisers gather to face their worst fears of mysterious interactive media.
In 1958, Billy Wilder came to the Hotel del Coronado here to film "Some Like It Hot." Thirty-six years later, the Association of National Advertisers has come to the same resort for an event that might be called "Some Like It Interactive."
Actually, the theme of the association's 85th annual meeting and business conference, which began Sunday, is "Mastering Innovation," which today means interactivity and other new media technology.


School's Integration Falling Short of Ideal
Anyone who still believes or hopes or dreams that America's schools are models for a more racially and ethnically integrated society will find "School Colors" dispiriting.
This revealing two-and-a-half-hour look at the 1993-94 academic year at Berkeley High in California, partly through the lenses of student video journalists, finds divisions and tensions that defy the best-intentioned efforts of teachers and administrators.
Considerable good will is in evidence on this "Frontline" offering, but the emphasis is on the conditions, emotions and ideologies that are keeping young people apart after 30 years of voluntary integration.
For all the school spirit on show at football games and homecoming celebrations, the seating remains largely self-segregated.


Regions Financial (RGBK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Q&amp;A
Nesting Boxes
Q.  How can I find out what kinds of birdhouse attract which birds?


Iraq Fails to Act on Security Council Proposal to Recognize Kuwait's Borders
The Iraqi Parliament held a closed session today that had been expected to yield formal recognition of Kuwait's sovereignty, but the meeting broke up without any acknowledgement that the lawmakers had even discussed the issue.
A vague statement issued later by the official Iraqi news agency said the 250-member assembly had discussed "situations in the Arab and international arena" and "the attitude toward the Security Council and recent Russian-Iraq talks." It was not clear when the Parliament would meet again.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Briefs; Learning the Hazards Of Full Disclosure
Bruce Benson thought he would score points for being honest.
Without prompting, the Republican, who is trying to unseat Gov.
Roy Romer, a Democrat, disclosed last month that he had twice been charged with drunken driving in the early 1980's.
And then came the details of his divorce, a rather lurid case that involved accusations of adultery and lavish spending on his mistress.
Judging from the polls, which show Mr.
Romer now leading Mr.
Benson by a wide margin, there are worse things than being an incumbent after all.


New Puzzle On Sex Life Of Octopus
Scientists surveying a hydrothermal vent about 10,000 feet deep, on the ocean floor 1,000 miles west of Guatemala, report having come across two male octopuses of different species having sex.
"It raises all sorts of questions about what is going on down there," said Janet Voight, an assistant curator of invertebrates at Chicago's Field Museum of Natural History.


Review/Fashion; Valentino in His Element: Glamour Without Camp
In a season when glamour rules the runways, Valentino is in his element.
His collection on Sunday captured the essence of glamour without the slightest tinge of campiness.
The word repeated by most people leaving the show was "beautiful."
The models' hair fell to their shoulders in soft waves, like the loose curls of 1950's movie stars. (Nadja Auermann, who cut her hair to a chin-length bob last week, wore a wig.) Lips were red, and heels invariably high.


Nobel Winners Rose Above Mideast Past
To the Editor:
The steps that Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and his Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, and Yasir Arafat, Palestine Liberation Organization chairman, have taken toward peace between their peoples are monumental achievements that deserve the recognition they received with the Nobel Peace Prize (front page, Oct. 15), and it took all three of them to get it done.


Vladiceasca Journal; Where Communists Trampled, a Village Rises
Dumitru Pantece remembers with a shudder the day he was standing on the roof and the bulldozers came.
Officials from the mayor's office waited outside his house making sure a heartbroken and angry Mr.
Pantece obeyed orders.
Then the big machine tore into his house and left it a pile of rubble, along with 50 others in this village.
Under a program imposed by the Communist Government of Nicolae Ceausescu, the villagers were moved into apartment blocks two miles down the road, where the heat was scanty, the rooms were tiny and people used to the freedom of owning property were cooped up in dormitory-style living.


Food Safety Requires Stricter Laws
To the Editor:
"Seeking a Way to Stop Hamburger Fatalities" (television review, Oct. 12), on the appearance of E. coli bacteria in ground beef in California and Washington State in 1992 and '93, was not a review but an editorial on public policy and public health by someone who indicates no health or science background for understanding the crisis.


Bruno's Inc.(BRNO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


U.S. Criticizes A Russian Aide At U.N. on Iraq
In an unusual public clash reminiscent of cold war debates, Russia's Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, came to the Security Council today to win sympathy for Saddam Hussein but was roundly rebuffed by the United States.
Mr.
Kozyrev, fresh from a visit to Iraq and Kuwait, criticized the Iraqi troop buildup near the Kuwaiti border for creating "a dangerous situation." But he also suggested that Iraq had no intention of invading Kuwait, citing reports in the Iraqi press that the troops were merely conducting maneuvers.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Briefs; Kennedy Rally Ponders A Republican Future
Sometimes it is hard to get voters riled up about a clean-cut Republican challenger like Mitt Romney, the businessman running against Senator Edward M. Kennedy, since there is no record to attack.
So on Sunday one of Mr.
Kennedy's allies, Representative Joe Moakley of Massachusetts, defined the race more broadly, warning that if Mr.
Romney won, Republicans might capture the Senate.
A vote for Mr.
Romney, he said at a rally here, was a vote for Bob Dole for majority leader.
The crowd booed.


Unisys Corp.(UIS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. and North Korea Agree To Build on Nuclear Accord
The Clinton Administration announced tonight that United States and North Korean negotiators in Geneva had reached a broad agreement that would freeze North Korea's nuclear weapons program and allow the resumption of international inspections.
Administration officials said the agreement included some concessions by Washington, including arranging for American allies to build in North Korea two modern nuclear power plants valued at several billion dollars.
The Administration also agreed to a delay in the inspection of two nuclear waste sites that were expected to reveal evidence of North Korea's production of weapon-grades material.


Logging Thrives on Economic Scare Tactics
To the Editor:
"Oregon, Foiling Forecasters, Thrives as It Protects Owls" (front page, Oct. 11) shows that timber industry warnings that protecting the spotted owl would lead to economic collapse of timber communities were false.
Oregon timber communities have experienced a boom, yet timber officials are still claiming that economic chaos will come.
They'll be proved wrong again.


Star Banc Corp.(STB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Accounts
*
Brothers Gourmet Coffees Inc., Boca Raton, Fla., to Harris Drury Cohen, Fort Lauderdale, Fla., as the first agency to handle advertising for the coffee company.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Delta Business Systems, Orlando, Fla., to Cramer-Krasselt, Orlando, to handle the office equipment company's account, previously at Clarke Advertising and Public Relations, St.
Petersburg, Fla.
Billings were estimated to exceed $1 million.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Friday about the response of the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company to a proposed purchase of the company's entertainment subsidiary, MCA Inc., misidentified the head of MCA's record business.
He is Al Teller, chairman and chief executive; David Geffen is the chief executive of Geffen Records, also owned by MCA.


Wachovia Corp.(WB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Kafelnikov Wins  Second-seeded Yevgeny Kafelnikov of Russia beat Australia's Richard Fromberg, 6-4, 6-4, yesterday to highlight the opening round at the $600,000 Lyons Open tennis tournament in Lyons, France.
A qualifier, Lars Rehmann of Germany, upset Tomas Carbonell of Spain, 6-3, 6-3, and Andrei Chesnokov of Russia defeated a Frenchman, Rodolphe Gilbert, 7-6 (9-7), 6-3. (AP) Korda Beats Skoff: Fifth-seeded Petr Korda of the Czech Republic defeated the hometown favorite, Horst Skoff, 6-1, 7-6 (7-4), yesterday in the opening round of the $375,000 CA-Tennis Trophy tournament in Vienna.
The top-seeded players, including Goran Ivanisevic, the United States Open champion Andre Agassi, Germany's Michael Stich and Thomas Muster of Austria, do not see action until midweek. (AP) YACHT RACING  Davis Wins Gold Cup  Rod Davis, the Californian who moved to Australia two years ago to skipper a boat from Down Under for the 1995 America's Cup races, won the Omega Gold Cup match-racing series on Sunday in Bermuda.
Davis edged out world-class skippers like Chris Dickson, Peter Gilmour and Ed Baird.


ISRAEL AND JORDAN SIGN DRAFT OF WIDE-RANGING PEACE TREATY
Israel and Jordan initialed a draft peace treaty today clearing the way for regular diplomatic relations, enhanced commerce and easier travel after 46 years of veering between warfare and uneasy coexistence.
The agreement, reached after torturous overnight negotiations, was the first major addition to the patchwork of Middle East peace since the agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization last year.
It was also the first peace agreement between Israel and an Arab nation since the treaty with Egypt in 1979.


Another Head Rolls: Cubs Fire Trebelhorn
The Chicago Cubs fired Manager TOM TREBELHORN yesterday.
He is the fifth manager to be dismissed since the season was stopped by the players' strike.
Trebelhorn, hired at the start of the season, was the Cubs' 10th manager in 10 years.
Chicago finished last in the National League Central with a 49-64 record, the second-worst in the league.
Trebelhorn was hired in the off-season by the Cubs' former general manager, LARRY HIMES, who was demoted to a scouting job two weeks ago.
ED LYNCH, hired last week to replace Himes, announced Trebelhorn's firing.


Sellars's Merchant Of Venice Beach
At 37, Peter Sellars, the enfant terrible of the American theater, is no longer an enfant, but terrible is still an operative adjective.
If you exclude Robert Wilson, no American director so polarizes spectators, rankling some and enthralling others.
With his staging of "The Merchant of Venice" for the Goodman Theater here, Mr.
Sellars is running true to form.


POP
Singer-Songwriter Festival Offers a Broad Sampling  Carnegie Hall
"I will not walk in my father's shoes," Cliff Eberhardt sang at the First New York Singer-Songwriter Festival on Friday.
He was wrong; most of the 30 songwriters on the bill echoed forebears like Bob Dylan, Joan Baez, Joni Mitchell and James Taylor.


First-Time Explorers Can Get Lost in the Internet
SO much is written about the Internet, the vast worldwide network of computers, that it is easy for relatively naive users to feel left out.
"Relatively naive" can mean people who operate a computer at the office or at home and perhaps even belong to a commercial on-line service, but are by no means experts.
I spent an hour or so one recent Saturday morning exploring the net.
I signed on with Turbogopher 1.0.8b4, a mouthful of a program that lets a Macintosh with modem cruise the infobahn through menus and a mouse rather than by typing arcane commands.
Turbogopher automatically connects to Arts and Farces, which offers six options.
Picking the option Other Gopher and Information Servers, I was then offered 15 additional places to go, from All the Gopher Servers in the World, through Africa, Asia and Russia, to Terminal Based Information.


Micron Technology Plans to Acquire Zeos
Micron Technology Inc. said today that it would acquire Zeos International Ltd., a Minneapolis-based telephone-order supplier of personal computers.
Zeos will be merged with Micron Computer Inc. and Micron Custom Manufacturing Services Inc., two Micron subsidiaries.
Zeos has suffered in the last two years as first-tier manufacturers like the Compaq Computer Corporation and Apple Computer Inc. have slashed prices, eliminating the one advantage direct sellers could offer.
Compaq has even offered its own direct sales.


After 40 Days and 40 Nights, Players and Owners Will Meet in Capital
Five years to the day after the World Series earthquake, there were slight rumblings yesterday in the long dormant negotiations in baseball's labor dispute.
Forty days after they last held a bargaining session, representatives of the players and the owners will meet in Washington tomorrow with Bill Usery Jr., the mediator who will try to help them resolve their differences.
Neither side would comment publicly on the meeting, but one person involved in the talks called the gathering a "ground rules meeting."


Apple Computer's Earnings Soar, but Its Stock Slumps $1.375
Apple Computer Inc. reported late today that its earnings soared in its fiscal fourth quarter, exceeding Wall Street's estimates.
Investors, who had enjoyed a significant run up in share prices in recent weeks, sold shares heavily near the close of trading, causing the stock price to drop $1.375, to close at $39.75 in Nasdaq trading.
The earnings were not announced until after the close, but traders were locking in profits, rather than risking a surprise that would send shares sliding.


Harry George Henn, 75, Author And a Law Professor at Cornell
Harry George Henn, an author of several influential law textbooks and a professor emeritus at Cornell University, died last Tuesday at a nursing home in Jacksonville, Fla.
He was 75 and lived in Naples, Fla.
The cause was myelodysplastic anemia, an ailment linked to a spinal-cord disorder, his family said.


KeyCorp (KEY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Tranquil Town Beset by Drugs, Mothers on Patrol Put Dealers on Notice
The mothers' crime patrol was out on the streets in the chill the other night, looking for telltale signs of drug dealing: youths with fat backpacks and oversized hoods or passing cars with headlights blinking or dark.
The three women -- Alice Clary, Teresa Brown and Majorie Solomon -- patrol with walkie-talkies, white baseball caps and black windbreakers.
They are the most obvious allies that law-enforcement authorities here have cultivated in their campaign to wipe out a drug subculture in and around Manahan Village, a public-housing complex.


Memorial to Victims of Air Crash in Pennsylvania


First National Bancorp (Ga.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Insurgents in Mexico Threaten to Fight if Governor Is Installed
Having rejected new peace talks with the Government, peasant rebels in the southern state of Chiapas are threatening to resume fighting if an elected Governor from Mexico's long-governing party tries to take office there as scheduled in December.
"If they want lead, we'll give them lead," the masked spokesman of the Zapatista National Liberation Army, who continues to be known only as Subcommander Marcos, told a gathering of supporters in rebel-held territory over the weekend.
"We are an army, not a labor union or some neighborhood club."


Chevy Chase Savings Bank reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Brown's Top Status Isn't Quite So Secure
Don't make too much of it, at least for now.
But the Giants have lost their last three games after winning their first three, and for the first time, Coach Dan Reeves said today that he might change quarterbacks.
The question arose at Reeves's news conference at Giants Stadium, a day after his team packaged a bundle of misdeeds and failed opportunities into a 17-10 loss to the Los Angeles Rams in Anaheim, Calif.


Ties to Gangsters Hinder Overhaul of Japan Banking
Few here had heard of Gifu Shogin, a small credit association about 180 miles west of Tokyo, before the Japanese Government forced it to merge with another local financial institution several months ago.
But then a stunning fact was disclosed: of Gifu Shogin's $110 million in outstanding loans, about $70 million worth was made to organized-crime groups or their affiliated companies.
As the four-year-long collapse of property prices takes its toll on lenders, the Government has had to engineer a series of increasingly large rescues of ailing banks.
But the bailout of Gifu Shogin may have said the most about the roots of the Japanese banking industry's troubles, and the problems in trying to resolve them.


Cuomo, for One, Seeks to Hitch His Star To Clinton's
In a year in which Democratic politicians are fleeing from the outstretched arms of President Clinton, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, ever the loyalist Democrat, made it clear today that he longs for the Administration's embrace and does not mind returning it.
Indeed, he made a repeated point of describing the President as great but misunderstood, a heroic figure whose struggle for popularity sounded very much like his own.
"He has the most extraordinary record for achieving things that has not been appreciated," the Governor said of President Clinton while campaigning on Long Island today, calling Mr.
Clinton not just a good President but a great President.
"I think I know why: when you get something done, you don't let it sink in and exploit it. Let the people know what you've done."


Two Concussions Force Hoge to Retire
In the hospital he was dazed and lost.
MERRIL HOGE didn't know his wife or his brother or that he had a 14-month-old daughter.
Two weeks later, he was still in a fog, unable to shake off his second concussion in six weeks.
As a result, the 29-year-old running back announced yesterday that he was retiring from football and the Chicago Bears.
"It's the end to a career but not to a life," Hoge said at a news conference in Lake Forest, Ill.


McGraw-Hill Inc.(MHP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INSIDE
How Paine Webber Plans To Make Kidder Deal Work
Paine Webber is focusing on basic operations to make its $670 million takeover of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company a success, but some analysts are still skeptical.
Page D1.
Official Faults G.M.
Trucks
The Transportation Secretary, Federico Pena, said G.M. sold pickup trucks that needlessly killed 150 people in fuel tank fires.
Page A18.
Vendor Sweep in Harlem
Twenty-two people were arrested as the police cleared 125th Street of illegal vendors.
Page B1.


New York Police Will Reflect the City's Population Even Less
To the Editor:
Your survey of new police officers in New York City (news article, Oct. 10) indicts political leaders and city policy makers who let a department off the hook because it says it "is trying to diversify its ranks." It is disgraceful that only 9 percent of 2,000 police recruits are black men.


Observer; Time to Fear and Hate
Scheduled to be away from home on Election Day, I have just sealed and mailed my absentee ballot.
My vote for senator went to A. I gather he is unpatriotic and possibly a child molester.
I gleaned this from B.'s commercials.
Of course A. admits nothing.


Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.(FRE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Democrats Getting No Lift From a Rising Economy
The politics in Tennessee epitomizes one of the paradoxes of this unusual election year: The economy is thriving, but President Clinton and the Democrats who support his economic program are getting no credit for it.
The economy here is the strongest in the state's history.
The unemployment rate, 4.7 percent in August, is well below the national rate.
More than 80,000 new jobs were created last year alone, and the economic research center at the University of Tennessee is forecasting 130,000 more by the end of next year.


Harlem Dancers Open New Home
Dance Theater of Harlem has formally opened its new Everett Center, a $7.5 million renovation and expansion of its headquarters on West 152d Street.
The building was designed by Hardy Holzman Pfeiffer Associates, which won an Award of Excellence in Design from the Art Commission of the City of New York for the project.
The facade of brick and black-and-white ceramic rectangles is topped by a curved roof and a weather vane in the shape of a male dancer in a ballet jump.


Toward Irish Peace
To the Editor:
"A Chance for Peace in Ireland" (editorial, Oct. 14) contains strange assertions.
The peace process under way in Northern Ireland was initiated by Prime Minister John Major of Britain and Prime Minister Albert Reynolds of Ireland in the Downing Street Declaration in December 1993.
You can rest assured we are hardly likely to fail to respond to a process we initiated.


G. M. Trucks Found to Be Fire Hazard Side-Saddle Tanks
Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena said yesterday that a two-year Federal investigation of 4.5 million older General Motors Corporation pickup trucks had found that the trucks posed a fire hazard when hit from the side because of the placement of their fuel tanks.
Mr.
Pena also said that evidence reviewed during the Government's inquiry suggested that the No. 1 auto maker knew before it sold the trucks beginning in 1973 that placing the fuel tanks outside the pickups' body frame could pose a danger, but it went ahead and sold them anyway.
Since then, Federal officials estimated yesterday, some 150 people might have died needlessly in fiery crashes because the original placement of the tanks allowed them to be easily punctured during side-impact crashes.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Briefs; California Candidate Sets Donation Record
In what is believed to be a record campaign gift by a candidate to himself, Representative Michael Huffington, a Republican, has contributed almost $10 million of his personal fortune to his campaign for the United States Senate and has lent his campaign an additional $7 million.
Mr.
Huffington, a former Texas resident whose family wealth comes from oil and gas interests, has also raised $1.3 million from 15,000 donors, according to a report that aides said he filed over the weekend with the Federal Election Commission in Washington.


Review/Fashion; Chanel's Message: Dress to Seduce
As "The Age of Aquarius" boomed on the sound system, Karl Lagerfeld, designing for Chanel, showed how he believes women should face a new age: hoisted and borne on pedestals of beefy male flesh.
His finale today had all the female models sitting on male models' shoulders.
Mr.
Lagerfeld isn't the first designer to conclude that women are still happiest supported by men, and why wouldn't he?
In his atelier, he is surrounded by young, beautiful successful women who seem to have it all -- models.
And what do these women mostly seem to be seeking?
Like Claudia Schiffer, who paraded on the Chanel catwalk in front of her fiance, David Copperfield, most seem to want marriage.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.71
3.03
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.92
4.84
3.06
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.34
5.25
3.14
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.59
7.59
5.24
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.82
7.83
5.84
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.67
8.69
6.93
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.61
6.60
5.35
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Researchers Find Gene That May Link Dyslexia With Immune Disorders
BY comparing the reading test scores and genetic codes of hundreds of children, researchers have found the approximate location of a gene that seems to be associated with dyslexia, a complex disorder that prevents millions of people from ever learning to read well.
The site of the gene is on chromosome six and lies within a huge stretch of DNA that gives rise to the human immune system.
The finding, reported in the current issue of Science magazine, fits with the observation that many dyslexics have asthma, hay fever and other immune disorders, suggesting that the problems may be linked.


From Giuliani, More Scolding
Even as Bernadette Castro complained about Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's party loyalty, another Republican -- Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani -- complained yesterday that the Senator had misbehaved at a ground-breaking ceremony for a Holocaust museum in lower Manhattan on Sunday.
Mr.
D'Amato pointedly argued with a City Hall aide when he was seated on the end of the platform, though the aide was not responsible for the seating.


Beating a Sales Slump With a Classic Formula
Contrarian is not the first word one would associate with Talbots.
The specialty women's clothing retailer has honed tradition and convention to a fine art, offering its customers timeless, classic clothing that varies little from year to year.


Ban on N.H.L. Players Lifted
The telephone lines between the National Hockey League office in New York and the Players Association office in Toronto remained silent for the sixth successive day yesterday, but other international telephone lines were working overtime.
The head of the International Ice Hockey Federation reversed his position and said locked-out N.H.L. players could play for European teams.
"I had no other choice," Rene Fasel, the federation president, said by telephone from Fribourg, Switzerland.


St. Paul Bancorp Inc.(SPBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Police Move Street Vendors In Harlem
Hundreds of police officers descended on 125th Street in Harlem yesterday to carry out the Giuliani administration's order to clear the busy thoroughfare of street vendors, and 22 people were arrested as scuffles broke out between the illegal merchants and officers.
Although the sweep went relatively smoothly -- the police had been anticipating trouble -- many store owners, fearful of reprisals from vendors, kept their doors shut for much of the day.


Kohl Dismisses Vote Setback but Faces Harder Time
Chancellor Helmut Kohl, his governing coalition whittled down to a 10-seat majority in Parliament in elections on Sunday, dismissed the setback today as no obstacle to his governing Germany for another four years.
But on any major decision affecting the future of Germany, Europe or trans-Atlantic relations, the conservative Chancellor now appears to have little option but to seek consensus with the opposition.


Provident Bancorp Inc.(PRBK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Juggling Policy on Gay Troops
The Clinton Administration is marshaling its best legal arguments and financial resources to defend new regulations barring openly homosexual troops in the military, Administration and outside lawyers say.
But in a strange twist in pursuit of this strategy, the Government might end up for the first time allowing a declared homosexual to serve in the armed forces.


Mercantile Bankshares Corp.(MRBK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Plan to Clean Holy River Fails to Stem Tide of Filth
THE stench of chemicals, leather, rotting flesh and stale air overwhelms visitors to Jajmau, a neighborhood on the edge of Kanpur, home to 175 tanneries on the southern bank of the Ganges River.
A brief shower converts the little enclave of bumpy roads and semipaved lanes, lined with hides and bark used for dyeing, into a squalid mess.
For decades, industrial effluents from the leather factories here, including toxic heavy metals such as chrome, and millions of gallons of untreated domestic sewage have spewed into the Ganges from hundreds of cities, towns and villages along the river's 1,560-mile journey through the sprawling northern Indian plains.


Chess
No one plays such brash sacrifices as Gary Kasparov.
Others may take risks against much weaker opponents, but the Professional Chess Association's world champion dives repeatedly into the realm of the speculative against his chief rivals.
And wins.
In the all-grandmaster Credit Suisse Masters Tournament in Horgen, Switzerland, he parlayed his legerdemain into a marvelous performance, taking first place a point and a half ahead of his nearest pursuers.
FINAL STANDINGS  Player . . .
W. . . .
L. . . .
D. . . .
Pts.
Kasparov . . . 6 . . . 0 . . . 5 . . . 8 1/2 Shirov . . . 5 . . . 2 . . . 4 . . . 7 Yusupov . . . 4 . . . 1 . . . 6 . . . 7 Korchnoi . . . 3 . . . 1 . . . 7 . . . 6 1/2 Lautier . . . 4 . . . 2 . . . 5 . . . 6 1/2 Gelfand . . . 4 . . . 4 . . . 3 . . . 5 1/2 Leko . . . 1 . . . 2 . . . 8 . . . 5 Benjamin . . . 1 . . . 3 . . . 7 . . . 4 1/2 Nikolic . . . 2 . . . 4 . . . 5 . . . 4 1/2 Miles . . . 2 . . . 5 . . . 4 . . . 4 Lutz . . . 1 . . . 4 . . . 6 . . . 4 Gavrikov . . . 0 . . . 5 . . . 6 . . . 3


'Hair of Dog' Tried as Cure For Autoimmune Disease
USING a technique reminiscent of the proverbial "hair of the dog," researchers have modernized an ancient Chinese remedy that shows great promise for treating and perhaps preventing various autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, insulin-dependent diabetes and uveitis, an inflammation of the eye that can cause blindness.
It may also one day make it possible to transplant organs between mismatched individuals by reducing or even eliminating the risk of rejection.


David L. Ladd Is Dead at 68; Expert on Patents and Copyrights
David Lowell Ladd, an authority on intellectual property law who was Commissioner of Patents in the Kennedy Administration, died last Wednesday at his home in Alexandria, Va.
He was 68.
He died of heart ailments, his family said.


Citizens Banking Corp.(CBCF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BOC Boat in Jeopardy
Josh Hall, a 32-year-old British sailor competing in the BOC yacht race round the world, called by radio for help yesterday afternoon after hitting an unknown object at sea.
Hall, who was in ninth place among the 19 solo sailors, said that his boat was taking on water quickly and that he was in danger of sinking.
"He said that his boat was severely holed," said Herb McCormick, a BOC race spokesman in a telephone interview from Cape Town, South Africa, the port where Hall and the other BOC racers are headed.
"He has a pump on board, but said he was barely able to stay ahead of the water coming in."


Market Place; S.&amp; P., responding to its rival, introduces a new stock index.
WHEN it comes to stock gauges, most investors know one better than any other: the Dow Jones industrial average.
But within the world of big institutions, indexes from two companies vie for supremacy, with Standard &amp; Poor's ahead but being challenged by the Frank Russell Company.
Yesterday, S.&amp; P. introduced its own response to Russell, which dominates the small-stock measurement field.
It is the S.&amp; P. Small Cap 600, which includes stocks that range in market value from $27 million to $886 million, with an average of $302 million.
By contrast, the well-known S.&amp; P. 500 focuses primarily -- but not exclusively -- on large stocks, while the S.&amp; P. Mid Cap 400 measures mid-sized companies with an average capitalization of $1.2 billion.


Pataki Gains Endorsement of a Jewish Assemblyman, Across Party Lines
Flanked by representatives of New York City's Orthodox Jewish residents, State Assemblyman Dov Hikind endorsed State Senator George E. Pataki for governor yesterday, saying the state needed new leadership.
"This is not about Democrats and Republicans," said Mr.
Hikind, Democrat of Brooklyn, who held a news conference at Mr.
Pataki's campaign headquarters.
"Certain races, you look at the individual and do what's best for the state. I really wanted to endorse a Democrat for governor, but in the end I couldn't."


Why Do You Think the Town Is Called Stony Point?


A Hunt and a Protest


First Midwest Bancorp Inc.(FMBI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Boy of Summer's Long, Chilly Winter; Once a Promising Ballplayer, Glenn Burke Is Dying of AIDS
This was one of the bad days.
The sheets on the twin bed were twisted, the printed red-and-blue toy cars wrinkled from where he had gripped the cloth too tightly.
The cartoons on the television set were no distraction.
The bottles of pills on the bedside table were not doing their job.
It took several minutes for Glenn Burke to rise from the bed and limp into the living room.
His body, once built for major league baseball, was now dependent on a pair of aluminum crutches.
Outside, the California sun baked the sidewalk, the temperature peaking at 76 degrees.
Inside, Burke wore a down winter coat over his shirt and long pants.
The heater was turned to high, and he asked for help to move his chair forward, directly in front of the vent.
Still, he rubbed his arms, his body shaking with the chill.


MCA's Parent Is Said To Be Considering Sale
As executives from MCA and its parent company, the Matsushita Electric Industrial Corporation, prepare to meet today, MCA may find its owners more willing to consider selling a controlling interest in the company than Matsushita officials have been indicating in public.
"Matsushita is mulling over the idea of a sale, no question," said an executive who is close to the giant Japanese consumer electronics maker.
"They are not saying no," he said, rebutting recent statements by executives of Matsushita that they have no interest in selling a large stake in the Hollywood film and entertainment company MCA Inc.


People v. Hamlet: A Case of Infinite Jest; Scholars of the Law and Shakespeare Hear the Prince's Appeal
When you're trying to get your client's conviction reversed, six homicides can be a tad much to explain away.
Particularly when the judges know the case as well as, if not better than, you do.
And especially when hundreds of onlookers -- colleagues at the bar whom your client has insulted (he once gleefully asked a gravedigger, "Why might not that be the skull of a lawyer?") -- are leaning forward, salivating.
The client, Hamlet, Prince of Denmark, was in trouble, big time: he survived a poisoned-tip duel only to be convicted in the deaths of Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, Laertes and Claudius.
In mounting an appeal of those convictions last week, the prince's self-appointed lawyer, Daniel J. Kornstein, did not deny that Hamlet was linked to the deaths; instead, he asked a three-judge panel to consider his client's rotten mental state.


FirsTier Financial Inc.(FRST,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Conquering the 'No Space' Barrier: a Printer, Copier and Fax
THOSE of us who work in home offices are not like normal people, analysts and market researchers agree, at least when it comes to technology.
We usually spend our own money, instead of dipping into an expense account; we have to deal with mechanical breakdowns and other technical tribulations by ourselves, rather than calling the tech support hot line for a replacement machine, and we toil in offices that are cleverly decorated to resemble spare bedrooms, kitchen tables or converted garages.


For G.E., Sale Was Fast and Cheap
The General Electric Company got rid of its unpleasant association with Kidder, Peabody sooner than expected and, based on some analysts' estimates, possibly at a smaller loss than had been anticipated.
One illustration of just how badly G.E. wanted Kidder off its books was that the deal with the Paine Webber Group was wrapped up less than three weeks after the start of serious talks.


CHRONICLE
REGINE CRESPIN, 67, France's most celebrated postwar opera singer, has often been treated more lovingly by other countries than by her own.
But last week, Prime Minister EDOUARD BALLADUR marked her contribution to the nation with the insignia of Commander in the Legion of Honor and, of course, a kiss on each cheek.
Mr.
Balladur, a leading contender for the presidency of France in next year's election, took time out from his unannounced candidacy on Thursday to tell the former singer, "Few artists can take pride in having contributed so much to the radiance of our country and of our culture."


Patterns
Thierry Mugler on a Roll
Designers this season have a vexing task: how to interpret the trend toward the 1940's and not have the result look like clothes by Thierry Mugler.
Through every trend since he started his own house, Mr.
Mugler has designed what everyone else is only trying to do now: sculptured 1940's silhouettes, achieved by modern cutting technique.


A Rock Band Confronts Its Fear of Success
Almost as soon as anyone had heard of Pavement, the band's songs started to agonize over ambition and the dangers of selling out.
"Can you treat it like an oil well/When it's underground and out of sight?" asked one song on the band's 1992 debut album, which cautiously added, "It's what I want." Back then, Pavement was recording for a small label and had been embraced only by college radio stations.
Now the band has real reason to worry: its second album, "Crooked Rain, Crooked Rain" (Matador), is distributed through Atlantic Records, and its concert on Saturday night at Roseland was sold out, drawing about 3,400 people.
For some bands on the alternative circuit, the response to such success is to undermine their own concerts, as if daring fans to really, really like them.
Their generation has been let down by both hippies and yuppies; neither indolence nor striving seems right.
Yet while Pavement has thrown away plenty of shows, Saturday's was not one of them.
Between songs, Stephen Malkmus, the band's lead guitarist and main songwriter, mockingly sang bits of mainstream rock; the other band members were strictly casual onstage, sometimes singing with their backs turned to the audience.
But Pavement honored its own music, choosing its most tuneful material and performing with all the ambivalent conviction the songs demand.


Police Report Recommends More Training and Oversight
A Police Department task force has recommended a sweeping reorganization that would raise standards for recruitment and graduation from the police academy and require monthly performance evaluations of officers.
Taken together, the 100 recommendations -- which range from transferring up to 200 clerical and administrative workers from police headquarters to the precincts, to giving precinct commanders new authority to combat corruption -- are designed to produce a decentralized, better trained and better supervised police department that is attuned to the needs of local, particularly minority, neighborhoods.


Montreal's Alou Named Manager of Year
FELIPE ALOU, who guided the young Montreal Expos to the best record in the majors before the strike stopped the season, was a near-unanimous choice yesterday as the National League's manager of the year.
Alou got 27 of 28 first-place votes, with DALLAS GREEN of the Mets receiving the other one.
The Expos, who have shown steady improvement in Alou's two-plus seasons, exceeded even their own expectations this year by going 74-40.
Alou received one second-place vote and finished with 138 points in balloting by the Baseball Writers Association of America.
Cincinnati's DAVEY JOHNSON finished second with 51 points. (AP)


Corrections
A map on Sunday showing gravesites of famous people at Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn misstated Samuel F. B. Morse's accomplishment.
He invented the electric telegraph, not the wireless telegraph.


G.O.P. Senate Contender Asserts D'Amato Is Undercutting Her Bid
Bernadette Castro, the embattled Republican nominee for the Senate from New York, said yesterday that Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato had steered contributors away from her campaign and told her that he had agreed not to work against the Democratic incumbent, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, because Mr.
Moynihan did not work against him two years ago.
In an interview, Ms.
Castro said that before the State Republican Convention nominated her last spring with Mr.
D'Amato's support, he had wished her well but told her, "I won't be able to help you." The reason, she said the Senator had told her, was that Mr.
Moynihan had not campaigned actively for Robert Abrams, then the State Attorney General, who challenged Mr.
D'Amato in the 1992 Senate race.


Standard Federal Bank (SFB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sellars's Merchant Of Venice Beach
At 37, Peter Sellars, the enfant terrible of the American theater, is no longer an enfant, but terrible is still an operative adjective.
If you exclude Robert Wilson, no American director so polarizes spectators, rankling some and enthralling others.
With his staging of "The Merchant of Venice" for the Goodman Theater here, Mr.
Sellars is running true to form.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BANKNORTH GROUP INC., Burlington, Vt., a bank holding company, has completed the purchase of North American Bank Corp. and its subsidiary, Farmington National Bank, Farmington, N.H., for about $19.1 million.
H.
J.
HEINZ CO., Pittsburgh, agreed to acquire All American Gourmet Co., Orange, Calif., the maker of Budget Gourmet frozen meals, from Philip Morris Cos.
Terms were not disclosed.


A Contract Out on Workers' Rights
BACK in the room he shares with two friends, Pedro Azurdia was acting like the luckiest man in the world for the two or three days a week of hard labor coming his way.
The contractors who were shooed from Palisades Park by the police are back, for the most part, at least for some days.
Mr.
Azurdia and his compatriots, about 60 to 75 Guatemalan immigrants, are getting construction jobs again.
The men, who wait at the curbs in the morning for the bosses to nod them into their trucks, sometimes even make enough to feed their families back home.


First Michigan Bank Corp.(FMBC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article on Thursday about President Clinton's fall political strategy referred incorrectly in some editions to his standard campaign speech.
It indeed mentions the failed attempt to enact sweeping health care legislation: it says Republican lawmakers thwarted the effort.


Comerica (CMA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Accept Case Testing the Reach of a Racketeering Law
The Government's effort to convict a former Federal prosecutor for using drug trafficking proceeds to mine gold in Alaska presented the Supreme Court today with an important legal question: when does an activity have a sufficient connection with interstate commerce to justify prosecution under the Federal racketeering law?
A Federal appeals court earlier this year threw out the former Government lawyer's conviction under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act on the ground that the gold produced by the mine was not sold outside Alaska and that the Government had not proved that the operation had more than a minimal or incidental effect on interstate commerce.


Light and Shadow


Argentina's Revival Doesn't Include Electricity and Telephone
Many Argentines believe that their country is undergoing a renaissance that will regain the ground lost over the last 60 years, restoring Argentina to a place among the world's 10 most affluent nations.
The country gradually declined under a statist economic doctrine, a series of military coups, widespread corruption and hyperinflation.
Then came President Carlos Saul Menem, who since his election in 1989 has stabilized the economy and sold off most state-owned utilities and services.


Oakley, the Indestructible Man, Is Hurting
Charles Oakley said today that he has been playing on a painful, dislocated right toe that has forced him to consider surgery.
But surgery does not appear to be a remedy, according to Dr.
Norman Scott, the Knicks' team physician.
In a statement issued through the Knicks, Scott described Oakley's condition as "a congenital malformation of his forefoot."


Pension Takeover Sought for Western Union
The Federal Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation moved yesterday to take over Western Union's pension plan, contending that a proposal to take the company's parent, the New Valley Corporation, out of bankruptcy fails to adequately protect present and future pensioners.
The action threatened to derail New Valley's plan to leave bankruptcy protection later this year.
If the agency, which insures pension benefits, succeeds in its bid to take over Western Union's pension obligations, it would become New Valley's largest creditor, and its opposition could ruin the company's plan.


Ecologists Read the Rolls of Vanishing Species on Staten Island
WHILE biologists have suspected that the ever-increasing sprawl of human society has taken a toll on native plant species, a lack of detailed historical surveys has left researchers unable to say exactly how many and which ones have suffered.
Now scientists have taken advantage of an unusual series of plant inventories done over the last 100 years on Staten Island to produce what researchers say is the first clear picture of the fate of native species during urban development.


Dollar Hits a 2-Year Low vs. the Mark
Buoyed by Sunday's parliamentary election results, the mark rallied today, sending the dollar to a two-year low against the German currency.
German bond prices also soared in response to the narrow election victory of Chancellor Helmut Kohl and his coalition Government.
The dollar fell below 1.50 marks, considered a key psychological barrier, to close at 1.495 in late afternoon trading here.
In New York it ended at 1.4987, down 1.4 percent from Friday.


Of Winchell and the Power of Gossip
WINCHELL  Gossip, Power and the Culture of Celebrity  By Neal Gabler  681 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $30.
At the height of Walter Winchell's power in the late 1930's, some 50 million Americans -- roughly two-thirds of the adult population -- either listened to his weekly radio broadcast or read his daily newspaper column.
Songs and movies were written about him.
Presidents courted him.
And politicians, actors and socialites alike all feared him.
Although he would die a defeated and largely reviled man, Winchell presided over American mass culture for several decades, a self-appointed arbiter of power and taste, and an eerie harbinger of the culture of celebrity and gossip that would take hold in the country in the years to come.


Islanders Sign 19-Year-Old Defenseman
The Islanders said yesterday that they have come to terms with the 19-year-old defenseman BRYAN McCABE.
McCabe, the Islanders' second pick in the 1993 entry draft, would have gone back into the draft had the team not signed him by June 1, 1995.
DON MALONEY, the Islanders' general manager, said the two parties agreed on a three-year deal with an option before the league-mandated Saturday afternoon deadline for signing players.
McCabe, who had 22 goals, 84 points and 218 penalty minutes in the junior leagues last season, is currently playing with Spokane of the Western Hockey League.
McCabe had been assigned to Spokane before the lockout and would not have been eligible for recall if the season had started on schedule.


Grgurich Discusses Terms With U.N.L.V.
With the job his for the asking, the former Nevada-Las Vegas assistant coach TIM GRGURICH met yesterday with U.N.L.V. officials to discuss his terms for taking over as the university's new basketball coach.
Grgurich, who is making a reported $320,000 a year as an assistant with the Seattle SuperSonics, reportedly would receive a similar sum in a proposed three-year deal with U.N.L.V.
University officials said Friday that Grgurich was the only candidate for the position when ROLLIE MASSIMINO accepted a $1.8 million buyout of his contract. (AP)


On Minority Performers
A discussion on the use of minority performers in traditionally nonminority operatic roles is to take place at 8 tonight at St.
Peter's Church, Lexington Avenue at 54th Street.
Patrick J. Smith, the editor of Opera News, is to be the host of the discussion with the soprano Marina Arroyo; the playwright Albert Innaurato; Linda Jackson, the general director of the Chautauqua Opera Company; Daniel Swee, the casting director for Lincoln Center Theater, and Thomas Young, a tenor.
The event is among the Metropolitan Opera Guild's 1994-95 lecture series.
Tickets are $12.
Information: (212) 769-7028.


Stalking Stickley, Pursuing Ming
At the Seventh Regiment Armory, on Park Avenue in Manhattan, is a bronze horse and chariot from the second century A.D.
"I have people panting to buy it," an antique dealer told Carol Vogel of The Times.
He is asking $3.5 million.
At Pier 92, which pokes into the Hudson at 52d Street, is soon to be -- among other monuments to Americana -- enough chalkware, spongeware, spatterware and slipware to choke quite a few horses.
None of it will go for a song.


Trustmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mr. Kohl Again, Underwhelmingly
With a notable lack of enthusiasm, German voters gave narrow support Sunday to their least risky choice, Chancellor Helmut Kohl and his center-right Government.
But Mr.
Kohl will have to struggle to make any headway during his fourth four-year term since 1982.
His parliamentary majority was shaved to 10 votes, and his coalition partners, the Free Democrats, just managed to squeak by the 5 percent threshold needed to assure their seats in the Bundestag.
Though Americans and Europeans might have preferred a less ambivalent outcome, Mr.
Kohl's continued leadership will be generally welcomed.
He and his Christian Democrats are tried and familiar.
The question is whether he intends to make something of his victory or mark time.


The Montreal Symphony's Lush Instrumental Palette
The Montreal Symphony's two programs at Carnegie Hall over the weekend never let listeners forget the power of instrumental color: how sound in its sheer sensuousness can remake interval, rhythm and counterpoint into music that is virtually new.
Under Charles Dutoit, the Montreal has become an elegant conveyance.
When one listens carefully, individual winds and brass lack that extra sheen of glamour.
But the strings, breathing easily together, give off a soft shine that is quite remarkable.
Orchestras are usually the means for symphonic music, the enablers of ideas.
Here, orchestra technique influenced, if not dictated, how the music would speak.


Corrections
The "On Golf" column on Sunday about the Masters tournament referred incorrectly to a journalist once banned from broadcasting the event.
The journalist, Heywood Hale Broun, is not "late"; his father, the reporter Heywood Broun, died in 1939.


United Carolina Bancshares Corp.(UCAR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On My Mind; The Peace Prize Winners
The winners of the 1994 Nobel Peace Prize have good reasons to allow themselves the pleasure and pride of accomplishment.
Wait -- the "buts" will come soon enough.
Still: if Israeli, Palestinian and American critics of the winners refuse them due credit they will harm their own credibility and future role in any attempt to work out peace on reliable terms, if such come to exist.


By Design; Belts, Heels and Flying Feathers
The waistline and the foot received a lot of attention in the European spring shows.
No outfit was complete without a belt, less than an inch wide at houses like Prada, wide and stiff in many of the French collections and grown to corselet width at Ungaro and Lagerfeld.


Alco Standard Corp.(ASN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A New Royal Squabble: Charles vs. Father
Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh, delivered a public rebuke today to his son, the Prince of Wales, for cooperating with a biography that presents the Prince as someone who underwent a lonely childhood, has an unsatisfactory relationship with his parents and was browbeaten into a loveless marriage.
Excerpts from the book, which will go on sale next month, appeared over the weekend in The Sunday Times, which has a circulation of nearly 1.2 million.
It has proved a bombshell.
The coverage today squeezed the story of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's narrow election victory in Germany off the top of most front pages here.


BancorpSouth Inc.(BOMS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  A PACT FOR ISRAEL AND JORDAN  Jordan and Israel initialed a draft peace treaty that will address water and land issues between them and maintain the momentum of Middle East peace efforts.
A1


JAZZ
A Musical Reconsideration Of the Art of Charles Mingus  Alice Tully Hall
Jazz at Lincoln Center's reconsideration of Charles Mingus on Saturday night was a brawling show that used Mingus's music to get to some real improvisation.
A protean, productive figure, Mingus wrote pieces that required his musicians to play at the outer limits of their abilities.
The material ranged from the silken and thoughtful "Reincarnation of a Love Bird" to the intentionally archaic "My Jelly Roll Soul," and it required not only improvisational power and originality, but interpretations according to Mingus's deep blues sensibility as well.


Region News Briefs; President Is Selected At L.I. Medical Center
Long Island Jewish Medical Center today announced the appointment of Dr.
David R. Dantzker as president.
Dr.
Dantzker, who has been the medical center's acting president since July 1993, is a professor of medicine at Albert Einstein College of Medicine and the chairman of its department of internal medicine.
He is an expert in pulmonary and critical care medicine.


Colonial BancGroup Inc.(CLBGA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


DANCE
Bits and Pieces To Tantalize the Appetite  Performance Space 122
One problem about programs of excerpts and works in progress is the fact that such offerings are incomplete.
Everything presented raises questions about how the snippets fit into what is not shown or into what is still to be created.


Peter D. Gould, 50, Broadway Designer
Peter David Gould, a production designer for such Broadway shows as "Cats" and "Miss Saigon," died yesterday at the Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
He was 50 and lived in Brooklyn Heights.
The cause was complications after surgery, said his wife, Jane Stuttell.


CHRONICLE
Several years ago, WILLIAM M. KUNSTLER represented David Hampton, the young impostor whose scams perpetrated on several prominent New Yorkers became the basis of the play "Six Degrees of Separation."
"At the time I didn't really understand what 'Six Degrees of Separation' meant," Mr.
Kunstler said the other day.
"Now I do."


Region News Briefs; Bus Company Is Sued Over Seating for Prayers
A woman who refused to change her seat on a bus to accommodate Hasidic men who wanted to conduct prayers filed a sex-discrimination suit today in State Supreme Court.
Sima Rabinovicz, 47, a medical technician, commuted daily from Rockland County to the Lower East Side on the Monsey Trails buses until December 1993 when she says she was threatened for refusing to change her seat.
She now takes a different bus line.


New Golf Travel Service
The New York Times Sports/Leisure Magazines, which publishes magazines that include Golf Digest and Golf World, said yesterday that the group would introduce a travel division that offers one-stop shopping for customized golf travel.


Pizza, Chicken Wings And Iron Mike's Binky
In the frenzy of excitement about pro football studio shows that overtakes at least a baker's dozen of people each season, NBC's "The N.F.L. Live" has been overwhelmed by the attention paid to "Fox N.F.L. Sunday."
Fox's newly created Terry Bradshaw-led crew is louder, sassier and crasser than NBC's revamped group, anchored by Greg Gumbel.
The former performs for an hour, the latter for 30 minutes.
Neither is as good as ESPN's "N.F.L. Gameday."


Ford Recalls Compacts, Delaying Production
For the second time in two months, the Ford Motor Company is recalling its new Contour and Mystique compact sedans because of a fuel system defect that can cause fires.
Because it cannot make corrected tanks fast enough, Ford said it had halted production of the cars for a week, which will worsen dealer shortages of the cars just as Ford is promoting them with a major introductory advertising campaign.


Kaufman &amp; Broad Chooses Dailey
The Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corporation, a home-building company based in Westwood, Calif., said yesterday that it had selected Dailey &amp; Associates in Los Angeles, to handle its account, which had been at JGMC in Santa Monica, Calif., for the last nine years.
Billings were estimated at $20 million.
Dailey was awarded the account after a two-month review that was narrowed to two other finalists: DDB Needham Los Angeles and Lintas Campbell-Ewald in Los Angeles.
A campaign is expected to begin in January.


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
Boston University
The Terriers have been successful all season in trying to show that their opening-game triumph over the defending National Collegiate Athletic Association champion, Virginia, was no fluke.


NBD Bancorp Inc.(NBD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On to Syria
The draft peace pact with Jordan makes it clear to Israelis that, for good or ill, they are closer to an agreement with Syria and a comprehensive peace for the Middle East.
News Analysis, page A12.


METRO DIGEST
POLICE REORGANIZATION RECOMMENDED
A Police Department task force has recommended a sweeping reorganization that would raise standards for recruitment and graduation from the police academy and require monthly performance evaluations of officers.
The recommendations are designed to produce a decentralized, better trained and better supervised department.
A1.


Correction Officer Charged in Killing of a Queens Man
A state correction officer was charged with second-degree manslaughter early today after he fatally shot a 27-year-old Queens man yesterday as the two men struggled on the sidewalk in front of a public housing project, police officials said.
The officer, Edwin Flores, 30, was taken into custody about 1 A.M. at the 103d Precinct in Jamaica, Queens, after investigators spent several hours questioning him and witnesses to the shooting, said Sgt.
Edward Caro, a police spokesman.


Northern Trust Co.(NTRS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Paine Webber's Plan for Kidder
To make its purchase of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company successful, the Paine Webber Group is not counting so much on Kidder's highly regarded brokers, strong research department or some of its investment bankers.
It is counting more on the favorable terms of the merger and its own own back office, the humdrum systems operation at the heart of any Wall Street firm.
Paine Webber's focus on these workmanlike matters is a direct result of the lesson it learned from its last merger, the 1980 purchase of Blythe Eastman Dillon.
That purchase was a disaster, and Paine Webber spent much of the 1980's trying to get it right.


It's Kerrigan and 'Ice Wars,' but Not What You Think
Nancy Kerrigan has always had this inner tug-of-war, loving to perform but feeling ill at ease in public.
She seemed to disappear after the Winter Olympics, as if she had landed a triple jump and burrowed into the ice, her reputation no longer as sterling as her silver medal.
Only now has Kerrigan begun to emerge again.
She attended a news conference at CBS yesterday to promote a coming skating event, then made an appearance on the Conan O'Brien show.
There is a layout in McCall's magazine, an exercise video due shortly, a Christmas tour planned with the singer Aaron Neville.
The Olympics have made her rich, if no less fidgety in the spotlight.


Corrections
A brief sports article on Sunday about the American Horse Show Association Junior Jumper Championships misidentified the horse ridden by James Darrow.
It was Madame X.


U.S. Trust Corp.(USTC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TCF Financial Corp.(TCB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thompson Officer Leaves for McCann
Nina DiSesa, who has been the executive vice president and executive creative director at J. Walter Thompson Chicago for the last three years, is leaving to return to McCann-Erickson New York in a similar position, effective Nov. 7.
Her decision to return to New York also affects the career of another top advertising executive -- her husband -- G. Brian Goodall, executive vice president and general manager at Bayer Bess Vanderwarker in Chicago, who is also leaving for New York.


Alcorn Considered for Liberty Bowl
Alcorn State is being considered for the Liberty Bowl game, the game's selection committee chairman said.
The panel, expecting the host team for the Dec. 31 game in Tennessee to be the winner of the Nov. 19 East Carolina-University of Memphis game, is considering Alcorn for the opposing team, said the chairman, REGGIE BARNES.
The panel will be closely watching Southeastern Conference and Big 10 teams, Barnes said.
But in case those teams are committed, the Memphis-based bowl is asking the National Collegiate Athletic Association for permission to invite Alcorn State, which features the record-setting quarterback STEVE McNAIR.
N.C.A.A. rules say bowl teams must win at least six games against Division I-A competition.
Alcorn State (5-2) is tied for second in the Division 1-AA Southwestern Athletic Conference.
The Braves have no Division I-A opponents. (AP)


Sanders Certainly Didn't Pull Punches, but Did the Referees?
Typically, when two National Football League players exchange blows during a game, they are given personal fouls and ejected.
But when 49er cornerback Deion Sanders and Falcon receiver Andre Rison got into a fight in the second quarter of the San Francisco-Atlanta game on Sunday, only Sanders was penalized and both players remained in the game.
Later, Sanders intercepted a Falcon pass and returned it 93 yards for a touchdown that helped the 49ers to a 28-3 halftime lead.


Cheating on Base Closings
Six years ago, in a stroke of political enlightenment, Congress created a new process for shutting unneeded military bases.
It assigned an independent commission the unpleasant business of picking bases to close.
Congress can overrule the commission's entire list, but has not done so.
The concept seemed flawless; the execution less so.
Three commissions -- in 1989, 1991 and 1993 -- have recommended closing more than 100 installations.
Various members of Congress have done battle for bases in their communities.
Some have even gone to court.
In the end the commissions' findings have been adopted.
But that does not mean that all the bases have actually been shut down.


Carroll's New Tack: Expect Much More
It shouldn't have surprised Pete Carroll, but it did -- some players need motivating.
Carroll is still learning on the job as the rookie head coach of the Jets, learning week by week with a franchise that has, ultimately, let down almost every coach in its history.
But as he faces a bye week, with his club at 4-3, Carroll has made a major change in his approach to leadership.
He said today that he has learned to expect more of his team and more of himself.


Bulging Disk in Neck Sidelines Trevino
LEE TREVINO, leading the PGA Seniors circuit in victories this year with six, will be out of action indefinitely because of a bulging disk in his neck.
His agent, CHUCK RUBIN, said Trevino has consulted with three doctors, but has not decided what to do.


New Dinosaur Species Surprise Paleontologists
FOSSILS of two previously unknown dinosaur species have been found in the Sahara, surprising paleontologists with evidence that could upset ideas about the evolution of dinosaurs after the continents began drifting apart 170 million years ago.
The discovery, made in Niger by an expedition led by Dr.
Paul C. Sereno, a paleontologist at the University of Chicago, also begins to fill in a blank page in the dinosaur fossil record.
The newly discovered species are among the first found in Africa from the Cretaceous geologic period, 145 million to 65 million years ago, which includes the heyday of dinosaurs down to their extinction.


Dow Rises 13.46 in a Blue-Chip-Only Rally
Blue-chip stocks continued their gains yesterday, the sixth advance out of seven sessions, but most of the leading stock indexes dropped slightly.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 13.46 points, to 3,923.93, putting it about 1 percent away from its peak for the year.
The wider market was almost equally balanced between winners and losers.
On the New York Stock Exchange, 11 stocks declined for every 10 that advanced.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International  Mexico will allow 46 foreign finanicial companies to begin operations.
The opening of the financial-services market represents a milestone in the redesign of the Mexican economy.  [ Page D1. ]


Sports of The Times; Judo Champ Doesn't Need Disguises
IN order to compete with her friends in judo, Rusty Kanokogi wrapped tape around her chest -- "so they looked like healthy pectorals, not breasts." She flung a few men around in competition, but eventually somebody figured out why she was changing in a broom closet, and she gave the medals back.
This old story from the newest member of the International Women's Sports Hall of Fame drew a large sigh of recognition yesterday.
Most female athletes have not had to disguise themselves quite that way, but many of them understand the feeling of marginality.


Intel's Profit Climbed 13% In Quarter
Under growing pressure from price wars in the microprocessor chip business, the Intel Corporation reported today that its earnings rose 13 percent in the third quarter.
But the company said its net income was pushed up by one-time items, including the previously announced sale of a subsidiary that makes programmable semiconductor chips.
Without the one-time items, earnings would have been slightly down.


First Chicago Corp.(FNB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Markets Opened By Mexico
Taking a final step to open Mexico's financial markets to the world, the Government announced tonight that it would allow 46 foreign banks, securities firms and insurance companies to begin operations here.
The Minister of Finance, Pedro Aspe Armella, said the foreign companies that gained places in the growing Mexican financial-services market were expected to start doing business here by next June.


Groark Stays the Course As Campaign Sinks
An early surprise in Connecticut's race for governor is the fall in the polls of Lieut.
Gov.
Eunice S. Groark, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s chosen successor, who is favored by fewer than 10 percent of those surveyed, dangerously near the race's fringe candidates.
Analysts say the collapse from 1990, when Mr.
Weicker won as an independent with 40 percent of the vote, is very much a result of traditional politics: voters don't like Mrs.
Groark's defense of the Weicker record and her pledge to carry on his policies.


State Outlines a Far Different Lilco
Trying to sell the Cuomo administration's plan for a $9 billion government takeover of the Long Island Lighting Company, state officials have been telling Long Islanders that what the state wants is not just government ownership, but an overhaul of the company.
S.
David Freeman, the president of the New York Power Authority, who would manage the transformation, outlined plans yesterday for the Suffolk County Legislature: solar cells, which make electricity directly from sunlight; fuel cells, which make electricity from gas or oil without combustion; help for homeowners in making energy improvements, and thousands of trees, planted on the south sides of buildings to cut the need for air-conditioning.
And there would be a new role for the power system -- fostering economic development.


First Fidelity Bancorp (FFB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Spreading Peace?
How soon will Syria be next?
Many Israelis asked the question today after the initialing of a draft peace treaty with Jordan.
Some asked it hopefully, others with dread, particularly those who are convinced that an agreement with Syria, with inevitable withdrawals from the Golan Heights, would be disastrous to Israeli security.


Giuliani Moves Slowly on Privatizing City Hospitals
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who campaigned on a promise to privatize public hospitals, has found the process far more complicated, both substantively and politically, than anyone had anticipated, both critics and supporters of the plan say.
As a result, 10 months after taking office, city officials have yet to come forth with a plan -- or make a decision about whether the hospitals would be leased, sold outright or simply turned over to new private managers.


Old Kent Financial Corp.(OKEN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Haitians Seize Men Accused Of Terror Acts
Haitian crowds, acting at the urging of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, seized dozens of men accused of being gunmen loyal to the former military government and turned them over to the American military police overnight and today.
The American soldiers then handed them over to the remnants of the very Haitian police with whom the gunmen had collaborated in terrorizing the population during the three years of military rule.


National Westminster Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gay Survey Raises a New Question
To the question of "How many homosexuals are there in America?" a new nationwide study has provided a striking range of numbers and an unanswered question of its own: What is a homosexual?
After all, there is no agreement whether homosexuality is a matter of self-identification, behavior, desire or a combination of these.
Further, the study found pronounced differences between the numbers of gay men and women who live in cities and those in smaller communities, and between those with college educations and those without.
There are hints, too, of racial distinctions, although these figures may be statistically insignificant.


Aqueduct's Fall Season Set
One century after it opened for the first time, Aqueduct will open its autumn season in Queens today with racing six days a week and with 30 stakes booked over the next two months, but with no guarantee of its long-range future as the home of winter racing in New York.
The season will begin at 12:30 P.M. with nine live races topped by the Athenia Handicap, a $75,000 stake at a mile and an eighth for fillies and mares.
Between now and the end of the year, racing will be held six days a week, Tuesday through Sunday, with no racing on Mondays, Christmas Eve and Christmas.


Russians Make Their Voice Heard
Inevitably, there were handshakes and smiles all around today in New York as the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, met his American counterpart, Warren M. Christopher.
But after a week of not-so-private squabbling over Mr.
Kozyrev's trip to Baghdad and his possible deal with the Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein, the Americans are being polite through clenched teeth.
They are trying to insure that Russia's intervention, and its efforts to get the United Nations oil embargo on Iraq lifted after a six-month "trial period," do not get in the way of Washington's policy.


Adflex Solutions
Shares of Adflex Solutions Inc., a maker of computer parts, rose sharply in Nasdaq trading yesterday after the company announced that third-quarter earnings more than doubled.
The company, based in Chandler, Ariz., went public on Sept. 27 at $13.50 a share.


Miami Dips Into Its Pool Of Talent
James Stewart, the 235-pound Miami running back and a prime pro prospect, has had his twisted ankle placed in a cast, and it is uncertain whether he will play on Saturday when the Hurricanes are at West Virginia.
The coach, Dennis Erickson, made the announcment yesterday routinely and without tears.
No wonder, since the Miami talent pool is asdeep as the Grand Canyon.


Executive Changes
BIOMECHANICS CORP.
OF AMERICA, Melville, L.I., appointed Michael Strauss president and chief operating officer.
CARELINE Inc., Irvine, Calif., a provider of ambulance services, named J. Scott Adams president and chief operating officer.
M.
Keith Huzyak, who had been president, remains chairman and chief executive.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Named Mike Flanagan pitching coach.


Not Just A Tharp Knockoff
Twyla Tharp is notoriously fussy in choosing companies that can perform her dances.
Among the groups she has honored with productions are American Ballet Theater, the New York City Ballet, the Joffrey Ballet, the Paris Opera Ballet and, since 1990, Hubbard Street Dance Chicago.
Hubbard Street, as the troupe is known, may not be as celebrated as those others.
Yet Ms.
Tharp likes it so much that she has restaged five older works for it, and between now and 1997 will revive yet another old piece and choreograph three new ones for the company.


Style Over Substance
To the Editor:
In regard to revamped uniforms for the New York Police Department, you quote the report recommending these changes as saying "uniformed officers are often observed by the public in a slovenly condition" and that the new uniforms would result in the police looking "trimmer and cleaner" (news article, Oct. 7).


Region News Briefs; Faculty Back in Class At C.W. Post Campus
Classes returned to normal today at the C. W. Post campus of Long Island University as faculty members ended a brief walkout, but the dispute over a new contract continued.


City National Corp.(CYN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Logging Thrives on Economic Scare Tactics; Mining's False Prophets
To the Editor:
Further on your Oct. 11 front-page article on "timber-dependent" Oregon: Western Montana, despite mill closings and projections of the loss of tens of thousands of jobs, is also in the midst of an economic boom, with unemployment rates at 25-year lows.


For 13, Change Brings A Chill
The announcement last week that the "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour" intended to abandon WNET, the station where the program began 20 years ago, has set off the latest round of doomsaying at Channel 13, New York's long-suffering public television station.
The management of Channel 13 has been through the cycle before: bad financial news, followed by sinking morale among employees, concerns among producers about forthcoming projects and serious questions about the station's long-term future.


Upjohn Co.(UPJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Sermon on Child Neglect and Crime
President Clinton flew west today to give a speech to police chiefs about crime.
But by its end, he had instead spun an angry sermon on the nation's duty to a generation of children whose hearts, he said, were being "turned to stone" by violence and neglect.
Asked if the President had strayed from his prepared text, the White House press secretary, Dee Dee Myers, replied, "He sure did."


THEATER
Telling Precious Secrets Just as Children Do  Theater at St. Clement's
A sister and a brother, Chinese-Americans approaching 60, seem to be playing elaborate conversational games in "Arthur and Leila" by the San Francisco playwright Cherylene Lee.
In fact they are exploring their affection for each other at a time when each feels increasingly alone in a strange world.


Who's Delaying the Test Ban? Everyone.
More than 30 years after the U.S., the Soviet Union and Britain signed a Limited Test Ban Treaty halting nuclear tests in the atmosphere, they are finally getting around to negotiating a comprehensive test ban, barring tests altogether.
But they and other nuclear-armed states seem to be looking for ways to limit the new treaty's comprehensiveness.
That, in turn, is delaying a final draft.
Delay is precisely what Britain and France want.
Both want to keep testing, and both hope that if negotiations drag on long enough, other states will lose interest.
One of their delaying tactics has been to press for an exemption for so-called hydronuclear explosions that stop just short of a big bang.
Although both countries argue otherwise, hydronuclear blasts are not needed to assure that warheads are safe and reliable; simulations using high explosives will suffice.


POP
Southern African Traditions Updated With Spirit  Symphony Space
Black Umfolosi, an eight-person a cappella group from Zimbabwe that performed in New York City for the first time on Saturday night, took a handful of Zulu traditions and combined them with the exuberance of youth.
The group, which sometimes seems like a younger, smaller version of the South African a cappella group Ladysmith Black Mambazo, often brought its sweet, resonant harmonies down to earth by asking the audience to throw its American Express cards onstage and miming soccer kicks during its dances.


Archer-Daniels-Midland Co.  (ADM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Victim's Sister Denounces Simpson-Related Halloween Costumes
As jury selection in the murder case against O. J. Simpson entered its fourth day, a sister of Nicole Brown Simpson complained today that people were trying to profit from her family's loss by selling Halloween masks portraying both the victim and the murder suspect.
The sister, Denise Brown, went public with her complaint in a written statement distributed to reporters.
In court, eight potential jurors were questioned today and four others were dismissed.


Noland Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quarterly Earnings Declined At Merrill and Bear Stearns
Signs of underlying strength were seen yesterday in the third-quarter results of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, despite a 35.6 percent drop in earnings that reflected still difficult operating conditions on Wall Street.
Merrill Lynch said that its earnings fell primarily as the result of a steep drop in underwriting revenue.
But analysts said that Merrill, the nation's largest securities firm, continued to show high returns on equity and tight cost controls.
Shares of Merrill rose 87.5 cents yesterday, to $35.25, on the New York Stock Exchange


World News Briefs; U.S. and Cuba to Meet On Immigration Issues
Diplomats from Cuba and the United States are scheduled to meet next Monday in Havana to discuss immigration matters, focusing on how to implement the Clinton Administration's promise to grant entry rights to at least 20,000 Cubans a year.
The talks, which Cuban and American officials said would last two to three days, will also examine how well Cuba is implementing the pledge it made in immigration talks last month to stop the flow of Cubans who try to reach the United States in small boats and rafts.


Once a Mayor, Always a Politician


Corrections
A report in the "On Stage, and Off" column of Weekend on Friday about the performance artist Ron Athey referred incompletely to Congressional budget action on the National Endowment for the Arts.
The final budget for fiscal 1995 was 1.6 percent less than the 1994 budget.
Another report in the column, about a play called "Blade to the Heat," which began previews yesterday at the Joseph Papp Public Theater in the East Village, misspelled the surname of a boxer.
He was Benny Paret.


Barnes Group (B,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Spare Chekhov Begins Sneakily
The actors and spectators for "Vanya on 42d Street" make their entrances casually, drifting into one another at the New Amsterdam Theater and making idle conversation.
That chitchat has evolved into Chekhov almost before a movie audience is ready to notice.
By the time the viewer fully apprehends the grand, cavernous scale of this crumbling theater or the naturalness of the actors, the performance is under way.
This is bare-bones Chekhov, though it is hardly Chekov without cachet.
Under the direction of Andre Gregory, this version of "Uncle Vanya" (filmed simply yet enthrallingly by Louis Malle) has a significant pedigree.
Evolving over a period of years as a workshop production, and available only to small, select audiences, it developed the inevitable mystique, which is only heightened by Mr.
Malle's participation.
With Wallace Shawn in the title role and memories of "My Dinner With Andre" as a quirky, dazzling collaboration by these principals, "Vanya on 42d Street" has a lot to live up to.


MGIC Investment Corp.(MTG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Muslims Urge Store Boycott In Harlem
Vendors displaced by the Giuliani administration's crackdown on illegal peddling in Harlem joined forces with the Nation of Islam yesterday and began picketing stores along 125th Street, calling on shoppers to boycott businesses not owned by black merchants.
The call for the boycott came one day after hundreds of police officers swept the vendors off the busy street where they have proliferated in recent years, angering local store owners.


Baldor Electric Co. (BEZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Plum Creek Timber Co.  L.P.(PCL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Brown Is Not Giants' Basic Problem
IN all the debates about Dave Brown's future as the Giants' quarterback, remember this: he's a virtual rookie on a retooled team without a dependable defensive unit.
For two seasons, Dave Brown stood on the sideline watching Phil Simms, but that's not the same as being in the huddle, as shouting an audible, as reading the defense, as throwing a pass where it should be caught and can't be intercepted.


From Mega-Food, Mega-Girth
MEGA-MUFFINS have become the norm.
A pretzel from a street vendor is as much food as five slices of bread, a simple cup of coffee has turned into a pint of latte, and beers are starting to come in 22-ounce sizes.
Chocolate truffles?
Some are as big as hens' eggs.
This has long been a land of size: big spaces, big cars and big buildings.
Now, there are signs that food is getting bigger than ever.
Restaurants are heaping huge quantities on plates in an effort to attract customers who demand more for their money.


Octel Communications Corp.(OCTL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Governor and Jeb Bush Debate, Exchanging Taunts and Claims of Distorting Truth
In a series of heated exchanges today, Gov.
Lawton Chiles and his Republican opponent, Jeb Bush, strongly attacked each other during a debate here, with each accusing the other of distorting the truth.
Governor Chiles repeatedly questioned Mr.
Bush's integrity, suggesting that Mr.
Bush, a son of former President George Bush, had profited in Miami real estate dealings because of who his father is.


Alfa Corp.(ALFA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rochester Telephone Corp.(RTC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Not a Joke: No Hockey Next Summer
The immediate future of the National Hockey League schedule is filled with uncertainty, but there is one thing to plan on for sure: There will be no games next July and August, no matter how long it takes to resolve the current labor conflict.
Gary Bettman, the N.H.L. commissioner, said this yesterday as the postponement of the season passed through its 18th day.
Bettman, accompanied by two of his vice presidents and John McMullen, the owner of the Devils, spoke in a luncheon interview with reporters and editors of The New York Times.


Endangered Species: Cavities
The sound of a drill in the mouth is becoming increasingly rare as Americans' need for dental fillings continues to decline.
In 1990, according to the latest survey of 4,206 dentists in private practice, Americans received, per capita, half the number of fillings they required in 1959, even though they were four times as likely to have gone to the dentist.
In 1959, more than one dental filling was needed for every man, woman and child, while in 1990, the latest year for which statistics have been compiled, the per capita filling rate was only 0.6.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: THE GOVERNOR The Perks and Pains of Incumbency; For Cuomo, Is the Office an Albatross or an Advantage?
Incumbency for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, particularly the kind of mega-incumbency that afflicts a politician after 12 years in office, is clearly the political albatross that Mr.
Cuomo says it is.
Just look at the polls.
But in a multitude of smaller ways, ranging from Mr.
Cuomo's ability to cut ribbons to the mechanics of how he travels, incumbency has also provided significant benefits for the Cuomo campaign, his opponents charge.


LOTUS DEVELOPMENT CORP. (LOTS,NNM)
The Lotus Development Corporation reported a third-quarter loss yesterday, citing a charge to complete acquisitions, poor performance in Europe and a slow acceptance of a new purchase plan by corporate customers.
The company reported a loss of $66.4 million for the quarter as a result of a $67.9 million charge to complete the acquisitions of Softswitch Inc. and Edge Research Inc. and a $9 million charge to revamp its European operations.


Corporate Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 3


At the Jordan Border, Israeli Farmers Hail the Peace Accord
Gilad Livni, who has lived all his 25 years in Israel, spent some time today in his village's flower beds and pepper fields next to the Jordanian border.
If he goes back there after next week, he will find himself in the Jewish diaspora.


Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber Co.  (CTB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SHOPPING WITH: Charles Busch; After Divas, It's a Challenge To Play a Man
CHARLES BUSCH is not the educated consumer who is Syms's best customer.
Not that you'd expect New York's pre-eminent drag performer and the author of plays like "Vampire Lesbians of Sodom" to shop at Syms.
His usual haunt when it comes to costumes is Lee's Mardi Gras Boutique, where he favors an open-toed black suede pump, size 10.
Which, coincidentally, is also his dress size.


What Happened to Today Sponge
CONSUMERS may be wondering what happened to the Today Sponge, which has disappeared from drugstores nationally.
Thousands of users of the sponge, a popular over-the-counter female contraceptive, have been searching for it since early last summer.
Whitehall-Robins Healthcare, a division of the American Home Products Corporation, which manufactures the sponge in Hammonton, N.J., voluntarily halted production more than a year ago after a routine Food and Drug Administration inspection found a problem in the plant's water purification system.


Market Place; Apple may defy the doomsayers, even in the long run.
IS Apple Computer for sale?
Despite a gangbuster quarter that suggests the company's Power Macintosh family of personal computers is taking off, conventional wisdom suggests that Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., will soon wilt before the inevitable onslaught of a yet-to-be-shipped and untested Microsoft operating system, Windows 95.


U.S. Inaction on Gunmen Upsets Haitians
Officials and supporters of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide's newly restored Government are quickly growing alarmed at the unwillingness of American troops here to disarm and arrest paramilitary gunmen.
They warn that the Americans' passivity could ignite popular retribution against the gunmen and reduce support for the foreign military presence here.


Genentech Inc.(GNE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Frisch's Restaurants Inc.(FRS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 18


People
*
Chris Parios was named president and chief operating officer at Ferguson Communications Group, Parsippany, N.J., succeeding John Zweig, who was previously named vice chairman.
Mr.
Parios was previously chief executive at Nidco International Inc., Liberty Corner, N.J.


U.S. to Aid Big 3 in Cleaner-Car Research
A year-old Government partnership with the Big Three auto makers has developed "a road map" for building a car that would go 80 miles on a gallon of gasoline with no loss in performance, safety or carrying capacity, Vice President Al Gore said today.
But smaller competitors in the race for high-technology clean cars are complaining that the three giants could squeeze them out of the effort.
That is because the plan calls for the Government to coordinate its research and development spending by seven Federal agencies with the efforts of Ford, Chrysler and General Motors.
Much of the research involves using electricity to power cars, a technology that the Big Three have opposed, at least for now.


Home Shopping Network Inc.(HSN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Connecticut G.O.P. Nominee Defends His New Positions
At the start of his campaign for governor in January, John G. Rowland sounded almost benign about the state's new income tax.
"I'm not running on a statute or position of repealing the income tax," Mr.
Rowland, a Republican, said on WFSB-TV in Hartford, stressing that he planned only to reduce it.


Myth of Back-Alley Abortions Refuses to Die; Use Hospital Facilities
To the Editor:
"Abortion: Where Are the Doctors?" (editorial, Oct. 13) could have addressed the lack of participation of our overbuilt hospital system in providing abortion facilities.
The procedure is relegated to free-standing clinics, which are more vulnerable to war-zone dynamics.
Hospital outpatient facilities would be safer and more medically appropriate.


Using the Racketeering Law To Bring Down Street Gangs
A year ago, the C &amp; C drug gang ruled a corner of the South Bronx with assaults, kidnappings and murders, doing its part to make the 40th Precinct one of the most dangerous in New York City.
But just how big a role the gang played became clear only after the C &amp; C gang and one of its rival groups were virtually eliminated by Federal racketeering indictments, using a law originally intended to fight the Mafia.


Ex-Lawmaker Indicted in Post Office Scandal
In the latest spinoff from the House post office scandal, a Federal grand jury today indicted Joseph P. Kolter, a former Democratic Representative from Pennsylvania, on five felony charges, accusing him of embezzling more than $44,000 in Congressional money for his personal use.
Mr.
Kolter, an accountant and one-time high school teacher, represented the Fourth Congressional District outside Pittsburgh for 10 years until he was defeated in a primary in 1992.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Link Between 4 Monologues: The Drone of a Dying Bee Performance Space 122
The waning drone of a dying bee links the four monologues that make up "Of Mice, Bugs and Women," an engaging performance piece by Deb Margolin, which may be seen tomorrow through Sunday at Performance Space 122 (150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, East Village).
A comic but melancholy sound, like a burlesque sigh, the drone becomes a gnawing aural emblem of both time passing and time frozen for Ms.
Margolin's ingeniously interconnected characters and the performer herself.


Hon Industries (HONI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


An Icon of 60's Liberalism Goes on the Attack
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, revered and reviled as liberalism's lawmaker, is fighting the battle of his political life on the ground he finds comfortable, defending government as an instrument of hope even as his opponent ridicules him as a man of "another time."
Mitt Romney, the Republicans' hope for their biggest single victory of the fall, uses television to portray the 62-year-old incumbent as fat and feeble, an irrelevant symbol of the 1960's who stands in the way of welfare reform, the death penalty and a smaller government that, the challenger says, would let the economy boom.


DPL Inc.(DPL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
One-Legged Tap-Dancer Turns 87 Still Dancing  Fashion Institute of Technology
The tap-dancer Clayton (Peg Leg) Bates turned 87 on Oct. 11.
On Sunday afternoon, some of his colleagues offered a program that proved to be a heartwarming birthday party.


Treasury Prices Drop, Quieting a 3-Day Rally
Prices of Treasury securities declined yesterday, indicating to some traders and investors that the recent three-day bond market rally had run out of steam.
Higher oil prices and speculation about the intentions of the Federal Reserve weighed down Treasury securities yesterday.


Working As Shadow Puts Hasty In Spotlight
James Hasty has been shadowing Rob Moore for two weeks, pretending that the wide receiver is someone else.
Someone with an enemy jersey.
Wherever Moore ventured on the field after the Jets finished their regular practice sessions, Hasty was breathing on him.
Hasty needed and desired extra work on man-to-man coverage, so he hounded Moore, the most difficult man to contain on the Jets.
When Moore was unavailable, Hasty worked against other receivers.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A challenge for agencies: convincing clients that they can learn the tricks of the new media.
WHILE media technologies like interactive television are undoubtedly new tricks, advertising agency executives are trying to reassure their clients that their shops are most definitely not old dogs.
"We should not fear obsolescence, nor should our clients fear our ability to adapt," Allen Rosenshine, chairman and chief executive of BBDO Worldwide in New York, said here yesterday at the final general session of the 85th annual meeting and business conference of the Association of National Advertisers.


O'Donnell Might Enjoy His Trip Back to Jersey
If the Giants' secondary is not in chaos, it is not far away.
On Sunday, the Los Angeles Rams, the team of Coach Chuck Knox and his Ground Chuck offense, passed on their first play against the Giants.
And why not?
The Giants' four defensive-backfield starters from last year are gone.
Their replacements have not yet learned to play together.
Coach Dan Reeves hints that a change or changes will be made today.


Watts Industries(WATTA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Enron Oil &amp; Gas (EOG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


P. J. McCarthy, 76, Cornell Statistician
Philip J. McCarthy, an expert in economic and social statistics who helped develop the more sophisticated polling and sampling techniques that came into use after World War II, died on Oct. 10 at Tompkins Community Hospital in Ithaca, N.Y., where he lived.
He was 76 and also lived on Cushing's Island, Me.
The cause was pneumonia, a family member said.


LCI International (LCII,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dolphins' Parmalee Is Suddenly a Celebrity
It took nine years of unwavering faith in himself for Bernie Parmalee to become an overnight star.
By the time the Miami Dolphins' third-year running back arrived home Sunday night from the Los Angeles Raiders game, well-wishers in his south Broward neighborhood had tied balloons to his mailbox, a fresh acknowledgment that someone special lives there.


Teco Energy Inc.(TE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Accord Reached on Refrigerator Efficiency
An agreement on new energy efficiency standards that would save the owner of a refrigerator about $120 during its life was announced yesterday by appliance manufacturers and the environmental group that has spearheaded the conservation effort.
The United States Department of Energy was scheduled to issue energy guidelines on refrigerators in 1998.
Jack Riggs, the principal deputy assistant secretary for policy at the department, said yesterday that the agreement would make it easier for the agency to "move quickly on this rule."


BHC Communications Inc.(BHC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Symbol Technologies Inc.(SBL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Campaigning, Pataki Seems to Do Better in Person Than on Camera
On a cool Wednesday morning a week ago, Zenia Mucha, campaign spokeswoman for State Senator George E. Pataki, was on the road at dawn, headed from Manhattan to Albany to meet her candidate and travel with him on a chartered jet as he carried his anti-crime message across the state.
In seven hours, Mr.
Pataki would hold news conferences in Syracuse, Rochester and Cheektowaga, as well as attend a campaign office opening in Latham.
Fund-raisers, like bookends, would start and finish the day.


Cambrex Corp.(CBM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


IN PERFORMANCE:
A Family's Metamorphosis From Mainstream to Dead  City Center
"Big Bertha" was a shocker when it was first performed in 1970.
But since then we've become used to the idea of evil agents, families gone amok and Paul Taylor as a subtly subversive choreographer.
In this major revival of the Taylor season, presented on Friday night, a towering, unsubtle carnival wind-up woman slowly but surely destroys a perfect middle-class family that passes by and ill advisedly puts coins in her outstretched hand.


Century Communications Corp.(CTY,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


World Cup Gives Rothenberg $3 Million
The 1994 World Cup finished with a profit of about $50 million and the chief United States organizer, ALAN ROTHENBERG, will get a $3 million bonus, the organizers said yesterday.
At the start of 1994, Rothenberg estimated a profit of $20 million.
It increased because security costs were lower than forecast.


Saber Rattling
It has become as much of a pattern in the O. J. Simpson trial as the tiffs between Robert L. Shapiro and Marcia Clark or the defendant's cheery smiles to prospective jurors.
Judge Lance A. Ito, his dander raised by what he deems wayward lawyers, journalists or policemen, threatens, scolds or withholds, and hints at some action that will change the complexion of the case.
Then, a few days later and a few decibels lower, he opts for the least drastic alternative.


John Nuveen Co. (JNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Berlioz Premiere
The New York premiere of Berlioz's Messe Solenelle is to be the highlight of an all-Berlioz concert by the Boston Symphony Orchestra on Friday at 8 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
The concert, to be conducted by Seiji Ozawa, will also include the Overture and "Royal Hunt and Storm" music from "Les Troyens" and "Reverie et Caprice" for violin and orchestra.
Guest artists are Vinson Cole, tenor; Gilles Cachemaille, baritone; Malcolm Lowe, violinist, and the Tanglewood Festival Chorus.
Tickets are $20, $35 and $45.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


KU Energy Corp.(KU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Daigle Gets His Wish: Back to Juniors
Ottawa's ALEXANDRE DAIGLE, the top pick in the 1993 draft, was cleared yesterday to return to his junior team for the duration of the National Hockey League's lockout.
The Senators, the N.H.L.'s worst team last season, initially neglected to include the 19-year-old center's name on a list of players eligible to return to juniors during the labor dispute.


Baghdad's Kuwait Caper: Its Isolation Gets Deeper
Two weeks after Iraq moved troops toward Kuwait in what some diplomats called a gamble to get the United Nations to lift crippling trade sanctions, the sanctions remain in place and Baghdad has little room for diplomatic or military maneuvering.
Baghdad's hope that Washington's swift military response could be checked by nations like France, Russia and China in the United Nations Security Council collapsed as the Council voted unanimously on Sunday to condemn Iraq's actions, as it has done repeatedly since the invasion of Kuwait in 1990.


Gallagher (Arthur J.) &amp; Co.  (AJG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
GOODYEAR TIRE AND RUBBER CO., Akron, Ohio, will sell its Micron Materials unit to Baker Rubber Inc., South Bend, Ind., for undisclosed terms.
LORAL CORP., New York, said its military systems division had won a five-year contract worth $100 million to work on the Tomahawk cruise missile team, supplying 1,000 missile guidance system components to Hughes Missile Systems.


Dakari Hru; Poet, 42
Dakari Hru, a poet and an author of children's books, died on Aug. 31 at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 42 and lived in Manhattan.
He died after a brief illness, said Mary Jack Wald Associates, his literary representative.


PATH Lines Are Returned To Normal
Service on PATH trains returned to normal yesterday after a Federal judge ordered engineers and switchmen to stop calling in sick.
The union representing the engineers and switchmen has been working without a contract since September 1990 and has refused to accept work-rule changes that the eight other unions representing PATH workers have agreed to.


Court Says Employer Insurance Plans Cannot Limit AIDS Benefits
Health insurance plans sponsored by businesses cannot discriminate against people with AIDS or other illnesses by setting benefit limits that are different from the limits on other kinds of illnesses, a Federal appeals court has ruled.
Many corporate health plans, to reduce costs, now limit the amount of coverage that is available to people with AIDS.
Marc E. Elovitz, staff counsel for the AIDS Project of the American Civil Liberties Union, said the ruling by the Federal appeals court in Boston on Monday was the first in which an appeals court had addressed whether limiting some kinds of illness but not others was a discriminatory practice barred by the Americans With Disabilities Act, passed in 1992.
Earlier cases on the topic had been settled before trial or are pending in lower courts.


GATX Corp.(GMT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Puerto Ricans on Mainland Making Gains, Study Finds
Puerto Ricans born in the 50 states made striking economic gains in the 1980's -- so striking that, by one measure, their income now surpasses that of Hispanic residents generally and of American-born blacks, a new national study has concluded.
But those who migrated to the mainland from Puerto Rico lag behind mainland-born Puerto Ricans in income, education and employment.
The study also found that Puerto Ricans had moved beyond longtime geographical enclaves.
Among Puerto Ricans living in the 50 states in 1960, two in three were residents of New York City; today, fewer than one in three is.


Computer Data Systems Inc.(CPTD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


It's a New Ball Game, But Only in the Talks
Negotiators for major league baseball club owners and players will visit a strange place today -- the bargaining table.
When they convene in Washington for their first formal meeting in 40 days, representatives of the two sides will be joined by Bill Usery Jr., who began earning his mediating fee yesterday.


Marvel Adds Welsh Comics
Marvel Entertainment Group Inc. has agreed to acquire Welsh Publishing Group, a publisher of comic books based on popular characters like the Mighty Morphin Power Rangers.
Financial details of the sale were not disclosed.


Food Notes
Trump Tower Luxuries
Truffles in Trump Tower?
Of course.
Urbani Fifth Avenue, a retail shop owned by Urbani Truffle, an importer in Long Island City, Queens, has just opened on the fifth floor.
Only luxury goods, like fresh Italian white truffles and giant dried porcini mushrooms, Russian caviar, French foie gras and Scotch smoked salmon are sold in this gleaming little shop.
Some introductory specials include an assortment for $60 consisting of 4 ounces of osetra caviar with a mother-of-pearl server and two 4-ounce packages of smoked salmon.
White truffles are currently $95 an ounce, but delicious fresh tortellini with a white truffle filling are a mere $9 for about half a pound.


Personal Health; Childhood epilepsy is no longer a life sentence.
IN decades past, a child with epilepsy was thought to have a lifelong disorder that required lifelong treatment.
For many children, the drugs they took to control their seizures greatly reduced the quality of their lives by interfering with schooling, socializing and athletics.
The potent drugs turned some of them into walking zombies.
And, for a still more unfortunate group, even the best drugs could not prevent seizures.
New Options
But today, many children who are free of seizures for two or more years while on anti-epileptic medication are being encouraged to taper off the drugs gradually, with the astonishing result that about 75 percent of them will remain free of seizures indefinitely, even without medication.
For some, the odds are better than 90 percent, although others have only a 50-50 chance of remaining free of seizures.


Thomas Fulton Memorial
A memorial service for the conductor Thomas Fulton is to be held tomorrow at 5 P.M. at the 92d Street Y on Lexington Avenue.
Carol Vaness, Sharon Sweet, Maria Guleghina, Vinson Cole and Sherrill Milnes are to sing, accompanied by John Keenan and Patrick Stevens, and a string quartet from the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra is to play.
The service is open to the public; seating is to begin at 4:30.
Mr.
Fulton, who was 44, died on Aug. 4.


No Headline
"Suddenly he pulled out a knife, in the classical arc position like Hamlet, and he goes after the guy. The guy sees the knife coming down at him and there is a tremendous commotion. The guy falls on the floor and dollars go flying all over the place." SCOTT ROBESON, describing a robbery at a Manhattan bank machine.  [ A1:5. ]


Co-Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stefan Martin; Artist, 58
Stefan Martin, an artist noted for his wood engravings, drowned on Oct. 7 in Assunpink Lake in Millstone Township, N.J.
He was 58 and lived in Roosevelt, N.J.
He was in a rowboat that apparently capsized, said his brother, Tony Martin of Brooklyn.


Nortek Inc.(NTK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Bosnia Serbs Attack Aid Convoy; U.N. Rejects NATO Strike
Bosnian Serb forces opened fire today on a United Nations aid convoy in eastern Bosnia, killing a Muslim driver and wounding another man.
A local United Nations commander requested a retaliatory NATO air strike against the Serbs, but the request was turned down by the United Nations command in Sarajevo.
A spokesman for the United Nations force said the convoy had come from Belgrade to the eastern Muslim enclave of Gorazde.
From there, using local drivers, the convoy continued today to outlying villages in the area, and the attack occurred about 12 miles from Gorazde.


American Electric Power Co.  (AEP,N) reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Public Service Enterprise Group (PEG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Legal Fund Is Formed By Savings and Loans
Stepping up its battle against new Justice Department rules that might force savings and loans to expand their operations in minority neighborhoods, the industry's trade association said today that it had created a $100,000 fund that could be used for legal challenges.
David E. A. Carson, the chairman of the trade group, Savings and Community Bankers of America, said that part or all of it could be donated to the legal defense efforts of the next savings institution accused by the Justice Department of racial bias.
But no firm decisions, he said, have yet been made on how to spend the money.


Attwoods PLC (A,N) reports earnings for Year to July 31


Promus Cos.(PRI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Solo Sailor Is Rescued
It was a harrowing night for the British solo sailor Josh Hall as he scrambled to keep his 60-foot sailboat Gartmore Investment Managers from sinking after a collision at sea with an unidentified object.
But a fellow competitor in the BOC single-handed yacht race around the world, Alan Nebauer of Australia, saved the day, as well as Hall.
Nebauer changed course in the South Atlantic Ocean Monday night to rescue Hall, whose boat was taking on water.


Jordan's King Is Betting On a 'Peace Dividend'
During the Persian Gulf war three and a half years ago, Fouad al-Afghani did a brisk business selling key chains and lapel pins modeled on the 39 Iraqi Scud missiles that were fired at Israel.
His jumbled store in downtown Amman still offers a T-shirt emblazoned with a Scud and the words, "Who will fire the 40th?"
These days, Mr.
Afghani, 47, a Palestinian who barely knew his family's home in Jaffa before Israel became a state and he became a refugee, feels he has been left behind by the region's ever-shifting politics.


Corrections
An entry in the listing of debt offerings in Business Day on Monday referred incorrectly to one by the Guam Power Authority.
It is not open for competitive bidding, but is a negotiated sale through Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


BancTec Inc.(BTEC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Book Notes
Win a Nobel
American publishers of Kenzaburo Oe's novels had heard so often that Mr.
Oe was about to win the Nobel Prize in Literature that they'd stopped listening to the rumors.
But Mr.
Oe (pronounced OH-ay) did indeed win this year, and now the taken-by-surprise publishers have another problem: how to get copies of his books into bookstores quickly enough to capitalize on the news.
Given the generally poor sales of Japanese literature in the United States, it's not surprising that many of Mr.
Oe's books have never even been published here, even though he is considered among the most important Japanese authors of the postwar generation.
And the books that have been published here were either out of print last week or available in such small quantities that they sold out as soon as the prize was announced.


Minerals Technologies Inc.(MTX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Nicor Inc.(GAS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Foreign Minister of Rwanda Is Reported Missing in New York
Rwanda's Foreign Minister has disappeared in New York along with $187,000 in cash he had carried here to finance the country's embassy in Washington and United Nations mission, the police and Rwandan officials said today.
The Foreign Minister, Vianney Jean-Marie Ndagijimana, had accompanied Rwanda's new President to New York on Oct. 5 to attend the General Assembly session.
Three days later, when the President summoned Rwandan diplomats for a meeting, the Foreign Minister did not appear, and he has not been seen since.


Nuclear Breakthrough in Korea
Diplomacy with North Korea has scored a resounding triumph.
Monday's draft agreement freezing and then dismantling North Korea's nuclear program should bring to an end two years of international anxiety and put to rest widespread fears that an unpredictable nation might provoke nuclear disaster.
The U.S. negotiator Robert Gallucci and his North Korean interlocutors have drawn up a detailed road map of reciprocal steps that both sides accepted despite deep mutual suspicion.
In so doing they have defied impatient hawks and other skeptics who accused the Clinton Administration of gullibility and urged swifter, stronger action.


Landstar Systems Inc.(LSTR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Michael Andretti Gets His Father's Ride
MICHAEL ANDRETTI and PAUL TRACY were named yesterday as the new drivers for the Newman/Haas IndyCar motor racing team, replacing Andretti's father, MARIO, and NIGEL MANSELL.
Terms of the deals were not announced, but the owner CARL HAAS said Andretti had signed for three years.


'Shoo-In' for French Presidency in '95 Now Faces a Struggle
Prime Minister Edouard Balladur never disguised his strategy for becoming France's next President: he would stand above the political fray and concentrate on governing the country until early next year, when he would emerge as the natural successor to Francois Mitterrand.
Until recently the strategy seemed to be working.
Polls showed him to be far more popular than his main rightist challenger, Jacques Chirac, the leader of his own Gaullist party.
And, on the left, the Socialist Party was a shadow of the force that twice elected Mr.
Mitterrand.


Chemical Waste Management Inc.(CHW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bucks and Robinson Light Years Apart
The Milwaukee Bucks and GLENN ROBINSON, the No. 1 pick in the National Basketball Association draft, are four years and $40 million apart in contract talks, the club said yesterday.


Pataki Pledges Relief From State Mandates as Cuomo Addresses Women's Issues
In his only campaign event today, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo spoke to an enthusiastic crowd of about 400 Democratic women, many of them state employees eager to cheer their boss.
But the Governor left his mild-mannered Lieutenant Governor, Stan Lundine, to deliver the applause lines attacking State Senator George E. Pataki's record on abortion.
On Long Island, meanwhile, another Cuomo surrogate, the Governor's daughter-in-law, Kerry Kennedy Cuomo, held a news conference to call Mr.
Pataki "a liar" on the issue of abortion.


Jefferies Group Inc.(JEFG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Comforts of Solving Comfortable Mysteries
Andy Griffith has "Matlock." Angela Lansbury has "Murder, She Wrote." Now after trial-balloon success in a two-hour movie this year, Bill Cosby is working on his own retirement annuity in "The Cosby Mysteries," Wednesdays at 8 P.M.  on NBC.
Mr.
Cosby is the star, executive producer and fellow who makes sure his deserving friends and relatives never want for a job.
There's usually another Cosby or two embedded in the final credits.
Like "Matlock" and "Murder, She Wrote," "The Cosby Mysteries" sticks to comfortable sleuthing, the kind likely to appeal to older viewers eager to escape the escalating nastiness and violence of real life.
The bad guys never get away with anything in this tightly structured world.
As Guy Hanks, a "Quincy"-like forensics genius who is able to retire from his New York City Police Department job after winning a $40 million lottery (the devices of scriptwriters are shameless), Mr.
Cosby is the soul of lovably cranky propriety.


Sun Microsystems Inc.(SUNW,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


U.S. to China: Be More Open On Arms Plan
In a rare address to Chinese military officers, Defense Secretary William J. Perry urged China's armed forces today to be more open about the budget and the planning in order to ease concerns abroad.
"Your capabilities in all areas, including the military areas, are growing by the day," Mr.
Perry told 300 Chinese colonels and generals.
"It would be helpful if your defense budget and strategic planning were more open and visible to the outside world."


Carlisle Cos. (CSL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


From a Nobody in the Rockies to a National Power
After playing two seasons at Division III Iona College, Karl Ballard decided he'd live a life of regret unless he attempted major-college football.
A friend told him about Colorado State, so Ballard piled into his four-wheel drive vehicle last January and headed for the Rocky Mountains, arriving on the school's doorstep as a football orphan, a can of film his only calling card.
Until he spoke with his friend, Ballard had never heard of Colorado State or Fort Collins, a former 19th century Army outpost an hour's drive north of Denver.
He tried to phone the coach, Sonny Lubick, but never got through during Christmas vacation.
So he decided to apply in person.
Ballard played well enough at linebacker during spring drills to be invited back as a walk-on for fall practice.
He drove back to Colorado, but, without a scholarship or money to waste, he slept in the parking lot of fast-food restaurants in Indiana and Nebraska on the three-day trip.


Lukens Inc.(LUC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Off the Menu
A Six-Star Dinner
For the first time, Joel Robuchon, who has a Michelin three-star restaurant in Paris, and Alain Ducasse, the three-star chef from Monte Carlo, Monaco, are joining forces.
They will be cooking dinner together in Paris on Saturday.
The $1,000 seats for the black-tie event, at Restaurant Laurent on Avenue Gabriel, have been sold out for months.
The menu for the 150 guests is a secret, but 1924 Chateau Lafite-Rothschild will be poured.
And Cuban cigars made for the evening will be lighted (the event is being organized by Marvin R. Shanken, the publisher of the quarterly Cigar Aficionado).
Some of the proceeds are to benefit Cap Cure, the Association for the Cure of Cancer of the Prostate.
A World's-Best List
According to one critic, Mr.
Robuchon's restaurant, bearing his name, and Mr.
Ducasse's Louis XV are, respectively, the best and the fourth best restaurants in the world.


Teradyne Inc.(TER,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Armed Men Steal Cars From East Side Garage
Wholesale robbery.
In a city that prides itself on doing things in a big way, grand larceny auto is achieving a new level of grandeur.
In the latest manifestation of an apparent trend, nine to 12 masked men emerged from a van on the Upper East Side early yesterday, pointed a gun at a garage attendant and stole nine cars.


Bell Microproducts (BELM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2 Agencies Selected For Jobs in Mexico
Two well-known advertisers selected agencies on their rosters to handle their accounts in Mexico.
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company in Mexico City said yesterday that it had named Young &amp; Rubicam Mexico in Mexico City to handle its account, which was previously handled in-house.
Billings were estimated at $18 million.
Y.&amp; R., which already handles the Sears apparel and stores accounts in the United States, was awarded the Mexican portion without a review.


Region News Briefs; 2 New Jersey Unions Sue State on Pensions
Two of New Jersey's largest unions today filed suit against the state in Federal court over changes made to their pension systems.
The suit, filed by the New Jersey Education Association and the Communication Workers of America, charges that changes enacted by the Legislature in June violate due process and infringe upon the employees' property rights.


Watsco Inc.(WSO,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


El Paso Natural Gas (EPG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Traffic Alert
Because of President Clinton's visit to New York today, sections of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive and First Avenue will be closed during the early afternoon and evening.
The streets around the Sheraton New York Hotel, at Seventh Avenue and West 53d Street, will be closed from mid-afternoon to mid-evening for the visit.
While the President's motorcade is moving, all other traffic will be at a standstill.
The Department of Transportation is advising motorists to use public transportation to avoid major delays.


Bystanders Join to Trap Robber At an East Side Cash Machine
Lending a hand is nothing new to Scott Robeson.
At 6:30 every morning, he stops at Richard Stagner's Manhattan newsstand, at 60th Street and Lexington Avenue, to help Mr.
Stagner untie newspaper bundles.
Yesterday, when Mr.
Robeson made his usual stop at the newsstand, he and Mr.
Stagner were called on for a more urgent sort of help, a chance to defy the stereotype of a cold, hard city where people will not lift a finger for their fellow citizens.
Mr.
Robeson spotted a robber stabbing a man at an automated teller machine -- the sort of place where, like the dark alleys of earlier times, people look anxiously over their shoulders -- and as the victim tumbled out the bank's door, the two barricaded the robber inside the lobby until the police arrived.


DSC Communications Corp.(DIGI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


IN PERFORMANCE: MUSIC
A Celebrated Oboist Highlights the 20th Century  Colden Center for the Performing Arts
There is a difficult split in Heinz Holliger's musical world view.
He is a fervent advocate of contemporary music, a creator of esoteric, dizzyingly complex avant-garde scores.
At the same time, he carries the responsibility of being the world's most famous oboist, arguably the world's only famous oboist.
In a Sunday afternoon recital at Queens College, he was more oboist than experimentalist, although the 20th century was given healthy representation.


New Editors for Two Women's Magazines
The game of musical chairs in the women's service magazines accelerated this week.
Ellen Levine, editor in chief of Redbook, will become editor in chief of Good Housekeeping, and Kate White, editor in chief of McCall's, will replace Ms.
Levine at Redbook.
The appointments follow the announcement last week that John Mack Carter, editor in chief of Good Housekeeping for 19 years, would leave that post to head Hearst Magazines Enterprises, a new division of the Hearst Corporation that will create magazines.
Hearst is the parent of Redbook and Good Housekeeping.


Trotting Title Is on the Line
Bullville Victory drew Post 5 yesterday for Friday night's $400,000 Cadillac Breeders Crown 3-year-old colt trot at Garden State Park in Cherry Hill, N.J., a race that should determine the divisional champion.
Bullville Victory, the 8-5 favorite who will be driven by John Campbell, won two legs of trotting's triple crown, the Yonkers Trot and Kentucky Futurity.
The Hambletonian winner, Victory Dream, is a 9-5 second choice with Mike LaChance from Post 2.


The Benefits of Incumbency
While polls show 12 years of incumbency may be hurting Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, it also provides perks that opponents say give him an unfair campaign edge.
Page B1.


Class Notes
It wasn't the greatest homecoming at the University of Georgia last weekend.
Not only did the Dawgs get whomped by Vanderbilt, but black students boycotted the event and marched on the football stadium chanting, "No Justice! No Queen!" after an all-white field of finalists produced a white homecoming queen.
But then, it wasn't the greatest homecoming a week earlier at the University of North Carolina, either.
The Tar Heels won, but many whites were upset because for the sixth year in a row a black candidate was elected queen, prompting aggrieved whites to gripe about "bloc voting" by blacks.


What Happened to Guatemala Guerrilla?
To the Editor:
You report that Jennifer Harbury, a Harvard Law School graduate, is living in the District of Columbia as she searches for her husband, the Guatemalan guerrilla Efrain Bamaca Velasquez, also known as Commandante Everardo (news article, Oct. 14).


Illinova Corp.(ILN,N) reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Healthsouth Rehabilitation Corp.(HRC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fall Planting Time: Get Those Clams In


Myth of Back-Alley Abortions Refuses to Die; Protect Targeted Clinics
To the Editor:
Last week three abortion clinics (two in California, one in Montana) were firebombed.
These crimes were not reported by any New York City newspaper, including yours.
These acts of arson underline the point made in "Abortion: Where Are the Doctors?" (editorial, Oct. 13).


Public &amp; Private; After the Rape
She came back from the pool carrying her towel, and as soon as she was inside the apartment he was behind her with the knife.
He told her to lie down on the floor and then he put the towel over her head and he raped her.
When he was gone she called 911 and the police came and they took her to the hospital.
And then something remarkable happened.
She was treated with sensitivity and great care by people whose only duties were to look after her, explaining what was happening as the semen and saliva samples were taken, as her pubic hair was combed for evidence, as she dropped her bathing suit onto butcher paper.


Banks Going Interactive to Fend Off New Rivals
Forget about learning to play interactive television game shows.
Postpone plans to visit the Library of Congress on line.
The first big consumer business on the information highway is shaping up as a set of financial household chores: balancing the checkbook, paying bills, saving for retirement.
Banks spent millions to develop and offer their services on personal computers a decade ago, but no one was interested.
Now, with the number of home computers in the United States at 30 million and growing, consumers have increasingly diverse options for checking their balances, moving money, paying bills and opening new accounts from personal computers and new computerized telephones.
Several hundred thousand households now do a substantial amount of their money management electronically from home.


Kent Electronics Corp.(KNT,N) reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 1


KLA Instruments (KLAC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Universal Health Services Inc.(UHS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Merck and Lilly Post Strong Earnings and Sales
Two big pharmaceutical companies, Eli Lilly and Merck, reported strong quarterly sales and earnings growth yesterday.
SmithKline Beecham, also an important drug maker, reported a relatively modest 4.9 percent gain as it struggled with price-cutting for generic copies of its flagship Tagamet, a widely used anti-ulcer treatment.
Analysts said the industry would report earnings growth of 5 to 8 percent in the third quarter, reflecting reduced spending for sales and marketing and aggressive discounting to increase volume.


Seminoles' Athletic Director Is Out
Florida State's athletic director, BOB GOIN, was dismissed yesterday for accepting a cut-rate roof on his house from the school contractor working on a $96 million stadium expansion.


Robert Ford, Clipper Pilot of 40's Who Circled Globe, Dies at 88
Capt.
Robert Ford, an aviator who made his mark in the era of the flying boats with an unscheduled flight round the globe, died on Sunday at his 880-acre ranch at Penn Valley, Calif., north of Sacramento.
He was 88.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, his family said.


A Look at Prostitutes and Their Ways, a Close Look
"Prostitution, Sex and the Law" is a little tentative about getting around to its mission.
The first half of tonight's hourlong report involves two upscale sex workers who were brought down by the law: the renowned Mayflower Madam and a sometime Los Angeles meter maid who decided that prostitution was less stressful and more therapeutic than police work.
It is amusing to hear Sydney Biddle Barrow, who ran a Manhattan escort service ($250 an hour), talk about market segments and customer loyalty, and Norma Jean Almodovar ($200 an hour), a true Californian, say that she actually found prostitution "very nurturing."


Trinity Industries(TRN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Borden Chemicals &amp; Plastics LP (BCU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 23


A Spanish Financier Is Arrested
A prominent financier, Javier de la Rosa, faces charges of fraud and the misuse of millions of dollars guaranteed by the Catalonia regional government for his latest venture, a $400 million theme park near Barcelona known as Grand Tibidabo.
Mr. de la Rosa, who was arrested today and questioned by a Barcelona magistrate this evening, has come to symbolize the get-rich-quick schemes of the booming 1980's for Spain's Socialist Government, which has itself been plagued by corruption scandals.


Myth of Back-Alley Abortions Refuses to Die; How Doctors Feel
To the Editor:
"Abortion: Where Are the Doctors?" (editorial, Oct. 13) at last addresses another participant in this process.
Attention has so far been focused only on the rights of women and fetuses, and rarely on the role of the medical practitioner.


Stryker Corp.(STRY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Butler Manufacturing Co.  (BTLR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New View of Prozac: It's Good But It's Not a Wonder Drug
AFTER listening to all the good news about the antidepressant Prozac, researchers are taking a more sober second look.
A statistical analysis of 13 studies of the medication finds that it is no more effective than the older generation of antidepressants it has largely swept from the marketplace.
The study, published in the current issue of The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, was the first meta-analysis of all of the published, stringently controlled studies of the effectiveness of fluoxetine, the generic name for Prozac.
It concludes that "fluoxetine produces modest effects, roughly comparable in magnitude to those of other antidepressants."


In Opening Its Finance, Mexico Bets Long Term
Mexican and foreign executives alike welcomed Mexico's wide opening to foreign banks and brokerage houses today, putting aside the prospect of tougher competition to instead emphasize the shot in the arm for Mexico's flagging economy.
"This is a historic event," said Ricardo Guajardo, chairman of Grupo Financiero Bancomer, Mexico's second-largest financial organization.
"These banks are definitely going to represent greater competition, but it is not going to come overnight."


Tales About the Yakuza May Endanger Health
Juzo Itami's "Minbo -- or the Gentle Art of Japanese Extortion" is a film already notorious for its aftermath.
Within days of its 1992 Japanese premiere, this satire about the mobsters known as Yakuza prompted a vicious assault on the film maker, who was slashed and seriously wounded.
What seemed to have galled the Yakuza most was the film's suggestion that they make empty threats.
Certainly "Minbo," which opens at the Cinema Village today, takes the brave step of presenting these tough guys as buffoons.
The Yakuza seen here travel in large, safe groups and make demands with grunts and grimaces.
Blackmail is their specialty, and the film demonstrates some of their favorite, most colorful methods.
Mr.
Itami apparently intended this as a cautionary tale and wound up succeeding all too well in that regard.


Darling International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


8 KILLED IN TEXAS AS FLOODS WORSEN
Rain, relentless rain, punctuated by thunder and lightning, pounded southeast Texas for a fourth straight day today and showed no signs of letting up.
The rain and flooding have killed at least eight people, with several more feared dead.
Hundreds of others are stranded in desperate situations as waters rise around their homes, and at least 10,000 people have been forced into shelters in roughly a 50-mile radius around Houston.


International Rectifier Corp.(IRF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Charles A. Walburg Jr.; Physician, 87
Charles A. Walburg Jr., an obstetrician and gynecologist who practiced medicine in Harlem for more than 60 years, died Oct. 1 at St.
Luke's Hospital.
He was 87 and lived in Harlem.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said his daughter Judith A. Walburg of New York City.


Montana and Elway Make It Memorable
The morning after the Giants lost by 27-10 on "Monday Night Football" last week, ABC's Al (I Eat No Vegetables) Michaels was eating an eggs Benedict breakfast at the Four Seasons Hotel in Manhattan when the show's unfortunate penchant for telecasting blowouts arose.
"Did we have a great telecast?" he asked.
"Well, the first half was great. But by late in the third quarter, we were in the syndrome of four weeks out of five, the game's over," he said.
"In the last couple of years, there have been maybe two or three compelling games a year out of 17."


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 14
Oct. 7
Oct. 15
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.5
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.4
3.5
Gasoline stocks
208.6
212.0
209.7
Distillate stocks
143.9
144.9
132.2
Crude imports, daily
7.1
7.2
7.5
Product imports, daily
2.0
1.6
1.9
Crude stocks
333.9
328.6
327.1
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
91.2
92.3
93.7
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Attacking the Republican 'Contract With America'
CANDIDATE -- Representative Jolene Unsoeld, in a tough re-election race in Washington State, is one of many Democrats around the country broadcasting advertisements that attack the Republican "contract with America." PRODUCER -- Fenn King Murphy Communications


Falconbridge Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Judge in Simpson Case Refuses To Bar Blood Sample Evidence
Backing away from an earlier threat, the judge in the O. J. Simpson murder case today refused to exclude critical blood samples as evidence in the trial even though prosecutors waited nearly three months before beginning DNA testing on them.
Judge Lance A. Ito of Los Angeles County Superior Court made the ruling despite arguments by Mr.
Simpson's lawyers that the prosecution had deliberately dragged its feet in conducting DNA tests as a way of buying time to build its case.
The evidence included a bloody glove and swatches of blood removed from the grounds of Mr.
Simpson's house and from his Ford Bronco after the bodies of his former wife, Nichole Brown Simpson, and a friend, Ronald L. Goldman, were discovered outside her home on June 13.


Haverty Furniture Cos.  (HAVT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $30 million of medium-term notes due in 1997 through BA Securities.
The notes, which are noncallable, are priced at par to yield 7.02 percent.


CHRONICLE
A hearty welcome, judicial style: More than 200 guests, many of them judges, gathered Monday for a dinner in the Great Hall of the Supreme Court in Washington to honor ELLEN ASH PETERS, Chief Justice of the Connecticut Supreme Court.
She is also the first woman to be elected president of the Conference of Chief Justices, an organization of the highest judges in each state.
That automatically makes her the chairwoman of the National Center for State Courts, a research and support organization for the state court system.


Finning Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Group Asks Whether Rowland's Defense Consulting Amounted to Lobbying
Since entering the campaign for governor in January, John G. Rowland has said that he never worked as a lobbyist and that the hundreds of thousands of dollars he received from Connecticut military contractors and other businesses over the last four years was to provide strategic advice on dealing with the Government.
"I didn't work the Hill per se," he said in an interview last week.
"I worked more with the companies' government affairs offices in Washington, trouble-shooting ideas, helping them analyze how the Pentagon works, determining what will sell and what won't sell."


Ethiopia Needs More Than a New Dictator
To the Editor:
Richard Greenfield (letter, Oct. 12) urges America to continue to support the Ethiopian Government of Meles Zenawi as a change from the former Amharic Governments of Emperor Haile Selassie and Mengistu Haile Mariam.
Is it enough to change from Amharic dictatorship to Tigrean dictatorship?
Mr.
Greenfield notes that Colonel Mengistu's rule was "infinitely worse" than the emperor's.
Change is not enough.


Hauptmann's Widow Dies
Anna Hauptmann, the widow of Bruno Richard Hauptmann, who was convicted of murder in the kidnapping of Charles A. Lindbergh's infant son, died on Oct. 10 at Lancaster (Pa.) General Hospital.
She was 95 and lived in New Holland, Pa.


Molinari's Gay-Baiting Won't Influence Voters
To the Editor:
Re "Guy Molinari, From the Gutter" (editorial, Oct. 12): The Staten Island Borough President's gay-baiting goes beyond ungentlemanly.
In saying the Democratic candidate for New York State Attorney General, Karen S. Burstein, should be disqualified because she is a lesbian, he promotes discrimination.


IMC Fertilizer Group Inc.(IFL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Schools to Get Wide License On Spending Federal Money Under New Education Law
The nation's public schools have long grumbled about the rigid spending rules that accompany Federal aid.
But under legislation to be signed tomorrow by President Clinton, they will receive broad freedom in how they spend such money.
Under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, which Congress reauthorized earlier this month, $60 billion will be spent on the nation's public schools over the next five years, and educators herald the measure as the most extensive revision of the legislation since 1965, when it was enacted as part of President Lyndon B. Johnson's Great Society program.


Not Yellow, and No Longer Alone
WE'RE Not Yellow -- We Go Anywhere.
That used to be the boast of the livery and gypsy cab drivers whose nighttime realm was the bleak, potholed neighborhoods their medallion counterparts shunned.


Goodfellow reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Abuse Of Women: 'Not O.K.'
Growing up in Trenton, Miami Dolphins cornerback Troy Vincent grew accustomed to seeing his mother make breakfast with a cast on her arm.
"Domestic violence was the way of life in my home," Vincent said today, as he told of being raised in an atmosphere that made women regular targets for abuse.


Amid Spurs' Changes, It's Still Robinson and Rodman
If nothing else, the San Antonio Spurs will provide answers for some trivia questions this season.
What National Basketball Association player changes his hair color three or four times a year?


Flexsteel Industries (FLXS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coleman's Creative Is Placed in Review
The Coleman Company of Wichita, Kan., a manufacturer of outdoor recreation products like coolers, lanterns and sleeping bags, said yesterday that it had placed in review the creative portion of its account, which had been at Sullivan Higdon &amp; Sink Inc. in Wichita for seven and a half years.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them to be as much as $15 million.
Scott Montgomery, a spokesman for the Rojek Marketing Group in Cincinnati, the marketing consulting company retained to manage the review, confirmed a report of the search this week in Adweek.
He said the review was in the preliminary stages with the primary focus on agencies in the Midwest.


Germany's Ex-Communists Promise to Behave in Parliament
Germany's jubilant former Communists, flushed with their showing in the parliamentary election Sunday, insisted today that their party had left its repressive past behind and was prepared to work constructively within the existing political system.
"We are far from the S.E.D.," said the party leader, Lothar Bisky, referring to the Communist party that ruled East Germany for 40 years.
"Stalinism is no longer an option."


Damark International (DMRK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Acclaim Entertainment Inc.(AKLM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Nets' Floyd Looking for Just a Few More Minutes
Eric (Sleepy) Floyd, droopy eyes and tired body, walked out of Nets practice today with a plastic bag full of ice wrapped around his left knee.
At age 34, his recovery time for minor injuries mirrors his first step.
Neither has improved with time.


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING  Duran, 43, Stops Opponent in Sixth Round  Fighting for the first time since losing a 12-round decision to Vinny Pazienza three months ago, the former champion Roberto Duran stopped the journeyman Heath Todd in the sixth round last night.
The 43-year-old Panamanian bloodied his opponent and ran his record to 94-10 in capturing the scheduled 12-round supermiddleweight bout at Casino Magic in Bay St.
Louis, Miss.
Todd (25-5), of Gladstone, Mo., was 2 months old when Duran first stepped in the ring as a professional in 1967.
Duran is to fight Pazienza in a rematch in January in Atlantic City. (AP)


Crawford &amp; Co. (CRD.A,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Life Amid the Ruins Of Health Care Bills
In May 1993, as President Clinton's health care plan and the attendant debate began to take shape, The New York Times interviewed a group of Midwestern families about their anxieties over health insurance and their hopes for change.
Interviewed again in September 1993, when the President unveiled his plan, the families welcomed the notion of coverage "that can never be taken away."


Coachmen Industries Inc.(COA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Krystal
Shares of the Krystal Company, a fast-food restaurant chain in the South, rose sharply yesterday after the company announced that third-quarter earnings were higher than what analysts had expected, at 28 cents a share, unchanged from last year.


So Who Gets What Restaurant?
RUX MARTIN, a book editor in Shelburne, Vt., who is separated from her husband, was arranging a dinner engagement with a friend, a woman who suggested a popular Italian restaurant.
"Oh, we can't go there," Ms.
Martin said.
"My husband got custody."
Judith Levine, a writer in Brooklyn, understands the sentiment.
"This guy and I broke up, and he got Maine," she said.
She was kidding -- sort of.
Frank Maya, a comedian in Manhattan, said he nearly lost his gym to an ex-lover.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.78
2.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.90
4.92
3.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.32
5.34
3.12
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.63
7.59
5.24
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.87
7.82
5.84
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.71
8.67
6.93
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.61
6.61
5.36
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Guardsman Products Inc.(GPI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


An Opera Buff Admires the Budding Talent


Armstrong World Industries Inc.(ACK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Suicides of 3 In U.S. Ranks Raise Concern
For the third time in a month, an American serviceman in Haiti has apparently committed suicide, prompting military commanders to hold small counseling sessions with soldiers and to enlist the help of chaplains and combat psychiatrists.
Since United States forces started landing in Haiti on Sept. 19, none of the 20,000 deployed have been killed by hostile fire.
But one marine and two soldiers from the same 600-man battalion of the Army's 10th Mountain Division have all apparently shot themselves to death.
Pvt.
Gerardo D. Luciano, a 22-year-old Army infantryman whose hometown was listed as New York City, became the latest suicide on Sunday.


Ohio Edison (OEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jiri Kylian Turns a Creative Corner With a Tale of Simplicity and Purity
Few choreographers in recent times burst upon the scene with the impact of Jiri Kylian, who has been the artistic director of Netherlands Dance Theater in the Hague since 1978.
Scores of younger choreographers were influenced by the emotional and kinetic thrust of his signature style, a highly physical fusion of ballet technique with the idiomatic freedom of modern dance.
As an artist, he has been remarkably deep and original.
At the same time, his work, with its dramatic reading of 20th-century music (especially by Stravinsky and the composers of Mr. Kylian's native Czechoslovakia) heralded a dance expressionism in the 1970's that stood out against the formal experiments of the time.
Audiences have been swept up by the power and energy of Mr.
Kylian's dances, and the Dutch company created something of a sensation during its appearances at City Center and the Metropolitan Opera House.


Fredi Washington Tribute
A memorial service for Fredi Washington is to take place at 3 P.M. on Friday at St.
Peter's Church, 619 Lexington Avenue, at 54th Street.
Miss Washington, who was among the first widely recognized black stage and film actresses, died of pneumonia in June at the age of 90.
Among those who are to speak or perform at the service are Jean-Claude Baker, Donald Bogle, Shirley Covington, David N. Dinkins, Bobby Short and Jane White.
The public is invited.


Anti-Social Science?
Among the ideas that have harmed mankind, one of the most durable and destructive is that the human species is divided into biological units called races and that some races are innately superior to others.
At the moment this notion is being resurrected yet again, in a new and seemingly objective guise, by several prominent social scientists.
Their argument goes like this.
Blacks perform more poorly on I.Q. tests then whites, so they must be less intelligent.
The I.Q. scores of children correlate with those of their parents, so intelligence must be at least partly governed by genes.
Therefore, the I.Q. difference between blacks and whites has a genetic component that cannot be eliminated by society.


Amgen Inc.(AMGN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Syrian Leader Condemns Israel-Jordan Accord as Blasphemy
President Hafez al-Assad of Syria today condemned the draft peace agreement between Israel and Jordan and said Jordan committed blasphemy by agreeing to rent part of its land back to Israel.
"Our land is ours," he said after meeting President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt.
"We consider it would be blasphemy for any country to speak of renting its land to Israel."


Scripps (E.W.) Co.(SSP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nashua Corp.(NSH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


An Airborne Battle of Services
Coffee? Tea? All the bananas you can eat?
Northwest Airlines has scrapped its traditional meal service and now offers a moving buffet on most flights.
The passengers on a morning flight, for example, can take as many bananas, bagels or sandwiches as they want.


Inacom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Hanna (M.A.) Co. (MAH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fortuneteller in New Jersey Accused of Bilking Woman of $50,000 Life Savings in a Scam
The fortuneteller's flimflam started with a simple $35 tarot-card reading in the summer of 1993, and by the time it crashed today with her arrest she had bilked her victim of at least $50,000, the authorities said.
The scam involved a slick-talking 22-year-old woman who promoted herself as "Mrs. Lisa" and prayed over bars of Dove soap, candles and leaves in her little storefront parlor, and a forlorn and gullible 33-year-old businesswoman from Bergenfield who became convinced that money was evil and ultimately lost her life savings, said John J. Fahy, the Bergen County Prosecutor.


Knee Surgery for Islanders' Plante
The Islanders announced yesterday that right wing DAN PLANTE would undergo reconstructive surgery on his left knee next Wednesday to repair a torn anterior cruciate ligament.
Plante, 23, suffered the injury the first week of training camp.
About a dozen Islanders who have remained in the New York area have begun skating together at the Rinx in Hauppauge, L.I.
The thrice-weekly skates are "totally optional," stressed TROY LONEY, the team's player representative.
"We're just horsing around. It has the same look upon it as summertime."


Former Empire Blue Cross Financial Chief Indicted for Perjury
The former chief financial officer of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield was indicted yesterday by a Federal grand jury on charges that he lied to a Senate subcommittee and obstructed its investigation of financial irregularities at the company, the nation's largest medical insurer.
The financial officer, Jerry Weissman, was dismissed last year after disclosures that Empire kept two sets of books and had filed false financial data with state regulators.
The false data exaggerated Empire's losses on its policies with high-risk customers, including older and sicker New Yorkers who, the company argued, posed a special burden.


Kaydon Corp.(KDN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Myers Industries(MYE,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Busy 1st Day Of Trading For Indosat
Indonesia's state-owned international telecommunications company, the P. T. Indonesia Satellite Corporation, made its debut on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, with a 17 percent rise in its first day of trading.
Indonesia's role as an emerging market and past successes among telephone companies being privatized in other countries seemed to attract buyers as much as the potential of the company, which is also known as Indosat.


Rust Intl.(RST,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Families Look at Failure on Health Care and Lament Politics
In the ruins of President Clinton's promise of affordable cradle-to-grave health care, five families in Middle America have found their hopes for changing the health care system transformed into contempt for a Washington that they say, cares not a whit about them.
"Why can't they just put their political parties aside and do something good for all of us?" said Debra O'Connor, 31, of Lisbon, Iowa, a factory worker and single parent with three young sons.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press yesterday about a civil trial over security at the 1991 Tailhook Association convention misstated the given name of a witness in some editions.
She is Tamela Redford, not Tamara.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article yesterday about progress in talks between North Korea and the United States carried an incorrect byline in some copies.
The article, datelined Washington, was by Steven Greenhouse.


Region News Briefs; Woman Admits Role In Death of Her Son
A Yonkers woman whose 13-month-old son starved to death in his crib last year admitted in court today that she abandoned him for several days while she went on a drug binge.
The woman, Rebecca Diaz Groom, 30, pleaded guilty to first-degree manslaughter in the death of her son Saleem.
The authorities determined that the infant, whose body was discovered on Aug. 20, 1993, had died at least five days earlier from a combination of acute starvation, dehydration and neglect, according to the Westchester County District Attorney's office.


More Leno Amtrak Jokes
Jay Leno is far from chastened by Amtrak's decision to withdraw $2 million worth of commercial time from his network, NBC, in response to jokes the comedian has made about Amtrak's safety record.
"Amtrak today unveiled their new slogan," said Mr.
Leno, who entertained at a dinner-dance Monday night at the Association of National Advertisers conference here.
" 'You feel lucky, punk? Do ya?' "


Attention Internet Shoppers: E-Cash Is Here
The first trials of an international electronic cash system will begin on Wednesday, with a bankroll of one million "cyber bucks" and several hundred volunteers eager to spend them, the system's developer said today.
Digicash Inc., which has offices in Menlo Park, Calif., and Amsterdam, hopes to establish its system as a standard for commercial transactions on the Internet, a global computer network that links millions of users.
If the system proves workable in the trials, it is expected to begin commercial operations within months.


Residents Demand Answers In Escaped Prisoner's Death
More than 500 people packed the auditorium of Public School 40 in Jamaica, Queens, yesterday in an angry meeting with police officials, demanding to know why a state correction officer fatally shot a man who witnesses say was pinned to the ground.
The officer was arraigned on manslaughter charges yesterday afternoon, 12 hours after he was arrested for killing a 27-year-old prisoner, Jason Nichols, who escaped from a work-release program last month.


Dana Corp.(DCN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Study Says Environmental and Economic Health Go Together
A new state-by-state study suggests that governments need not sacrifice environmental quality for economic well being.
In fact, the report, released last week by the nonprofit Institute for Southern Studies, a social policy research and advocacy group, shows that nearly all of the states that ranked among the top dozen using the study's environmental criteria also ranked highest using its economic criteria.


Federal Signal Corp.(FSS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Downey Savings &amp; Loan Association (DSL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Navy Settles a Fraud Case On Stanford Research Costs
Stanford University and the Navy yesterday settled a fraud case involving research expenses, with the university repaying a small fraction of the Navy's original claim and the Navy saying that an investigation had found no wrongdoing by the university.
Closing an embarrassing chapter in its history, the university said it had agreed to repay $1.2 million to the Office of Naval Research for payments it had received for research conducted from 1981 through 1992.
The settlement brings to more than $3 million the repayments that Stanford has made to the Government.


Wabash National Corp.(WNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinton Adjusts His Itinerary, And His '94 Campaign Focus
Next Tuesday, with just two weeks to go before midterm elections in which Democrats are trying to stave off a major defeat, President Clinton plans to set forth on an unusual election-eve mission: flying thousands of miles to Israel, Jordan and Kuwait to celebrate foreign policy success.
Advisers to Mr.
Clinton insist that the journey is a statesman's duty, not a politician's ploy.
But his decision to go abroad at so pivotal a time reflects a clear judgment that it is wiser for Mr.
Clinton to seek out a few days of unfiltered limelight than to invest that time with voters and candidates who have shown no great affection for him.


Glatfelter (P.H.) Co. (GLT,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MPG Investment reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Caracas Journal; In These Grim Jails, All Hope Is Easily Abandoned
Past three rusted iron doors, a visitor groping through the half-light and tropical stench of Catia Prison comes upon a scene evoking the hold of an 18th-century slave ship: 150 listless men packed shoulder to shoulder in a cell 20 yards long by 4 yards wide.
"If they behave themselves, they move into a cell after one or two months," said Jose Enrique Martinez Pelaez, the cellblock's prisoner "delegate." In his cellblock, there were 5 men to a cell, 344 men for one bathroom.


If That Wasn't Sears, Then Where Was I?
To the Editor:
After reading that Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, which is planning a store at Herald Square, "has offered its wares everywhere but in Manhattan" (news article, Oct. 12), I was left wondering whether there had also never been a Third Avenue El, a Socialist named Norman Thomas, a New Deal, Social Security or even an Empire State Building.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Citicorp led big bank companies in reporting better-than-expected gains in the third quarter.
Its earnings surged 69.3 percent, while Chase Manhattan, Chemical and Wells Fargo also posted strong earnings.
Banc One, however, had lower profit.  [ Page D1. ]


METRO DIGEST
GANG-FIGHTING WEAPON: RACKETS LAW
A year ago, the C &amp; C drug gang ruled a corner of the South Bronx with assaults, kidnappings and murders, doing its part to make the 40th Precinct one of the most dangerous in New York City.
Just how big a role the gang played became clear only after it and a rival were virtually eliminated by Federal racketeering indictments, using a law originally intended to combat the Mafia.
With just over 30 gang members off the streets, homicides in the 40th Precinct have been cut by more than half.
A1.


Stores Where the Customer Is Always Good for a Laugh
"Clerks" was shown as part of this year's New Directors/New Films series at Lincoln Center.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 25.
The film is opening today at the Angelika Film Center, Mercer and Houston Streets, Greenwich Village.
Have you ever wondered whether the contractors working on the Death Star didn't become innocent victims during the climactic battle of the "Star Wars" adventures?
No?
Well, it may take a certain kind of workaday atmosphere to bring such thoughts to mind.
Dante Hicks (Brian O'Halloran) and his friend Randal (Jeff Anderson) are seen experiencing that atmosphere to the fullest in Kevin Smith's "Clerks," a buoyant, bleakly funny comedy chronicling a day's worth of activity at two adjoining stores.
Though nominally situated in New Jersey, this convenience store and video rental place are in spirit somewhere very near the end of the world.


Campaigning in Kuwait
President Clinton plans a Middle East trip, leaving behind the campaign trail, apparently deciding he will be better off in the limelight of foreign policy successes.
Page A12.


Wine Talk
BRIDGEVIEW VINEYARDS, a winery in southern Oregon producing 45,000 cases a year, specializes in German-style wines like riesling and Muller-Thurgau.
Recently Bridgeview's wine maker, Laurent Montalieu, sent along a bottle of what the winery calls Blue Moon Riesling for appraisal.
The wine was O.K. -- West Coast rieslings are not exactly show stoppers -- but that's not why it turns up here.
It was the bottle that grabbed instant attention, and then the cork.
Both were a vivid cobalt blue.


CHRONICLE
In a world riveted by Charles and Diana, how refreshing it is to contemplate BOB and DOLORES HOPE.
He's 91; she's 85.
They have been married for 60 years.
And there they were Monday evening at Sardi's, holding hands, gazing into each other's eyes, sharing a kiss or two.


Editorial Notebook; Aunt Jemima Gets a Makeover
The jovial black women who wear bandannas on their heads and grin at you from antique cookie jars are known to collectors and cultural historians as "mammies." Crockery lovers covet them.
Rich collectors grab up as many as they can.
Andy Warhol, as befits the priest of pop, owned a mammy made of silver; it fetched a pretty penny after he died.
With the mammy trade flourishing among both blacks and whites, some find it surprising that Quaker Oats Company is taking heat for its new ad campaign with the pop singer Gladys Knight pitching that most famous mammy of all, Aunt Jemima, the woman whose grinning countenance has appeared on pancake boxes for a century.
The drama points up a lesson: that racially charged imagery never fully loses its historical taint.
A black millionaire driving home in a Mercedes full of mammy antiques might well see himself as having a joke on the past.
Confronted by mammy faces on packages in the supermarket, the same millionaire might well get angry.


A Return of Polio
To the Editor:
Mary Cantwell's "Polio, Remembered" (Editorial Notebook, Oct. 10) is moving, but many who had polio in the 1950's epidemic and are now experiencing postpolio syndrome do not share her optimism.
Perhaps 40 percent to 50 percent of survivors will suffer symptoms similar to their first contact with the virus.


CHRONICLE
Prince SADRUDDIN AGA KHAN has decided it is time to sell his collection of Eskimo ivory and Northwest Coast art, so 47 pieces will go on the auction block at Christie's tomorrow.
The Prince, who is the former United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, explained in a conversation from Geneva, where he has a home, that he had stopped collecting the Eskimo art in part "because I wanted to concentrate on Islamic art, which is really my field." Earlier, he sold his African collection for the same reason.
Proceeds, expected to be about $185,000, will go to the Bellerive Foundation, which he established in 1977 to address a wide range of environmental and development issues.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  U.S.
APPROVES KOREA AID  President Clinton approved the plan for $4 billion in energy aid for North Korea in exchange for its commitment to freeze and dismantle its nuclear weapons program.
A1  CHINESE MILITARY HEAR PERRY  Defense Secretary William J. Perry spoke to a military audience in China, part of an effort to create more openness and ease concerns.
A14


IP Timberlands Ltd. (IPT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Metropolitan Diary
JOAN M. CAMPBELL was an audience of one when the following playlet took place on East End Avenue.
Principal players: A 30-something couple, dressed for a formal afternoon appointment.


California Microwave Inc.(CMIC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Characters 'Laboring to Maladjust'
DAWN POWELL AT HER BEST
Edited by Tim Page
452 pages. Steerforth Press. $28.
So, we say to ourselves, another nearly forgotten writer exhumed, cleaned up, reissued and put on display with endorsements from Edmund Wilson, Diana Trilling and Gore Vidal.
Then a friend says no, she's terrific, read her, and we do, and here it is, that infinitely distinguished thing, a dead writer so full of charm and derring-do that literature's canon makers should sit back, smile and say, Dawn Powell, where have you been all our lives?


Myth of Back-Alley Abortions Refuses to Die
To the Editor:
"Abortion: Where Are the Doctors?" (editorial, Oct. 13) repeats the old myth of abortion proponents that "before Roe v. Wade, 1.2 million back-alley abortions took place each year." The 1.2 million figure comes from a 1955 conference on abortion convened by the Planned Parenthood Federation of America.
The full conference report was published in 1958 as a book called "Abortion in the United States."


In America; Promises and Deficits
With tax revenues off, New York City now faces an estimated $1.4 billion budget deficit.
That figure, from Comptroller Alan Hevesi, is $400 million more than had been expected, and comes in the wake of $1 billion in spending cuts already made by Mayor Rudolph Giuliani.
The Mayor seems perpetually to be cutting the budget, like a harried woodsman slashing his way through an endless forest.


Standard Pacific Corp.(SPF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Amphenol Corp.(APH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp.(OCF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clayton Homes Inc.(CMH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Curtice-Burns Foods Inc.(CBI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Schools to Get Wide License On Spending Federal Money Under New Education Law
The nation's public schools have long grumbled about the rigid spending rules that accompany Federal aid.
But under legislation to be signed tomorrow by President Clinton, they will receive broad freedom in how they spend such money.
Under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, which Congress reauthorized earlier this month, $60 billion will be spent on the nation's public schools over the next five years, and educators herald the measure as the most extensive revision of the legislation since 1965, when it was enacted as part of President Lyndon B. Johnson's Great Society program.


Democrats Find a Target in G.O.P. 'Contract'
They are filmed from a distance, moving in slow motion, and often in lockstep, sometimes with the whir of a camera's motor drive in the background and a threatening, ominous soundtrack.
Visually, these scenes from Democratic commercials have the feel of an illicit gathering, recorded on the sly.
That, of course, is the Democrats' design: In advertisements running throughout the country in the final three weeks before the Nov. 8 election, Democrats are trying to turn the Republicans' "Contract With America" into a dark and frightening ceremony -- and along the way, meet some urgent political needs.


Stocks Off Ahead of Data on Trade Deficit
Stock traders, pausing before the release of today's trade deficit figures, bid down the prices of stocks slightly yesterday, as measured by most leading indexes.
Blue-chip stocks, which rose on Monday, joined the overall market decline.
On the New York Stock Exchange, 13 stocks fell for every 9 that rose.


Equifax Inc.(EFX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CLINTON APPROVES A PLAN TO GIVE AID TO NORTH KOREANS
President Clinton approved a plan today to arrange more than $4 billion in energy aid to North Korea during the next decade in return for a commitment from the country's hard-line Communist leadership to freeze and gradually dismantle its nuclear weapons development program.
"This agreement will help achieve a longstanding and vital American objective -- an end to the threat of nuclear proliferation on the Korean Peninsula," Mr.
Clinton said this afternoon, after his top foreign policy advisers described the details of an enormously complex agreement struck with North Korea late Monday.


Two Covers For New York
New York magazine is running two different covers on its current issue in an effort to draw attention to two articles in the magazine about the politics of hate.
Half the magazine's subscribers are receiving issues bearing a cover photo of Conrad Muhammad, a Nation of Islam minister and a possible heir to Lewis Farrakhan, with the cover line "Why He Hates Jews." The other subscribers are getting magazines with a cover photo of a radio talk-show host on WABC-AM, Bob Grant, with the cover line "Why He Hates Blacks." A similar 50-50 split between covers applies at newsstands.


Standex Intl.(SXI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TRW Inc.(TRW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Birmingham Steel Corp.(BIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2 Are Shot In Hold-Up At Grocery
Two security guards were wounded, one critically, by gunmen who ambushed them yesterday as they were loading several plastic bags full of cash into their armored truck at a supermarket in Bayside, Queens, the police said.
The guards, employed by the I.B.I.
Security Company of Queens, were transferring about $20,000 from the store, a Key Food supermarket at 214-14 73d Avenue, when at least two men approached them with 9-millimeter handguns drawn, said Lieut.
Raymond O'Donnell, a police spokesman.


Mueller Industries(MLI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Romania Gives Britons Prison In Baby Case
A British couple has been sentenced to two years and four months in prison after being convicted of buying an infant and trying to smuggle her out of the country.
Diplomats and foreign social workers had expected the couple, Bernadette and Adrian Mooney, would receive a lighter penalty.


Aqueduct Opens, but Is It for Last Mile?
Aqueduct Race Track opened its autumn season yesterday in bright sunshine but with dark memories of last year's ferocious weather and with gloomy questions about the future of winter racing in New York.
Is this the last mile for racing at Aqueduct?


INSIDE
Blue Cross Official Indicted
The former chief financial officer of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield was charged with lying to a United States Senate panel.
Page B1 Haiti Toll on U.S.
Troops
After the third American soldier in Haiti committed suicide, the military has started counseling sessions and is seeking the cause.
Page A3.
A Clean, High-Tech Car
A Government partnership with Detroit's Big Three has drawn up "a road map" for a car that would get 80 miles to the gallon.
Page D1.


Easter Seal Awards Given in New York
A brewer, two national retailers, and a cellular communications company were among the top winners at the 1994 National Easter Seal EDI Awards ceremony last night in New York, honoring communications judged to enhance the independence of people with disabilities.
The winners in broadcast advertising were Anheuser-Busch Inc. in St.
Louis and its agency, D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in St.
Louis; Target Stores Inc. in Minneapolis and its in-house advertising team, and Wal-Mart Stores Inc. in Bentonville, Ark., and its agency GSD&amp;M Advertising in Austin, Tex.


Standard Products Co.(SPD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Is Mr. Softee a Scofflaw?
They arrested Mister Softee yesterday.
More precisely, they arrested 61-year-old Carlos Marrero of the Bronx, who had the misfortune or bad judgment to park his Mr.
Softee truck at a bus stop on West 125th Street when police officers, a lot of them, were in the neighborhood for a second day of a crackdown on peddlers.


Safety Bubble Bursts for U.S. Students in Russia
It was not the sort of start to his new life as a college student in Russia that Charles Maymes had envisioned.
But to the organizers of his student-exchange program, the American Embassy's recent briefing on rape, battery, assault, break-ins and confidence games was a fitting welcome -- and warning -- to Moscow 1994.
Whereas the oppressive oversight of the K.G.B. once insured the safety of foreign students here, Mr.
Maymes and his 45 fellow American students are now like average Russians in their vulnerability to the criminality unleashed by the collapse of the Soviet Union.


Modern Museum Didn't Hide Source of Art
To the Editor:
Re "Nazi Art Loot Found Its Way to New York's Modern Museum" (letter, Oct. 9), by Alice Goldfarb Marquis:
In June 1939 the Museum of Modern Art acquired five important works of art, which had been, along with many others, condemned by the Nazi Government, confiscated from German state-owned museums and subsequently sold at public auction in Switzerland.
The works -- by Derain, Kirchner, Klee, Lehmbruck and Matisse -- had been neither stolen nor pilfered, as the German Government could hardly steal its own property.


Ah, Chicago: Build New Landmarks, Bash Old Ones
It has long been a given that the nation's first city of architecture cares about its past.
With an array of buildings by Louis Sullivan, Frank Lloyd Wright, Daniel Burnham and Mies van der Rohe unmatched by any city in the world, how could it not?
But the reality of historic preservation in Chicago is more complicated.
For all the pride the city takes in its great buildings, when push comes to shove it has often done less to protect them than cities with less great architecture to flaunt.
From 1929, when Frank Lloyd Wright's Midway Gardens was torn down after only 15 years, to 1972, when Mayor Richard Daley allowed Sullivan's Stock Exchange to be replaced by a banal office tower, Chicago hasn't hesitated to let its Midwestern pragmatism get the better of its artistic heritage.


KLLM Transport Services Inc.(KLLM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A chart yesterday about the elections in Germany transposed the state-by-state vote totals of two parties in the coalition led by Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
In all states, the Christian Democrats, not the Free Democrats, won the greatest share of votes for the conservative coalition.


Peace Across the Jordan
This week's draft peace treaty between Israel and Jordan is much more than just another incremental advance on the Jewish state's least dangerous frontier.
It may lack the drama of Anwar el-Sadat's path-breaking 1977 initiative, or last year's embrace by Israel of its former archenemy, Yasir Arafat, or the hoped-for breakthrough with Syria's President, Hafez al-Assad.
But Israel's new peace with King Hussein is enormously significant.
Most of the credit belongs to Israel's Nobel laureate duo of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Foreign Minister Shimon Peres, along with Jordan's agile and experienced King.
Still, the Clinton Administration played a supportive role, encouraging both countries and now standing behind their achievements.
The invitation to President Clinton to take part in next week's formal signing ceremony in the Mideast is warranted.


Showalter Is Named Manager Of the Year
Buck Showalter had plenty of time on his hands at Yankee Stadium yesterday after being flown in from Florida to be honored as the American League's manager of the year.
"I walked out on the field this afternoon," Showalter said last night.
"I couldn't help but feeling I should have been doing something else."


Amway Asia Pacific Ltd.  (AAP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Executive Changes
BIRMINGHAM STEEL CORP., Birmingham, Ala., appointed John M. Casey chief financial officer.
DEUTSCHE BANK NORTH AMERICA, New York, named Stuart Sugarman head of information technology and Sal Ricca head of operations.
Both will become managing directors.


Green Tree Financial (GNT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tastes Like Chili Only It's Lighter
IF there is such a creation as a light chili, this would be it.
Red meat has been replaced by chicken breasts, and white beans make the chili seem lighter.
This chili is so easy to make that if you feel like doubling the recipe you will add no more than five minutes to preparation time.
Of course, second-day chili is even better than freshly cooked.


Chabrol's Study of Conjugal Jealousy
At the center of Claude Chabrol's new psychological thriller is a man who brings the phrase "insanely jealous" to life.
Paul (Francois Cluzet) owns a hotel by a serene lake.
He marries the beautiful Nelly (Emmanuelle Beart), they have a son, and soon Paul begins hearing voices in his head that tell him Nelly is unfaithful.
"L'Enfer" ("Hell") works best in its early stages, when it is clear that Paul is losing his mind but unclear just what Nelly might be up to.
She does, after all, have a blase sex appeal and a hotelful of men to choose from.
Paul catches her in the dark, watching slides with a muscular guest.
And she has lied about how much she paid for a cute new handbag, so what else has she lied about?
Attached to Paul's point of view, we never catch Nelly in a compromising situation, but that doesn't mean she's innocent.
The film's pedigree encourages these suspicions.
Mr.
Chabrol, the New Wave veteran and the director of the recent "Madame Bovary," also has a taste for stylish thrillers.
And he has adapted the script from one written by Henri-Georges Clouzot, who directed "Diabolique," the classic story in which a man's wife and mistress team up to murder him.
Clouzot, in fact, started to film "L'Enfer" in 1964, but abandoned it when the lead actor and then he himself became ill.


Franklin Electric Co.  (FELE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Simpson Judge Seeks Delay of Broadcasts
Judge Lance A. Ito, struggling to control intense publicity about the O. J. Simpson murder case, asked three television broadcasters to delay interviews with the author of a new book about Nicole Brown Simpson.
He also indicated that he plans to sequester the jury for at least part of the trial.


Harley-Davidson Inc.(HDI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Rankings Are Out: Biggio Is At Second
The new edition of baseball's ranking statistics doesn't highlight any names in capital letters or boldface type, but one name should have been accorded that treatment: Craig Biggio of the Houston Astros.
In the rankings released today, Biggio was No. 1 among National League second basemen, the first time in 11 years that distinction has not gone to Ryne Sandberg.
The last time Sandberg was not No. 1 was in 1983; Johnny Ray of Pittsburgh and Glenn Hubbard of Atlanta shared the top spot that year.


Clinton Trip Is Still On
President Clinton plans to go ahead with a visit to Israel adn Jordan next week to witness their leaders' signing of a peace treaty despite the deadly terrorist bombing in Tel Aviv, the White House said.
He denounced the attack as one that sought "to wreck the quest of the Arabs and Israelis for peace."
Article, page A16


Fabrics From Memory
THE textile designer Liora Manne is best known for an award-winning line of rugs inspired by memories of her native Israel.
The rugs echo ancient tile patterns, like one on a fountain in her grandmother's garden in Old Jerusalem.
Ms.
Manne (pronounced mah-NAY), 41, went on to collaborate with Todd Oldham and design handbags for Barneys.


Magnifying Metaphors in a Work Rich in Them
"Let me tell you about metaphor," a 17th-century witch says to the child of an adulterous liaison in Phyllis Nagy's perversely breezy adaptation of "The Scarlet Letter" at the Classic Stage Company.
The instructions probably aren't necessary, since the witch is talking to a living metaphor.
The little girl, Pearl, is played by an indisputably adult actress (Erin Cressida Wilson) in a sexy crimson gown that keeps falling off her shoulders.
There's no doubt that this Pearl is a walking reminder of the moment of illicit carnality in which she was conceived.
That was also pretty clear in the novel that is Nathaniel Hawthorne's masterpiece.
But in Ms.
Nagy's interpretation, which has been staged by the hot young director Lisa Peterson, symbols, subtext and contemporary correspondences are scaled up in a way that calls nudging attention to form as well as content.
And later when Pearl, in talking about her penchant for collecting decaying flora and fauna, announces, "I'm fond of decomposition," she might as well be speaking for the author.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: PENNSYLVANIA SENATOR Struggle for the Senate; In Pennsylvania, Round 2 on Healt
Just months ago, most analysts, and many people in his own Republican Party, had dismissed Representative Rick Santorum, who is challenging Senator Harris Wofford, as too far to the right to suit the political tastes of most Pennsylvanians.
The state, after all, has a history of sending moderate Republicans to Washington -- lawmakers like Arlen Specter, John Heinz 3d, Hugh Scott and Richard S. Schweiker.
Confronted with a newly conservative Dick Thornburgh in 1991, voters instead chose Mr.
Wofford, their first Democratic Senator in 30 years.


GTE Corp.(GTE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fore! Here Comes the Champ
The search for a mythical world golf champion will be undertaken in a new event that will feature 32 players vying for the $1 million winner's prize.
The $3.65 million tournament will start next year and take place periodically at courses worldwide from March to December, pitting eight golfers from four regions in single-elimination match play.
Seven of each region's eight players will be chosen from the Sony Rankings, a worldwide rating of golfers; the last will be the sponsors' choice.


President Is Gift-Laden on His Visit
In his effort to bolster Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's re-election campaign, President Clinton came to New York yesterday bearing a gift -- Federal permission for the state to experiment with its welfare program.
The announcement, which Mr.
Clinton made during a speech at a state-sponsored forum on intergovernmental relations, was intended to illustrate Mr.
Cuomo's contention that certain benefits flow from having Democratic chief executives in both capitals.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International  The United States' trade deficit with Japan swelled 2.4 percent in August.
The report sent the dollar falling to near a record low against the yen.
But the trade deficit with the rest of the world narrowed sharply on a surge in exports.  [ Page D1. ] The former chief executive of B.C.C.I. was imprisoned for more than eight years.
Bank creditors agreed to accept $1.8 billion in compensation from Abu Dhabi, the bank's largest owner.  [ D2. ] Companies  A meeting between executives of MCA and its parent, Matsushita, left open whether Matsushita might sell MCA to end its deteriorating relationship with the American unit's management.  [ D1. ]


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Tuesday about the sexual behavior of octopuses omitted a credit.
The article was by The Associated Press.


Rangers Turn to Oates As Their New Manager
JOHNNY OATES knows pitching and defense.
He will be tested to the limit in teaching those skills to the Texas Rangers, his new employer.
"I think Texas is very close to being a winner," Oates said yesterday in Arlington, Tex., after being hired as manager and signing a two-year contract.
"I know I was certainly intimidated at times by their offense. But there is more to baseball than just offense."


Fee Reduced For Drawing District Map In Nassau
A Federal judge has cut $60,000 from the bill submitted by a special master whom the judge named in July to draw district maps for the proposed Nassau County Legislature.
In an order signed on Tuesday, the judge praised the work of the special master, Edwin J. Wesely, whose bill of $227,505 for about three weeks of work by a team of lawyers and paralegals angered Nassau officials.


Israeli Soldier Died As a Peace Stand-In; Ben-Gurion and Irgun
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis (column, Oct. 17) refers to a 1948 incident in Israel in which "David Ben-Gurion's Government seized weapons from a ship, the Altalena, that was bringing them to the Irgun movement," the Jewish militant underground group.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN STOCK EXCHANGE, New York, appointed Ronald D. Corwin executive vice president of marketing and sales.
COOPER TIRE AND RUBBER CO., Findlay, Ohio, named John Fahl president of tire operations.


Sonoco Products (SONO,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


CLASSICAL MUSIC
American Quartet Repertory In the Chromatic Area  Miller Theater
Taking American works as their focus, the Lydian and Composers String Quartets are presenting a six-concert overview of the quartet repertory.
The Lydians opened the series on Tuesday evening, offering works composed between 1907 (Ives's Second Quartet) and 1993 (John Harbison's Third) and all drawn from the chromatic middle ground between tonality and Serialism.


Germany Discriminates Against Scientology
To the Editor:
For me, as a German, now living in this country, "Officials in Germany Denounce Sect as a Menace to Democracy" (news article, Oct. 13) lays out exactly the warped mind-set of the German Government when dealing with religious minorities it does not understand, even when those minorities have been recognized as religions by the highest courts of Germany.


Princeton Stadium Slowly Crumbling
Fans attending Princeton University football games this season have been noticing some unsettling changes around the school's 80-year-old Palmer Stadium.
Not only is one section of seats off-limits, but the undersides of the bleachers are lined with orange and black tarps designed to catch any chunks of concrete that might fall.
Built in 1914, Palmer Stadium is the second-oldest college stadium in the United States.
The 45,000-seat stadium has been the site of every Princeton home football game since the Tigers beat Dartmouth there on Oct. 24, 1914.


Will Average Brazilian Make Any Gains?
To the Editor:
I have been following your coverage of the Brazilian elections and your enthusiasm for the presidential victory of Fernando Henrique Cardoso (news article, Oct. 14).


Polaroid Corp.(PRD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


South Korea Says It Will Soon Allow Business Travel to North
South Korea is expected to relax restrictions soon on travel by South Korean businessmen to North Korea and on investments in the Communist nation, South Korean officials say.
The expected moves were in keeping with South Korea's praise of the agreement reached with the United States earlier this week intended to halt North Korea's suspected nuclear weapons development.


Morton Intl.(MII,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jung Had Nothing To Do With Cults
To the Editor:
In "The Rose, the Cross and the Analyst" (Op-Ed, Oct. 15), Richard Noll makes an unwarranted and wholly uninformed comparison between Luc Jouret, the dead cult leader, and Carl Gustav Jung.
Mr.
Jouret was a self-immolated madman.


As Labor Wars Go, This Is Different
There once was a time when one couldn't talk labor wars without certain images pushing to the fore.
George Meany, jaw jutting, scowl permanently affixed on his face, was the picture of the quintessential labor leader.
Big Steel and the Big Three auto makers were and still are big-management incarnate.


Less Money and Time for Charity, Study Says
With little time and even less money to spare, Americans are declining to give to charity.
A study made public on Tuesday by Independent Sector, an organization that does research on volunteerism, said that 3.4 percent fewer Americans volunteered in 1993 than in 1991, and that Americans are giving about $19 less per household to charitable causes than in previous years.


Sprint Corp.(FON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Trade Gap With Japan Widens
The United States' trade deficit with Japan jumped 2.4 percent in August, sending the dollar down briefly today near its lowest level since the end of World War II.
By the end of the day, the dollar had recovered slightly, to 97.35 yen to the dollar, but it was clear that the revival of the American currency's strength that surrounded a new trade agreement with Japan late last month was a flicker, not a recovery.


Bridge
Books on bidding, like some wines, do not usually travel well.
But there is now an exception to this generalization: "Partnership Bidding at Bridge," by Andrew Robson and Oliver Segal, is one of the best books to appear in the last decade, and also one of the biggest.
It has 408 pages and is an excellent value for $17.95, including mailing, from C &amp; T Bridge Supplies, (310) 598-7010.
Robson is a young British star who has made a considerable reputation on the international scene in recent years, and his co-author is even younger.
They cover a lot of ground that has not been dealt with by other writers, and distil some useful general principles.
One of these is "In quick, out quick," and the diagramed deal is given as an illustration.


Skimming the Surface of Stravinsky, Properly
Put revolution aside for a moment; Igor Stravinsky was also our century's musical historian, providing, that is, he could rewrite the chapters himself.
Long after "Le Sacre du Printemps" ripped tradition to shreds, came another Stravinsky: the reviver of Webern, the arranger of Gesualdo.
In the Mass and in the great "Symphony of Psalms," ancient polyphony rises from the dead dressed in clothes of Stravinsky's design.
And then there is "The Rake's Progress," in which the great man reconstitutes Mozartean opera in his own image.


CHRYSLER PLANS JOINT VENTURE IN VIETNAM
The Chrysler Corporation is planning a joint venture in Vietnam to assemble and eventually manufacture Jeeps, pickup trucks and other vehicles, a company representative said yesterday.
The company hopes to sign an agreement with a Vietnamese partner within six weeks, said Mark Gelinas of the consulting firm Vatico, Chrysler's representative in Hanoi.
Chrysler would become the first American auto maker to assemble vehicles in Vietnam.
Chrysler initially plans to assemble vehicles from imported kits.(AP)


Regional School Planning On Integration Is Praised
State education officials and Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. today praised regional plans produced under a Connecticut law intended to promote racial integration across school districts, saying towns and cities had shown they were willing to cooperate on voluntary approaches.
While few of the 11 plans propose specific programs that would result in children from different communities attending school together, the officials said all of them propose dozens of ways to increase the exposure of children from different backgrounds to each other.


UNITED ASSET MANAGEMENT UNIT TO BUY JMB SUBSIDIARIES
The United Asset Management Corporation said yesterday that its Heitman Financial Ltd. unit would buy two affiliates of the JMB Realty Corporation of Chicago, forming one of the world's largest managers of institutional real estate assets.
Under the agreement, Heitman will buy JMB Institutional Realty and the JMB Properties Company and form a new company called the Heitman/JMB Advisor Corporation.
The transaction will bring together the $6.6 billion of commercial real estate assets managed by Heitman and the $5 billion of assets managed by the JMB subsidiaries.(Bloomberg Business News)


Hold the Little-Pig Jokes, Please
ENOUGH already about the three pigs: houses built of straw bales are being rediscovered as a viable form of "alternative architecture." Straw is a cheap resource that is rarely put to efficient use, says Catherine Wanek, a New Mexico videographer and straw bale proponent.
Straw-bale houses have walls made of bales that are stacked in a bricklike pattern, reinforced with shafts of bamboo or rebar steel, then finished with stucco or plaster.


Report Faults Bilingual Education in New York
In a first step toward re-examining bilingual education in New York City, the Board of Education released a study yesterday concluding that the current efforts to educate tens of thousands of students in their native languages are flawed.
The study found that students -- even recent immigrants -- who take most of their classes in English generally fare better academically than students in bilingual programs, where little English is spoken.


Clinton Aids Cuomo in New York As Whitman Visits to Help Pataki
President Clinton and a sprinkling of senior aides swept into New York City yesterday to join Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in a fight for their mutual political futures, helping to raise $2.5 million to keep the Governor's job -- and the state's electoral votes -- in Democratic hands for 1996.
It was Mr.
Clinton's fourth political appearance of the year with Mr.
Cuomo, the third at a fund-raiser, and he has now helped the Governor raise nearly $4 million for his re-election, a total rivaled only by his help for Kathleen Brown, the Democratic gubernatorial nominee in the biggest state, California.


Government Revises Case On Terrorism
With less than six weeks left before a Muslim cleric and his followers are scheduled to stand trial on terrorism and conspiracy charges, the Government, in court papers filed yesterday, fine-tuned its case, focusing more heavily on the roles of the cleric and the man who was acquitted in the killing of Rabbi Meir Kahane.
The revised charges, contained in an indictment returned by a Federal grand jury in Manhattan, represent the latest -- and perhaps the clearest -- in a series of bids by United States Attorney Mary Jo White's office to outline its case against the men who it says plotted to bomb the United Nations and other landmarks and to assassinate public figures ranging from Assemblyman Dov Hikind to President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt.


U.S. Is Ready to Ask U.N. to End Bosnia Arms Ban
The Clinton Administration said today that it would introduce a Security Council resolution next week calling for the automatic lifting of the arms embargo against Bosnia's Muslim-led Government in six months.
The move is an opening maneuver in what are likely to be delicate negotiations with Russia, Britain, France and Germany, who have been working with the United States in a so-called "contact group" on Bosnian peace.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  CLINTON HELPS CUOMO RAISE MONEY President Clinton joined Governor Cuomo in a fight for their mutual political futures, helping to raise $2.5 million to keep the Governor's job in Democratic hands.
A1.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey helped State Senator George E. Pataki.
B10.
REPORT FAULTS BILINGUAL EDUCATION The Board of Education released a study critical of programs that educate thousands of students in their native languages.
A1.
School maintenance overhaul is sought.
B4.
NEW YORK CITY  MAN QUESTIONED IN QUEENS SEX ATTACKS A 29-year-old man was being questioned about sex attacks in Jackson Heights, Queens, after a plainclothes police officer said he followed a 15-year-old girl, then heard her say, "Please don't hurt me." B3.


Albemarle Corp.(ALB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NORTH AMERICAN MORTGAGE STOCK FALLS 25 PERCENT
The North American Mortgage Company, which said in August that it was looking for a buyer, said yesterday that it had not received a satisfactory bid, setting off a sharp selloff of the company's shares.
The stock of North American Mortgage plunged $6.625, to $19.375, on the New York Stock Exchange, where its 25 percent decline was the worst of the day.
The company, based in Santa Rosa, Calif., hired Morgan Stanley &amp; Company to explore "strategic alternatives," including the sale of the company.
"Although we had discussions with several parties, we did not receive any proposals that we believed were in the best interests of our shareholders," the company said in a statement.
North American Mortgage has 109 offices in 29 states.(Reuters)


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sampras Back in Form  The injury-plagued Pete Sampras returned to the tennis court with a vengeance yesterday when he needed less than an hour to win his opening match in the $763,500 Marlboro Championships in Hong Kong.
The world's top-ranked player, who pulled a hamstring in the Davis Cup semifinals against Sweden four weeks ago and had not played a competitive match since, crushed Wayne Black of Zimbabwe, this year's National Collegiate Athletic Association champion, 6-1, 6-4, in a Silver Group match. (AP) Ivanisevic Advances: Top-seeded Goran Ivanisevic fired nine aces as he overpowered Jonathan Stark, 6-4, 6-2, in an opening match in the $375,000 CA Trophy tournament in Vienna.
Andre Agassi, seeded third, also had little trouble in his first-round match at the indoor Stadthalle arena, dismissing a fellow American, Chuck Adams, 6-4, 6-2. (AP) GOLF  Azinger Drops Out  Brian Kamm and Sean Murphy shot 64's to share the lead, but two bigger names were in the spotlight in the first round of the 5-day, 90-hole Las Vegas Invitational over three courses.
Greg Norman, making his first American tour start in almost two months, served notice his intestinal problems were at an end with a solid 67.
Paul Azinger, on a comeback from successful cancer treatment, continued to have problems with back spasms and was unable to start.
It marked the second consecutive week that the back problems had forced him out of a tournament. (AP) SOCCER  Unbeaten Streak Ends  One of the longest unbeaten streaks in college sports -- 101 games -- ended yesterday when the women's team at the University of North Carolina was beaten, 3-2, by Duke at Chapel Hill, N.C.
It was only the Tar Heels' second loss in 206 games.
North Carolina's previous loss was 3-2 to Connecticut on Sept. 22, 1990.
That game ended an unbeaten streak of 103 games for the Tar Heels.
North Carolina lost for the first time at home, where it now has a 139-1-2 record. (AP)


New Report Is Critical of States on Regulation of Insurers
Representative John D. Dingell, who has long favored Federal regulation of the insurance industry, has prepared a new report that describes inadequacies of state insurance regulation and criticizes state regulators for failing to enforce insurance laws.
The report has not been published yet, but Mr.
Dingell, the Michigan Democrat who is chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee's oversight and investigations subcommittee, has previously said that state regulators have not done enough to improve their oversight of the insurance industry.


Corrections
A picture yesterday with an article about flooding in Texas showing an inundated highway was printed in mirror image in some editions.
The buildings should have been at the right.


Australian Surfers' Boots
IN Australian slang, "ughs" are sheepskin booties, designed by surfers in the 1960's to coddle feet weary after "shooting the curl."
They were worn on bare feet, using the sheepskin's ability to wick moisture away to keep feet warm or cool.


Bowater Inc.(BOW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Flooded Texas Area Gets Some Relief After 4 Days
The sun came out over southeastern Texas for a time today, bringing a measure of relief from the four days of miserable rain and flooding that killed at least nine people and drove thousands of people from their homes.
But many rivers, bayous and creeks remained at record levels, and the authorities warned that even a small amount of rain could cause new devastation.


Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp.(DNB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Day's Sales of Problem Book: 10,000
The book that is causing all the fuss in Judge Lance A. Ito's courtroom sold about 10,000 copies yesterday alone, according to its publisher, Dove Books.
Michael Viner, the president of Dove Audio and Dove Books, said in an interview from his office in Los Angeles that Dove had printed 600,000 copies of the book, "Nicole Brown Simpson: The Private Diary of a Life Interrupted" by Kaye D. Resnick.


Ameritech Corp.(AIT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


W. R. GRACE TO SELL ITS PRINTING BUSINESSES
W.
R.
Grace &amp; Company said yesterday that it would sell its printing products business and a related unit for about $144 million to different buyers.
The sale is part of the company's previously announced plan to divest itself of nonessential operations to focus on specialty chemicals and health care products.
Grace will sell the printing products business to a new company to be formed by the unit's management and an investor group.
Grace, based in Boca Raton, Fla., has signed an agreement in principle to sell the related unit to an unidentified party.
Grace's printing products business produces photopolymer printing plates, offset printing blankets and rubber-based covers for industrial rollers.(Reuters)


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, plans to sell $400 million of debentures tomorrow.
*
First Bank National Association, a unit of First Bank System Inc., is selling $100 million of 8.35 percent subordinated notes due in 2004 through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The notes are priced at 99.90 to yield 8.365 percent.
The issue, which is noncallable, is rated A2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Digital Trims Loss; Market Lifts Stock
The Digital Equipment Corporation reported another big quarterly loss today but showed sufficient signs of improvement to satisfy Wall Street.
Digital lost $131 million, or 98 cents a share, in its first fiscal quarter, which ended on Oct. 1, an improvement from a loss of $154 million, or $1.14 a share, in the quarter a year earlier.
But the improvement reflected a $65 million benefit from accounting changes.


McDonnell Douglas Corp.(MD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


WHERE TO FIND IT
STEVE PLOTNICKI, the president of Profile Entertainment, a record company in Manhattan, had a home theater installed in his house in Southampton, L.I., last summer.
The theater was designed to showcase a big picture and big sound, with a 32-inch television screen, a 100-disk CD player, a cassette tape deck, a laser-disk player, four built-in wall speakers and a large sub-woofer, which makes sounds pulsate.
"You get one of these and immediately go out and rent 'The Terminator,' " he said.


Essay; Of I.Q. and Genes
Back in the 50's, a group of feisty dreamers gathered for breakfast at 7 every week in the Madison Avenue eyrie of the realty tycoon William Zeckendorf.
Their dream: to build the world's largest building, with the tallest tower.
Using the air rights over Penn Station, "The Palace of Progress" would not only combine an office building with a merchandise mart, but would contain a "videal dimension" -- television shopping made interactive with telephone ordering, much as we have today.


Independent Votes Hold Key to 8th District
Both Herb Klein and Bill Martini are lawyers who live in Clifton.
Beyond that they have little in common, except that Mr.
Klein, a Democrat, is the Congressman from the Eighth District and Mr.
Martini, a Republican, wants to be.
The district in southern Passaic and northern Essex counties was changed after the 1990 Census from a safe Democratic stronghold represented for 24 years by Robert A. Roe to a district that can go to either major political party, depending on the mood of its large number of unaffiliated voters.


Let's Be Ready for Next Epidemic
To the Editor:
The next global epidemic, which may be more devastating than AIDS, is waiting to strike, and we are pitifully unprepared to fend it off.


Discipline Meets Show Biz, Amicably
One of the most popular dance groups on the national circuit, surprisingly, did not make its Manhattan debut until Tuesday night.
In the last five years, Hubbard Street Dance Chicago, until recently known as Hubbard Street Dance Company, has been in special demand at American and European festivals; the reason was obvious in this first of several programs in the troupe's two-week season at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).
Good old North American pizazz (there was one Canadian choreographer on the bill) is seemingly close to the heart of Lou Conte, who founded Hubbard Street in 1977 in Chicago and is its artistic director.
Yet discipline and form are just as dear to the hearts of his dancers, who turn out to be engaging and versatile, reaching beyond the company's jazz-dance roots.


Kohl's Free Democratic Allies Shaken by Big Election Losses
For Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel and his tiny Free Democratic Party, everything was at stake in the German elections last Sunday, as campaign posters with his picture proclaimed.
Mr.
Kinkel's party won barely enough votes to get into Parliament, and its performance in state and local elections held in various parts of the country the same day was so bad that it plunged immediately into an identity crisis.


Phone Deregulation Won't Help Consumers
To the Editor:
We are hearing a call to extend deregulation to local phone companies and electric utilities these days.
The assumption is that the public would benefit from reduced rates.


Rohm &amp; Haas (ROH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Israeli Soldier Died As a Peace Stand-In
To the Editor:
Last week 19-year-old Nahshon Waxman, an Israeli soldier, was killed after abduction by those who call themselves Hamas, "The Party of God." Many may be tempted to dismiss this as regional feuding: what the press often calls the cycle of violence in the Middle East.
By suggesting sociohistorical gusts that compel humans toward barbarism, the cycle excuses calculated cruelty.


Weapons Makers Report Rise in Profits for Third Quarter
Three weapons makers, McDonnell Douglas, Northrop Grumman, and General Dynamics, reported higher third-quarter earnings yesterday.
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation, the nation's largest military contractor, posted record earnings of $161 million, or $4.07 a share, compared with $142 million, or $3.62 a share, in the quarter a year earlier.


Springs Industries(SMI,N) reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 1


THEATER
Male Growing Pains, Childhood to Maturity  Judith Anderson Theater
In the final moments of "Men: The Musical," a revue about male growing pains from childhood to maturity, the five-member cast sums up its befuddlement with a collective shrug: "We've come so far/Well here we are."


In Ocean Depths, Scientists Find Fast Growth
Solving a riddle of the sea, scientists are reporting today that the eerie thickets of snakelike creatures and towering chimneys of rich minerals that inhabit the sunless depths can form on the ocean floor not in eons, centuries or decades but as little as two or three years.
The rates of growth in some cases appear to be among the fastest known anywhere.
The surprisingly swift action took place at hot vents in the ocean floor that sometimes form atop volcanic fissures.


Haiti and U.S. Sign Pact to Stabilize Price of Gas
With gasoline prices shifting nervously from a street price of about $37.50 a gallon on Tuesday to one-fifth that sum today, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide signed a $15 million agreement with the United States Agency for International Development this morning that is intended to bring gas back to the pumps, stability to the market and a river of revenue to the state as it struggles to pay for everything from back salaries to light bulbs.
But on the fourth day after the international trade embargo on Haiti was lifted, many people here were still paying black-market prices for low-grade gasoline filtered through handkerchiefs, women's blouses and smudgy rags while they talked with resignation about last-minute gouging and the slow pace at which life is stumbling back to normal.


Corrections
A picture yesterday with a summary of a campaign advertisement for Representative Jolene Unsoeld of Washington State was published in error.
It showed an advertisement for Representative George Hockbrueckner of New York, one of many Democratic campaigns around the country that attack the Republican "Contract With America."


Season Opens For Folk Art
ON your mark. Get set. Go -- for that sponge-ware pitcher!
The opening today of the 16th annual Fall Antiques Show at the Pier signifies open season for folk art -- all those charming, irresistible objects and artifacts sought after by collectors and ordinary people for whom capturing and living with folk art has become a way of life.


Clinton Going Ahead With Mideast Visit
The White House said yesterday that President Clinton would go ahead with plans to visit Israel and Jordan next week despite the deadly terrorist bombing in Tel Aviv, which Mr.
Clinton called "an outrage against the conscience of the world."
In a written statement, Mr.
Clinton called on leaders around the world to condemn the attack, which came just two days after he announced that he would travel to the region to join Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and King Hussein of Jordan as they sign a peace treaty.
Later, in a speech in New York, Mr.
Clinton denounced the attack as one that aimed "to wreck the quest of the Arabs and Israelis for peace in the Middle East." He labeled those responsible as terrorists and declared, "They must not be allowed to succeed."


'We Can't Wait Forever,' Executor Says
CHARLES MOORE'S heirs say that they are not sure what to do with the architect's house now that the University of Texas has rejected it but that they would prefer not to put it on the market.
A movement has begun to create a private foundation to operate the house in cooperation with the Austin chapter of the American Institute of Architects.
But getting a new foundation off the ground is neither easy nor cheap.
Roughly $350,000 would be needed just to retire the mortgage, and it would take another $1.5 million to endow the foundation with enough money to maintain the house as a study center and museum of Charles Moore's work.


Arthur Siegel Memorial
A memorial service for Arthur Siegel, a songwriter and pianist, is to be at 7:30 P.M.
Monday at St.
Peter's Church, Lexington Avenue at 54th Street.
Mr.
Siegel, whose best-known song was "Love Is a Simple Thing," died of heart failure in September at the age of 70.
His colleagues from the world of musical theater and cabaret will offer remembrances and perform some of his songs.
The public is invited.


ON CAMPUS WITH: Dr. Judith Rodin; In an Ivy League of Her Own
ON Friday, when Judith Rodin is inaugurated as the seventh president of the University of Pennsylvania, she will become the first woman president of an Ivy League university and the chief executive of the largest private employer in Philadelphia.
Dr.
Rodin, 50, who is known for her research in eating disorders, will also be the only author of a self-help book to steer a major university toward the 21st century.
In the gray-tweed and furrowed-brow world of academia, Dr.
Rodin turns heads with her cover-girl smile and designer clothes.
She is also the only woman to have been on the short list for the presidencies of both Yale University and Penn as well as for the top position at the National Institutes of Health in the same year she appeared on "Oprah," where she promoted "Body Traps: Breaking the Binds That Keep You From Feeling Good About Your Body." She is also the only product of the Philadelphia public schools and the first graduate of Penn to become the university's president.


Genuine Parts (GPC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Amgen
Amgen Inc. was the most actively traded stock on the Nasdaq market yesterday, rising sharply.
After the market closed on Tuesday, the biotechnology company announced third-quarter earnings higher than expected.


Harman International Industries (HAR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Pop Life
In the Face of Adversity
It has been a busy year for Victoria Williams.
It's hard to believe that a little over a year ago, Ms.
Williams was too busy worrying about medical bills to play much music.


Corrections
An article by Reuters in Business Day on Tuesday about a planned acquisition of Alascom by the AT&amp;T Corporation misstated the effect on employees.
The 674 employees who work under a joint agreement between the companies would not be dismissed but would become employees of AT&amp;T.


CMS Energy (CMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. and Balkans: Shifting Stance
Maneuvering again to use Serbia as the unlikely instrument of its Balkan diplomacy, the Clinton Administration is now pressing the Serbian President to grant diplomatic recognition to Bosnia and Herzegovina and to Croatia.
In exchange for such recognition, intended to further isolate Bosnian and Croatian Serbs long armed and supported by Serbia and its President, Slobodan Milosevic, the United States would be prepared to accept a further easing of trade sanctions against Serbia, Western officials said today.


Allegheny Power Systems (AYP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MISTRIAL DECLARED IN MARRIOTT FRAUD CASE
A Federal judge in Baltimore declared a mistrial yesterday after a jury failed to reach a verdict on an $18 million lawsuit contending fraud by the Marriott Corporation.
After three days of deliberations, the jury told the judge that it was hopelessly deadlocked in the case involving accusations that Marriott improperly hid from investors its plans to split the company in two.
The 11 investor groups purchased $400 million in Marriott bonds in April 1992.
Less than six months later, Marriott announced plans to split the company -- Marriott International, a hotel management business, and Host Marriott, a hotel owner heavily in debt.
Because the bonds were mostly tied to Host Marriott, the bonds' value plummeted 30 percent within a week of the announcement.
A lawyer for the plaintiffs said they would ask to have the case retried.(AP)


Regulator's Plan on Insurers
The Washington State Insurance Commissioner, Deborah Senn, announced proposals yesterday to make it easier for policyholders to collect from their insurance company on claims for cleaning up enviromental damages.
Ms.
Senn, who was elected Commissioner in 1992 and is known as a generally pro-consumer regulator, said the proposals were intended to help individuals and small-business owners because they "cannot afford to fight the large insurance companies who have the time and money to litigate."


Region News Briefs; Two 25-Year Terms In Shooting of Officers
A 21-year-old man who was convicted of shooting two Mount Vernon police officers last October was sentenced today to two consecutive 25-year-to-life terms in state prison.
The man, Daniel James, who said he was homeless, was convicted in Westchester County Court here in August of two counts of first-degree attempted murder in the attack on the officers, Learie Johnston and Leroy Palmer.
The officers approached Mr.
James last Oct. 30 and tried to question him about an assault on other officers.
Authorities said Mr.
James pulled a handgun from his belt and shot Officer Johnston in the forehead and Officer Palmer in the thigh.


Putting the Magic Back
MAKERS of Oriental carpets have used chemical dyes and machine processes to guarantee a sometimes overly uniform product.
Black Mountain Looms, a new company, produces a collection of Oriental folk rugs handmade by artisans in India, Turkey and Romania and marked by a patina of gently uneven colors and nubby textures, the product of vegetable dyes and hand-spun wool.
"We wanted to breathe new life into old tradition," said Teddy Sumner, the owner of Michaelian &amp; Kohlberg, which owns Black Mountain Looms with Woven Legends Inc.
In the collection is the Kentwilly group of pile rugs (one is shown below), which includes Arts and Crafts patterns by the 19th-century designer William Morris.


Chesapeake Corp.(CSK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Judge Blocks Police Merger In New York
In a blow to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to merge the housing police with the New York City Police Department, a State Supreme Court justice ruled yesterday that the Mayor would first need to win the approval of the City Council and the State Legislature to consolidate the forces.
In her ruling, Justice Carol H. Arber agreed with the arguments of the Housing Police Benevolent Association that civil service law prohibited the transfer of New York City Housing Authority employees to another city agency, and would therefore need to be amended.
She also said that under the consolidation, housing police officers "would be irreparably harmed" by a loss of workers' compensation, pension and retirement benefits.


Re-enter Julie Andrews
Julie Andrews, the musical film star who has not performed on Broadway since she opened "Camelot" in 1960, is to return this spring in a musical version of "Victor/Victoria."
The musical, to open April 23 after a four-week tryout in Boston, is based on the 1982 film by her husband, Blake Edwards, in which she played a down-and-out singer who becomes the toast of 1930's Paris as a female impersonator.
The show, which has been in the works for a long time, has a new score by Henry Mancini and lyrics by Leslie Bricusse.


Whitman Denounces Cuomo's 12 Years
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey, whose tax-cutting policies have haunted Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo from across the Hudson, issued a no-holds-barred critique of the Cuomo years last night as she helped State Senator George E. Pataki raise an estimated $2 million for his Republican gubernatorial campaign.
"New Yorkers are not happy that the national recovery is leaving them behind," Mrs.
Whitman said.
"No wonder confidence is so low. No wonder a majority of New Yorkers cannot name a single accomplishment of the 12-year Cuomo administration.


Giuliani Says His Neutrality Is a Deliberate Strategy
When he showed up halfway through the ground-breaking ceremony at a new printing plant for The New York Times yesterday in College Point, Queens, a red-faced Mario M. Cuomo sat down next to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who had already given his speech.
"What did I miss?" the Governor whispered to the Mayor.


Alaska Air Group (ALK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BOOKER TO ACQUIRE NEW JERSEY FISH-FARM COMPANY
Marine Harvest International Inc., a fish-farm company based in Woodbridge, N.J., agreed yesterday to be acquired by Booker P.L.C. of Britain for $122 million.
Marine Harvest, which produces Atlantic salmon in Scotland and Chile and western white shrimp in Ecuador, said Booker was making a cash tender of $10.20 for each of Marine Harvest's shares.
Shares of Marine Harvest rose 87.5 cents, to $10, on the American Stock Exchange.
Booker said the purchase of Marine Harvest would make it one of the world's leading producers of farmed Atlantic salmon and would give the company better access to the growing salmon market.(Reuters)


At Zabar's, a Realignment at the Top
For the last four decades, Murray Klein has helped guide one of New York's most famous institutions.
So yesterday, when Mr.
Klein announced his retirement from Zabar's food emporium, it was something of an upheaval to the salmon-and-Cuisinart set, not to mention to food retailers.
In the dog-eat-dog deli world of New York, Mr.
Klein is a marketing legend, a feisty bull terrier who delights in outhustling and undercutting competitors.
What New Yorker could forget the Macy's-Zabar's beluga price war of 1983, which Mr.
Klein orchestrated?


INSIDE
Respite From Rain
The sun came out in southeastern Texas after four days of flooding, but rivers, bayous and creeks remained at record levels and more rain was threatened.
Page A18.
A No to Broadway
The playwright Neil Simon in effect declared war on Broadway and its economy by scheduling his next play Off Broadway.
Page C15.
Martha Raye Dead at 78
Martha Raye, the boisterous singer and comedian who entertained American troops in three wars, died after a long illness.
Page B16.
Big Gamble on North Korea
President Clinton is gambling that a promise of $4 billion in energy aid can persuade North Korea to be a responsible member of the global community.
News analysis, page A7.
Joy in Crown Heights
Eight months after he was shot in a in the head in a van filled with Hasidim, a Crown Heights teen-ager is home from the hospital.
Page B1.
Top Woman on Campus
Dr.
Judith Rodin, the first female president of an Ivy League school, takes over the University of Pennsylvania, football and all.
Page C1.


Borden Sells Two More Businesses
Borden Inc., the beleaguered food company that has agreed to be acquired by a subsidiary of Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company in a stock deal valued at some $2 billion, said late yesterday that it had agreed to sell two of its North American salty snack foods businesses to Pittsburgh Food and Beverage Inc., a privately held brewing and candy company.
Terms of the sale of Wise Foods and Moore's Quality Snack Foods were not disclosed.


Memorial Service Is Set For Ungerleider-Mayerson
A memorial service for Joy Ungerleider-Mayerson, a former director of the Jewish Museum in Manhattan, will be held at 6 P.M. on Oct. 27 at the museum, 1109 Fifth Avenue at 92d Street in Manhattan.
At her death, on Sept. 7, Mrs.
Ungerleider-Mayerson was president of the Dorot Foundation, whose interests include biblical archeology and Jewish education.
She was also chairman of the Albright Institute for archeological research in Jerusalem and served on the boards of several cultural and educational organizations.


Davies and Nicholas Use Power and Finesse
They are the Mutt and Jeff of European women's golf, the long and short of it, a par 5 and a par 3.
They are to the European Solheim Cup team what Seve Ballesteros and Jose Maria Olazabal are to the European Ryder Cup team.
They are Laura Davies and Alison Nicholas, best of friends and Europe's best pairing in the Solheim Cup.
Davies, 31, is the longest hitter in women's golf, and Nicholas, 32, is one of the game's best putters.
This combination of power and finesse is always difficult to beat in team golf.
And when combined with the other compatibility factors, it makes Davies and Nicholas a strong combination again this week as Europe and the United States meet Friday through Sunday in the third edition of the biennial Solheim Cup at the Greenbrier resort here.


CHEMICAL TO SELL SOME COMMERCIAL MORTGAGE LOANS
The Chemical Banking Corporation said yesterday that it would sell $341 million of commercial mortgage loans and real estate assets to the Morgan Stanley Real Estate Fund L.P. and Lennar Florida Partners.
Chemical, based in New York, said the sale price represented more than 60 percent of the portfolio's face value and more than the company's carrying value for the assets.
Chemical said bad loans and foreclosed properties accounted for about 86 percent of the portfolio, which also included about 80 small-to medium-sized real estate properties.(Reuters)


McKeon Steps Down As N.Y.R.A. President
The political struggle for control of horse racing in New York State took a sharp turn yesterday when Gerard J. McKeon resigned as president of the New York Racing Association after months of a running feud with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
"The fate of racing lies ultimately in layers of regulatory bodies," McKeon said.
"The attitude of governments all over this country is that racing is immoral unless it raises money for the government. The fate of racing isn't even in racing's hands. And in New York, racing is lost in a world of gambling alternatives."


Teledyne Inc.(TDY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


M.T.A. Committee Presses City For Coliseum Development Plan
Eager to start producing revenue from the largely dormant New York Coliseum, members of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority yesterday pressed the city to either support a plan for an interim use of the complex, or make a concrete proposal to sell it.
Yesterday's meeting of the real estate committee of the M.T.A. board showed that the city and the transportation agency were still far from agreeing on the fate of the site, a 3.4-acre parcel at the southwest corner of Central Park at 59th Street and Columbus Circle.
The site has been in limbo since July, when a plan to sell half of the property to the developer Mortimer B. Zuckerman collapsed in acrimony.


Treasury Prices Ebb On More Inflation Talk
Prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday for the second day after the latest trade report raised investor concern that the Fed's rate increases had not sufficiently slowed the economy to keep inflation in check.
Among other factors weighing on the market were commodity prices, which were up sharply from the start of trading.
Meat components led the Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commodity futures, which was up 1.45 points to 231.17.
Industrial commodities including energy, copper and lumber are also posting solid gains, with precious metals chipping in modestly.


FIRST TENNESSEE TO ACQUIRE PEOPLES COMMERCIAL
The First Tennessee National Corporation agreed yesterday to acquire the Peoples Commercial Services Corporation, the parent company of Peoples Bank, subject to approval by regulators and Peoples shareholders.
First Tennessee said Peoples Bank, based in Senatobia, Miss., had $96 million in assets, $84 million in deposits and $11 million in stockholders' equity.
First Tennessee, based in Memphis, said Peoples Bank would retain its name, charter and management.(Reuters)


Hofstra Dutchmen (6-0) Flying High
The way Joe Gardi remembers it, he was walking off the field on a cold November day in Missoula, Mont., two years ago.
The afternoon had been made a little colder because his young Hofstra football team had been blown out, 50-6, in the final game by the University of Montana, perennially a Division I-AA power.


Looking for the 'Real' Big Spender
In New Jersey's Eighth Congressional District, Representative Herb Klein and his Republican challenger, Bill Martini, are anxious to tag each other as fiscally irresponsible.
Mr.
Martini's Commercial
PRODUCER -- Dave Murray Associates, Princeton, N.J.
ON THE SCREEN -- The 30-second ad first features pictures of Mr.
Klein, former Gov.
Jim Florio and President Clinton; beneath them are the words "The Tax and Spend Way." Meanwhile, an announcer says: "It's clear their way isn't working anymore. Bill Martini can do better." The next scene is that of a fund-raiser attended by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman and Sheriff Edwin Englehardt of Passaic County, one of the party's most popular local figures; under Mrs.
Whitman's picture are the words "Martini will cut taxes." And the Governor is heard saying, "We need Bill Martini in Congress to cut spending, to cut taxes, to end politics as usual."
ANALYSIS -- The familiar "tax and spend" label that Republicans use against Democratic opponents has become such a campaign cliche that it defies examination.
The unspoken message: guilt by association.
Mr.
Klein's Commercial
PRODUCER -- Fenn, King, Murphy Communications, Washington.
ANALYSIS -- The "doozy ad" is an effort to throw the "tax and spend" charge right back at Mr.
Martini.
But Mr.
Martini wasn't even on the Passaic County Board of Freeholders when the project was first discussed in 1988, or when it was designed or put out to bid.
"In fact, when I joined the board in January 1993, the building was already 85 percent completed," he said.
And despite the fact that the site had some unexpected environmental problems that contributed to its final $38 million cost, the entire project's overrun was less than 4 percent, he said.
Mr.
Klein, of course, is gambling that even if voters hear both sides of the story, what they will remember when they get in the voting booth is something about Mr.
Martini and a project that ended up costing millions.
JOSEPH F. SULLIVAN


Economic Scene; Big government and the Big 3 pass the air pollution buck.
FOUR years ago Congress got a big round of applause for requiring the states to reduce ozone air pollution to levels that don't send asthmatics to early graves.
But it left the details to the states.
And -- no surprise -- regulators in the heavily polluted Northeast, who must answer to diverse interest groups, are at a loss on how to get from here to there.
Worse, perhaps, the only Federal agency with the power to drive the bargaining to a conclusion that serves the public is hoping, hoping, hoping someone else will take the political heat.
"The Environmental Protection Agency has abdicated its leadership role," argues Dan Dudek, an economist with the New York-based Environmental Defense Fund.


Arvin Industries Inc.(ARV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Dow Gains 18.50 on Strong Earnings News
Gaining a little after prices flattened in recent sessions, the stock market closed broadly higher yesterday in heavy trading after strong earnings reports continued to surprise Wall Street.
Stock prices received a lift after the Government reported that the United States trade deficit narrowed in August.
But the report also showed a widening gap with Japan, and the dollar, already weak, slid further.
The bond market also fell slightly.
The weakness in the dollar and bonds limited the gains for stocks.
Only 11 issues rose for every 10 that declined.


A Flower Grows in Manhattan


FMC Corp.(FMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thermal Journal; Tribe Smells Sludge and Bureaucrats
In the glow of a campfire and the stench of a half-million-ton mountain of human waste, tribal dancers beat their leather drums and sang of a time when the Indians who lived here marked their tribulations more simply, in earthquakes and droughts.
It was cold on the nighttime desert at the edge of the Salton Sea, and George Auclair, a tribal committee member, warmed his hands in his armpits as he talked of temptations that have led Indians to trade away their freedoms over the years.


CHRONICLE
The Burstein clan will get together for a party at Elaine's tonight.
But KAREN S. BURSTEIN, the Democratic candidate for State Attorney General, will not be the guest of honor.
That part is reserved for her sister ELLEN BURSTEIN MACFARLANE, whose book, "Legwork," is being published by Scribner.
The book, which she wrote with her twin, PATRICIA BURSTEIN, describes her struggles with multiple sclerosis.


S.&amp; L.'s See New Threat, This Time From Banks
Just as the $200 billion bailout of the savings and loan industry nears its end, Federal regulators are voicing fears about a new threat to the industry.
The problem is this: Although savings and loan companies are mending, commercial banks are recovering from their recession-related troubles even faster.
And that means that the premiums commercial banks pay to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation are likely to be cut drastically next spring, while the savings and loan industry will continue to pay higher charges for the next seven years to rebuild its own depleted fund.


General Dynamics Corp.(GD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Former B.C.C.I. Chief Given 8-Year Jail Term
A Federal judge today sentenced the former chief executive of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International to more than eight years in prison and ordered him to pay $255.4 million in restitution in one of the biggest bank frauds in history.
Judge Joyce Hens Green gave the sentence to Swaleh Naqvi, who was at the center of the B.C.C.I. international banking scandal in which thousands of people lost their savings.
The eight-year jail sentence was one of the longest given to anyone so far in connection with the bank.


Publishers Push a Book By the Pope
In an unusually aggressive marketing campaign, the Vatican and publishers have issued a book of personal reflections by Pope John Paul II on his papacy, his faith, his upbringing in Poland and a range of issues related to religion and morality in the modern world.
Translated into 21 languages, the book, "Crossing the Threshold of Hope," is to go on sale on Thursday in bookstores in 35 countries.


Removal of Weil, Gotshal Sought in Leslie Fay Case
In a stinging rebuke of one of the country's richest and most prestigious law firms, a Federal official recommended yesterday that Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges be removed from the Leslie Fay bankruptcy case and be forced to forfeit part of the $5.3 million in fees it has billed to date.
In a motion filed in Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan yesterday, Arthur J. Gonzalez, the United States Trustee responsible for supervising the bankruptcy of the Leslie Fay Companies, said Weil, Gotshal's relationship to members of the Leslie Fay board constituted an "actual conflict of interest." In addition, Mr.
Gonzalez said, the firm had failed to disclose those relationships to the court.


Harassment in Singapore
Many Americans applauded Singapore's brutal caning of the teen-ager Michael Fay earlier this year.
They should now ask themselves whether they like the way the tiny city-state is dealing with another American citizen, Christopher Lingle.
No, Mr.
Lingle is not accused of vandalism.
He is being threatened with arrest for "criminal defamation." His crime?
He wrote an article for The International Herald Tribune in which he criticized Southeast Asian nations' suppression of free speech, censorship of the media and their reluctance to censure their neighbors for even the worst violations of human rights.


Market Place; U.S. Investigating Nasdaq's Pricing Practices
The Justice Department said yesterday that it was investigating the dealers who make Nasdaq markets, an inquiry that intensifies the pressures on Nasdaq to change in ways that could fundamentally alter the nature of the market.
At a minimum, the pressures seem likely to cut profit margins for the dealers at the center of the market.
The Federal inquiry appears to be focusing on suspicion of price-fixing in what investors are charged when they buy and sell stocks on Nasdaq, the network of securities dealers linked by computer and phone.


A Police Official Pays The Price of Conscience
IT'S sort of amusing.
Michael Julian is getting raves for doing in the second place what he readily concedes he should have done in the first.
"I did a Faustian move," said Mr.
Julian, former Chief of Personnel at the Police Department.
"I sold my reputation for pay. I was entitled to it under the law. But I wasn't entitled to it in my mind."


Village Voice Owner's Deal
Leonard N. Stern, the owner of The Village Voice in New York, has reached an agreement to buy L.A.
Weekly, the large alternative newspaper in Los Angeles.
The price was undisclosed.
Mr.
Stern said he had been trying to buy L.A.
Weekly for several years because he saw potential for efficencies in owning youth-oriented publications on both coasts.
He also said he was interested in buying other alternative newspapers in other cities.


Jazz Festival in Quilts
IN one quilt, a cigarette dangles from the mouth of a pianist with batik eyes and a saxophone player wears a shimmering peaked blue cap.
In another, a limber-fingered bass player wears an amber-bead choker.
This jazz trio takes on different guises in a dozen patchwork quilts made by Michael A. Cummings and titled "African Jazz." Six are on view at the main gallery at Flushing Town Hall, 137-35 Northern Boulevard, through Nov. 27.
The exhibition complements the jazz cafe in the next room, which features live performances on Thursday nights and walls covered with photographs of past performers and with Louis Armstrong memorabilia.


Tribune Co.(TRB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Big Modem Maker Buying Small Rival
U.S.
Robotics Inc., a leading maker of computer modems, said yesterday that it would acquire the Megahertz Holding Company, a smaller rival, in a stock swap valued at $213 million.
The deal would enable U.S.
Robotics to extend its product line in a part of the market where its sales have lagged: modems for portable computers.
Megahertz is the market leader in modems for small computers that use credit-card-sized plug-in devices called PCMCIA cards.
PCMCIA, an industry standard, governs various sorts of plug-in cards that can add modem capabilities, memory or other functions to portable computers.


INTEL BEGINS EXPANSION OF PENTIUM CHIP PLANT
The Intel Corporation, the world's largest chip maker, broke ground yesterday on a $500 million expansion of its Pentium chip plant in Santa Clara, Calif., which it said could create as many as 1,200 new jobs.
The project will double the size of the company's "clean room" to 70,000 square feet and add 160,000 square feet elsewhere in the plant.
A clean room is a self-contained area where circulated air prevents the contamination of silicon chips.
The factory produces the Pentium chip, Intel's most advanced microprocessor, but the company said the plant would also develop future chips for personal computers.
The stock of Intel rose $1.75, to $60, in Nasdaq trading, where almost 7.2 million shares changed hands. (Bloomberg Business News)


The Ultimate Hollywoodian Lives an Anti-Hollywood Life
Years ago George Lucas fled Hollywood, a town and a state of mind that appalled him.
He poured his fortune into creating Skywalker Ranch, a secluded Victorian-style work paradise surrounded by groves of eucalyptus and redwood in Marin County, just north of San Francisco.
"I opted for quality of life," said the 50-year-old film maker, a shy, almost reclusive figure who customarily wears jeans, sneakers and work shirts and whose beard is rapidly turning gray.
"Most of my friends are college professors. It's a different world." He laughed.
"I prefer this to Malibu."


Buyer of Western Union Will Assume Pensions
Bowing to pressure from the Federal Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, the prospective buyer for Western Union's money-transfer business said yesterday that it would reduce its bid by $300 million and assume full responsibility for the pensions owed to 16,000 Western Union employees and retirees.
The buyer, the First Financial Management Corporation, and Western Union's owner, the New Valley Corporation, said they had reached a new definitive agreement under which First Financial would pay $893 million in cash for the money-transfer business and assume responsibility for the pension plan as part of the deal to release Western Union from bankruptcy proceedings.


Disregards to Broadway: Neil Simon's Next Play Will Be in 'Off' Category
Firing a shot across the bow of Broadway's unions and theater owners, Neil Simon has announced that his newest play will open Off Broadway when it comes to New York.
Mr.
Simon is the country's best-known living playwright, and has opened 23 plays on Broadway since "Come Blow Your Horn" in 1961.


No Vouchers for Jersey City
New Jersey wants to experiment with a school voucher plan for Jersey City, the state's second-largest school district.
Gov.
Christine Whitman and Jersey City's Mayor, Bret Schundler, support the idea; that could help propel this ill-advised plan through the State Legislature.
Although the proposal is limited in its initial application, it has dangerous implications for public education.
Eligibility is restricted, but parents who qualify could use the vouchers to send their children to parochial as well as private schools.
That can only undermine the public schools by siphoning off students and money.
It may also violate the constitutional separation of church and state.
Taxpayer funds ought not to be diverted to parochial school vouchers.


20 KILLED IN TERRORIST BOMBING OF BUS IN TEL AVIV; 48 ARE HURT
A powerful bomb tore apart a crowded bus in the heart of Israel's main commercial city today, killing at least 20 people and wounding 48 others in one of the deadliest terrorist attacks in Israeli history.
Believed by Israeli officials to have been carried by a Palestinian Islamic extremist on a suicide mission, the bomb packed such force that it sent people flying through the air, ripped bodies to pieces and reduced the bus to a charred, barely recognizable shell.


Giuliani Could Use a Socrates at City Hall
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has proposed in his plan to limit New York City public assistance drastically that all "able-bodied," childless people who receive welfare benefits work 20 hours a week at a menial task to return what they presumably owe the city's coffers.


Dylan, Musician, Just Doing His Job
Bob Dylan doesn't act as if his songs are classics.
He is a throwback to an era when a musician's job was to perform live, not to perfect a studio arrangement.
His music stays in the present tense.
Mr.
Dylan won't recreate his old recordings; with every new band, and sometimes with each performance, he toys with tempos, rhythms and melodies, rarely content to sing a line the same way twice.
Over a three-decade career, some of his live efforts have been garbled, even perverse.
But with his current band, Mr.
Dylan has reclaimed his place as a great American musician: an improviser with deep, broad roots.
At Roseland on Tuesday night, opening a three-night stand, Mr.
Dylan was dressed as a country preacher, or a Western gunslinger, in a black frock coat.
He sang as if savoring every word, still finding new shadings in his own lyrics: a touch of cocky threat in "I'll Be Your Baby Tonight," a slow-building ardency in "Tears of Rage." A new song, "God Knows," mixed a lover's declarations of fidelity with portents of apocalypse.


Moscow Journal; At Court of Yeltsin, Royalty and Hints of Intrigue
Some Russians were wondering today about the future of Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, who hotly denied resignation rumors that floated into print on Tuesday night.
But many more were wondering where President Boris N. Yeltsin and his aides got the dinner jackets they wore at the state banquet for Queen Elizabeth II on Tuesday, the first black-tie affair in the Kremlin since 1917.
The Communists not only put a stop to formal wear, but also murdered the Russian royal family, and that has put something of a pall on relations with Britain and its royal family ever since.
Czar Nicholas II was a first cousin of King George V of Britain and the Russian state archives are full of handwritten letters from the King addressed to "Nicky" and signed "Georgie." They are full of affection and concern for the problems of an increasingly chaotic pre-revolutionary Russia.


Perkin-Elmer Corp.(PKN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pacific Telesis Group (PAC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


After Two Decades, How Much Longer?
Like some aging life of the party who can no longer depend on nips and tucks to maintain the illusion of youth, "Saturday Night Live" is discovering the futility of makeovers.
Celebrating its 20th anniversary this season, this NBC show has been in some sort of turmoil since almost the beginning.
But back then it was largely a matter of creativity bursting at the seams.
These days it's more a pedestrian question of survival, of trying to at least simulate some of that early exuberance.
It's not happening.
Reasons are not hard to come by.
Veteran staff members are now in their 40's and not always in tune with their younger writers.
The performers are interested less in a long run on the show than in snagging a lucrative movie or sitcom deal elsewhere.
The show's longtime producer, James Downey, says he sadly detects "a more measured kind of involvement." That extends even to Lorne Michaels, the executive producer, who left the show from 1980 to 1985 and who now copes with a schedule that includes feature films and "Late Night With Conan O'Brien."


Journal; The Last Tycoons
The only sure thing about Hollywood is that there's no such thing as a sure thing.
Robert Redford's "Quiz Show," autumn's media darling, has already drooped at the box office.
So has "The River Wild," the thriller everyone pegged to revive Meryl Streep's career by turning her into Harrison Ford.
If blue-chip talents like these can quickly become yesterday's heroes, why has such unrestrained optimism greeted the news that Jeffrey Katzenberg, Steven Spielberg and David Geffen are starting a new studio?
"This is as if Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig and Joe DiMaggio got together" was the movie producer Harvey Weinstein's typical accolade for a mogul dream team whose inception was described as "atomic" by Newsweek and "nuclear" by Time.


Ground Broken For Times Plant
The New York Times broke ground yesterday for a sprawling new printing plant in College Point, Queens, one of the largest manufacturing structures to be built in New York City in years.
Construction of the three-story, 515,000-square-foot structure actually began several weeks ago on a former police car pound along the Whitestone Expressway in the College Point Corporate Park.


Hamelin Is Top Rookie
BOB HAMELIN of the Kansas City Royals was an easy winner yesterday as American League rookie of the year.
Hamelin, 26, was the first designated hitter to win the award, and the first player from the Royals to earn it since LOU PINIELLA in 1969.
The honor, now named the Jackie Robinson Rookie Award, was first presented in 1947.
Hamelin batted .282 and hit 24 home runs. (AP)


Ex-Olympic Swimmer Is Lithuania's Most Likely to Succeed
As he climbed the victory stand to collect his medal at the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal, Arvydas Juozaitis approached a moment for which he had been preparing for years.
Forced by geopolitics to swim for the Soviet Union rather than his beloved Lithuania, he had decided to pull a glove onto his hand, raise his fist to the sky in a gesture of defiance to Moscow, and then seek political asylum in Canada.


Books of The Times; High Life and Low In a Pair of Mysteries
A LONG LINE OF DEAD MEN  By Lawrence Block  285 pages.
William Morrow &amp; Company. $20.
WILD HORSES  By Dick Francis  319 pages.
G.
P.
Putnam's Sons. $22.95.
In the clever plot of Lawrence Block's 12th and latest Matthew Scudder detective novel, a very private club that began with 31 men in 1961 has been meeting annually to toast the joys of living and read aloud the names of those members who have died in the meantime.


New Rochelle Ponders a Trump Tower in the Sound; Where Some See a Park, the Developer Sees an Island of Condos, With a New Name
These days, the Mayor of this small coastal city finds himself on a first-name basis with one of the most flamboyant developers in the world.
"He calls me Tim," said Timothy C. Idoni, the Mayor of New Rochelle since 1992, "and I call him Donald. It's fairly comfortable."


Zimmerman Chosen For Mitsubishi Work
Zimmerman &amp; Partners Advertising in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., said it had been awarded the accounts of 3 additional Mitsubishi dealer associations, bringing the total it handles to 15, with combined billings estimated to exceed $30 million.


Hornets' Johnson Out
LARRY JOHNSON of the Charlotte Hornets could be out for two months with a possible stress fracture in his left foot, the club said.
Johnson, who has a 12-year, $84 million contract, missed 31 games last season with a deep lower back sprain.


Mention of Daughter's Rape Is Generating Its Own Tempest
As sound bites from campaign debates go, it was not in the same political league with Lloyd Bentsen's withering riposte that Dan Quayle was "no John Kennedy." Nor was it in the same class as Ronald Reagan's patronizing comment to Jimmy Carter, "There you go again."
Nevertheless, State Treasurer Kathleen Brown delivered a debate sound bite to remember -- and one that is now the subject of hot debate -- when midway through a televised face-off with Gov.
Pete Wilson last Friday she demanded that he stop questioning her commitment to be tough on criminals and then delivered an emotional, personal revelation about crime.


Panel Calls for Overhauling School Maintenance System
Advocating an end to "knee-jerk reaction to intermittent abuses," a special commission called yesterday for overhauling the maintenance and repair of New York City's schools.
In its first report, the nine-member commission, appointed in March by Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, pinpointed experimentation as vital to improvement, saying no single method was applicable to a system of 1,150 old and new buildings serving more than a million students.


Judge Seeks Delay of TV Interviews on Simpson Book
Judge Lance A. Ito, struggling to control intensive publicity about the O. J. Simpson murder case, asked three television broadcasters to delay interviews with the author of a new book about Nicole Brown Simpson.
He also indicated that he planned to sequester the jury for at least part of the trial.
Responding to Judge Ito's request, CBS News and Maury Povich, the host of a syndicated talk program, said they would exercise their First Amendment free speech rights and broadcast the interviews.
A third network, CNN, said in a statement that "in light of the court's fair concerns" it would delay broadcasting an interview between Larry King and the author of the book, Faye D. Resnick, a close friend of Mrs.
Simpson


A New Ayer Unit For Event Marketing
Ayer Inc. in New York said it had created Ad: Vent, a subsidiary specializing in event marketing, from the agency's strategic events marketing group division.
The new unit, with 17 employees, opens with existing Ayer clients like AT&amp;T and Gillette, and two new ones: Tommy Hilfiger U.S.A. and General Motors.
Mark Dowley, 30, who was a senior vice president and management supervisor at Ayer's New York office, was named to head the subsidiary as senior vice president and managing director.


Mallinckrodt Group Inc.(MKG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


JOHNSON &amp; JOHNSON (JNJ,N)
Johnson &amp; Johnson reported an increase of 15.6 percent in its profits for the third quarter, as worldwide sales rose and costs were reduced.
"It was a blowout quarter," said Samuel Isaly of Mehta &amp; Isaly Worldwide Drug Research.


Harris Corp.(HRS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Martha Raye, 78, Singer And Comic Actress, Dies
Martha Raye, the big-mouthed, big-hearted entertainer whose career spanned the decades from vaudeville to videos, died yesterday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
She was 78.
In recent years, she had suffered a serious of ailments, including a stroke and circulatory difficulties.
Ron Wise, a spokesman for Cedars-Sinai, said, "Her death was an aggregate of that and other problems."


Ailing Toe Can't Deter A Determined Oakley
So far, nothing has stopped Charles Oakley during the preseason.
He has played well despite a partly dislocated right toe.
He has played well despite lingering dissatisfaction with his contract.
After Oakley scored 15 points and grabbed 10 rebounds Tuesday in New York's 109-92 victory over the Spurs in San Antonio, Derek Harper reaffirmed how important Oakley's health is to the Knicks.


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
BOSTON CELTICS -- Signed Greg Minor, guard. Continental Basketball Association
OMAHA RACERS -- Promoted coach Mike Thibault to president.
Named Bart Kofoed assistant coach.
Football  National Football League
NFL -- Fined Deion Sanders, San Francisco 49ers cornerback, and Andre Rison, Atlanta Falcons wide receiver, $7,500 for fighting in Sunday's game.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Jim Bal lard, quarterback, to the developmental squad.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Re-signed Allen DeGraffenreid, wide receiver, to the practice squad.
Waived Anthony Daigle, running back, from the practice squad.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Kevin Brothen, guard-center, off the practice squad of the Pittsburgh Steelers.
Placed Houston Hoover, guard, on injured reserve.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Oscar Shorten, defensive tackle, to the practice squad.
PITTSBURGH STEELERS -- Signed Kenny McEntyre, defensive back, to the practice squad.
Waived Kevin Brothen, guard-center, from the practice squad.
Canadian Football League
BALTIMORE -- Released Mike Kerr, linebacker.
HAMILTON TIGER-CATS -- Released Anthony Bailey, defensive end.
LAS VEGAS POSSE -- Transferred Jason Medlock, defensive end, to the injured list effective Oct. 28.


Giants Are Shaky, but Aren't Shaken Up
Instead of taking the Giants, putting them in one big bag and shaking until thoroughly mixed, Coach Dan Reeves decided that no shake-up was a good shake-up.
He made changes today, but they won't shock the football world.
They didn't even shock his team.
In fact, a knee injury to linebacker Corey Miller is more significant than anything else that happened at the Giants' camp today.


MCA Chiefs Fail to Sway Matsushita
A contentious meeting of top-level officials from MCA Inc. and its Japanese owner has ended with the Japanese company saying it would not cede greater control to MCA's executives.
But the meeting left open the question of whether the parent Matsushita Electric Industrial Company might sell MCA as a way of ending its deteriorating relations with the Hollywood film and entertainment company's management.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  BOMBING KILLS 20 IN TEL AVIV  A powerful bomb tore apart a crowded bus in Tel Aviv, killing at least 20 people and wounding 48.
Israeli officials suspect that the attack was carried out by an Islamic militant on a suicide mission.
A1


GM Hughes Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giuliani Proposes Bonds to Help Parochial School Construction
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that his administration is considering helping religious groups finance the construction of parochial schools with tax-exempt municipal bonds.
During the administrations of Mayor David N. Dinkins and Edward I. Koch, religious institutions were barred from using tax-free bonds for construction because city officials thought that such a move would violate the Constitutional separation between church and state.


COMPANY BRIEFS
TYCO INTERNATIONAL, Exeter, N.H., has received shareholder approval for its $1.2 billion acquisition of Kendall International Inc., Mansfield, Mass., a maker of disposable medical products and adhesive materials.
ORNDA HEALTHCORP, Nashville, an operator of hospitals, psychiatric and substance-abuse centers, has signed an agreement with Charter Medical Corp., Macon, Ga., an international health care concern, to share resources in joint venture service offerings.


Rangers Can't Decipher McMullen Payroll Facts
Neil Smith, president and general manager of the Rangers, said yesterday that a lawyer for his team had telephoned National Hockey League Commissioner Gary Bettman to complain about remarks made earlier this week by John McMullen, owner of the Devils.
In discussing the Rangers and the Devils during a luncheon interview with reporters and editors of The New York Times on Tuesday, McMullen said the Rangers had a payroll of "between $25 million and $27 million" last season when they won the Stanley Cup.
The Devils, McMullen said, had a payroll of $12.3 million when they lost to the Rangers in overtime in Game 7 of the N.H.L. playoffs' semifinal round.


20 KILLED IN TERRORIST BOMBING OF BUS IN TEL AVIV; 48 ARE HURT
A powerful bomb tore apart a crowded bus in the heart of Israel's main commercial city today, killing at least 20 people and wounding 48 others in one of the deadliest terrorist attacks in Israeli history.
Believed by Israeli officials to have been carried by a Palestinian Islamic extremist on a suicide mission, the bomb packed such force that it sent people flying through the air, ripped bodies to pieces and reduced the bus to a charred, barely recognizable shell.


McKeon Steps Down As N.Y.R.A. President
The political struggle for control of horse racing in New York State took a sharp turn yesterday when Gerard J. McKeon resigned as president of the New York Racing Association after months of a running feud with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
"The fate of racing lies ultimately in layers of regulatory bodies," McKeon said.
"The attitude of governments all over this country is that racing is immoral unless it raises money for the government. The fate of racing isn't even in racing's hands. And in New York, racing is lost in a world of gambling alternatives."


Airline Stocks Jump as AMR's Net Surges
With little to cheer about in recent years, investors in airline stocks celebrated surprisingly strong third-quarter earnings by the parent of American Airlines yesterday by bidding up shares of most major carriers.
The AMR Corporation said yesterday that its net income rose 74 percent, to $205 million, or $2.47 a share, on revenues of $4.23 billion.
The earnings were 23 percent better than the average of Wall Street analysts' estimates and were AMR's biggest quarterly profit ever.


Moore's House Divided
TO build a house, the architect Charles Moore once wrote, "you bind the goods and trappings of your life together with your dreams to make a place that is uniquely your own."
Few architects have taken their own advice so consistently and so well.
Throughout his life -- Moore died of a heart attack last December at 68 -- he built as eagerly for himself as for his clients.
He rarely had much money, but he had some remarkable goods and trappings, including hundreds of antique toys, pieces of folk art, architectural models, drawings and artifacts, which he cobbled together into a series of residences that were almost magical in their ability to merge whimsy and monumentality.


PHILIP MORRIS TO BUILD CIGARETTE PLANT IN KAZAKHSTAN
The Philip Morris Companies said yesterday that it would build a new cigarette manufacturing plant in the Almaty region of Kazakhstan.
The company already makes cigarettes at the Almaty Tobacco Company, which it acquired last year.
Philip Morris said it would invest about $300 million in the next five years to increase Almaty's annual production capacity to more than 25 billion cigarettes and help Kazakhstan to become a self-sufficient tobacco-growing region.
It expects to begin construction of the new factory next year.(Reuters)


Iraq Religion Ministry Bombed, Killing One
A bomb exploded in an office of the Iraqi Ministry of Religious Affairs here today, killing one person and seriously wounding five others, Iraqi television announced.
The report said the bomb had been planted by what it described as "paid agents of foreign elements."


Petersen Plans to Acquire Sassy Magazine
In a move that is bound to change the dynamics of the teen-age magazine field, Petersen Publishing has signed a letter of intent to acquire Sassy magazine from Lang Communications.
Lang said in an announcement yesterday that a final deal was expected in 30 days.
Company executives declined to discuss the deal or disclose the terms.
Calls to Petersen, which is based in Los Angeles and publishes 20 special interest titles, were not returned.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Two New Reference Works
Since I'm often asked to suggest single-volume encyclopedias, it's nice to be able to report the appearance of two exceptionally useful new books.
Each is priced at $60.


Gains in the Vitamin War
The take-no-prisoners partisanship that marred the closing days of the 103d Congress did not prevent lawmakers from approving a bill resolving one hotly contested issue: how to regulate the health claims made by the manufacturers of vitamins and other dietary supplements.
Few issues this session generated as much grass-roots emotion, largely because the supplement industry waged a well-financed scare campaign that had many health-minded Americans convinced, wrongly, that the Food and Drug Administration was about to ban these popular products.


Times Co. Has Profit of $120.6 Million
The New York Times Company said yesterday that its earnings surged in the third quarter, reversing a loss from a year earlier, as all three of its major business lines showed improvement.
For the quarter, the Times Company reported net income of $120.6 million, or $1.16 a share, compared with a loss of $3 million, or 4 cents a share, in the quarter a year earlier.


Aristide Vows to Include Wealthy in Haiti's New Cabinet
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, elected as the revolutionary champion of Haiti's poor, pledged today that his new administration would include members of the tiny, wealthy elite that has long held sweeping power in Haiti.
A cabinet of both rich and poor, he said in his first news conference since being restored to power on Saturday, would help foster "the image of reconciliation."


Fruit of the Loom (FTL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On the No. 5 Bus Line, A Thud, Then Silence
Shmulik Sadan had no idea at first what hit him.
It had started out like any other day.
He was on his way to work just before 9 A.M., reading a newspaper at the back of the No. 5 bus and standing up to get off at the next stop on Dizengoff Street.


Way Out Front on a Hot-Button Issue
Gov.
Tommy G. Thompson strode into the dining room of the Governor's Mansion and plunged, with equal zeal, into his breakfast ham and the welfare record that has made the two-term Republican the envy of many politicians.
He called his eight-year attack on the welfare system "gutsy." He said his reducing benefits had made liberals feel as if "their hearts had been cut out." He even called the blizzard of anti-welfare campaign advertising now blanketing the country a tribute to his own bellwether instincts.


E-Systems (ESY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Militants, Once Seen as Useful to Israel, Are Now Its Main Foe
There is a lingering paradox in the rise of Hamas, the militant Islamic group that took responsibility for the attack in Tel Aviv today.
Secular Palestinians say that at Hamas's founding in December 1987 -- when the Palestinian uprising began -- Israel did little to halt its activities, seeing the group as a potential counterweight to broad support for the Palestine Liberation Organization.


CHRONICLE
The actor RAUL JULIA was reported to be in guarded condition in a Manhattan hospital yesterday following a stroke that he suffered on Sunday.
In a statement released by Cynthia Parsons of the William Morris Agency, JEFF HUNTER, Mr.
Julia's agent, denied speculation that the actor had died.
"Contrary to reports in the Spanish press, Raul Julia is alive," the statement said.
Ms.
Parsons said that no further details would be made public and that she would not identify the hospital.


A Blue Year for the Purple-and-Green Dinosaur
Poor Barney.
The plush purple-and-green Tyrannosaurus rex, beloved by toddlers if not their parents, is having a bad year.
Sales of Barney merchandise are dropping as briskly as they took off last year.
The most popular toys in stores this year are the Mighty Morphin Power Rangers action figures.
And therein may lie a marketing lesson in overexposure.


CHRONICLE
Beleagured by the fallout from two new books dealing with her supposedly loveless marriage and reported infidelity, the PRINCESS OF WALES flew to New York yesterday for a respite.
The Associated Press reported that she landed at Kennedy International Airport at 4:20 P.M. on a British Airways flight.
She was met by a young woman believed to be her friend LUCIA TARSO FLECHA DE LIMA, the wife of the Brazilian Ambassador to the United States, Paolo Tarso Flecha de Lima.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.71
2.91
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.89
4.90
3.01
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.34
5.32
3.11
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.67
7.63
5.23
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.89
7.87
5.82
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.69
8.71
6.92
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.64
6.61
5.35
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.  (BMY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about apparent suicides among American troops in Haiti misstated the recent trend in the number of suicides in the military.
It has declined this year, after increasing in 1993; it has not been increasing steadily.


NBC Attacks Rival's Application for a Television Station
NBC lost no time yesterday in attacking a revised application filed by SF Broadcasting to purchase a Wisconsin television station, contending that the new papers were incomplete and still represented an effort by the Fox network to mask the true extent of its control over ownership of the station.
Richard Cotton, the chief counsel for NBC, wrote a letter to the Federal Communications Commission, stating that SF Broadcasting had still not filed the necessary documents that would fully explain its ownership structure and whether that ownership exceeded F.C.C. limits on foreign investment in broadcast stations.


A Hint Of Hope By Baseball Owners
If the words their chief labor executive spoke today were not simply rhetoric, major league baseball club owners may be backing away from their "three-imp" plan: impose a freeze on free-agent signings, declare an impasse in negotiations for a new labor agreement and implement the salary cap they covet.
Richard Ravitch, the management official, offered hints of change following a 90-minute meeting that signaled the resumption of talks after a 39-day hiatus during which the World Series was obliterated for the first time in 90 years.


Up, Up and Away: Muted Carlesimo Starts Over
So P. J. Carlesimo, the new coach in town, by reputation yells too much.
So, what's wrong with that?
The guy he replaced supposedly whined too much, and that nobody-respects-me refrain grew old and tired, along with the legs of some of his stars.
The friendly folks here will tell you that Rick Adelman grew, like weeds, on the so-called City of Roses, whose mandate is to take deep, sustaining inhalations of professional basketball, the only major league game it has.


Gay Stand Costs Prospect A Justice Post
A top candidate to head the Clinton Administration's program of adding 100,000 police officers to the nation's streets said today that he had withdrawn from contention because of concerns at the Justice Department arising from his advocacy of homosexual rights.
The prospective official, Tom Potter, who was Police Chief in Portland, Ore., from 1990 to 1993, has long been known in that city as a gay rights advocate.
He was never formally offered the community policing job at the Justice Department, but he appeared very close to getting it when the issue of gay rights came up at a meeting on Oct. 5 with John R. Schmidt, the department's third-ranking official.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: CALIFORNIA SENATOR Struggle for the Senate; In California, a Daily Quest for Cash
Occasionally, Senator Dianne Feinstein makes a speech.
Sometimes she actually campaigns, as she did in the San Fernando Valley on Monday.
Once in a great while, she relaxes.
But what she does most of the time, in her current struggle against political oblivion, is ask for money.
On the phone.
In letters.
In person.


Electronic Data Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Headline
"My eyes closed, and when I opened them everything was black. I looked to see if everything was O.K., and then I jumped through the window. What used to be the window. I looked back and realized what I was saved from. My first thought was that I'd come out alive." -- SHMULIK SADAN, a survivor of the bus bombing in Tel Aviv.  [ A16:1. ]


IBP Inc.(IBP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Anderson's Return Big On Agenda
Picture the Nets as you would a roomful of musicians -- tuning their instruments, rehearsing for their first performance.
They are ready to play, but their maestro needs more time.
His rhythm is missing.


Sports of The Times; Baseball's Empty Office
THE World Series was scheduled to start this Saturday night, but the game of baseball isn't being played in stadiums now.
Instead, the industry of baseball is being discussed in meeting rooms, as it was yesterday in Washington.
But the acting commissioner, Bud Selig, wasn't even there -- the acting commissioner who never seems to act.


Police Question Man in Queens Sex Attacks
A 29-year-old man was being questioned yesterday about a string of sex attacks in Jackson Heights, Queens, in which schoolgirls and young women were accosted in broad daylight, the police said.
A plainclothes officer said he arrested the man, George Shaw, after seeing him follow a 15-year-old girl.


A sharing of clients, but not ownership, quickens the growth of a Hispanic-owned agency in Dallas.
HISPANIC-OWNED advertising agencies often face a common quandary: how do they get the power and the clients they need to grow, yet remain independent?
Victor F. Ornelas struggled with that question six years ago when he started his own agency on his dining room table here.
He decided that he did not want to be swallowed up as a Hispanic division of a general market agency, as was the trend.
Instead, he built his agency by forming an alliance with Tracy-Locke Inc., now part of DDB Needham Dallas Group.


MCI Communications Corp.(MCIC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinton Ups Atom Stakes
In its rush to strike a nuclear agreement with North Korea, President Clinton is gambling that the promise of $4 billion in energy aid can turn what he has labeled "a rogue state" into a responsible member of the global community.
The agreement, announced by President Clinton on Tuesday, reflects the Administration's conviction that offering the Communist Government in Pyongyang a way out of its economic difficulties will induce it to give up its nuclear ambitions and stop threatening neighboring South Korea with its million-member army.


THEATER
A Comedy of Manners And a Radical Diatribe  The Mint Theater
It is something of an occasion when any theater company, deciding to try its hand at Oscar Wilde, passes over the perennial favorite, "The Importance of Being Earnest," for one of the earlier plays.
The Mint Theater has risen to that occasion to open its third season with a satisfying revival of "Lady Windermere's Fan: A Play About a Good Woman."


Hasidic Gunshot Victim Crosses a Personal Bridge
For Nachum Sasonkin, merely swallowing has for months been the most difficult of physical tasks.
The disability has often left him exasperated and angry, as well as more than a bit hungry.
But swallowing was probably never harder than it was shortly after 5 P.M. yesterday, as his father's car turned onto Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn.
The 18-year-old Hasidic student, though, didn't mind the difficulty.
It was joy, after all, that was choking him.


Northrop Grumman Corp.  (NOC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Report Leads Germany to Review Bizarre Death of Politician
A tale of international intrigue and the possible murder of one of Germany's most promising young politicians is gripping the country.
When the politician, Uwe Barschel, was found dead in a Geneva hotel room seven years ago, the authorities quickly closed the case as a suicide.
But Mr.
Barschel's family, convinced that he was killed to keep him from revealing what he knew about an illicit trade in weapons, have doggedly pursued the case, aided by conspiracy theorists.


Sale of Farrar, Straus Is Near, Its President Says
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, the family-run publishing house that has maintained a steadfast independence through extraordinary times of industry turmoil, says it will soon be sold to a larger firm.
Roger Straus, who helped found the company in 1946 and is now its president and chief executive, said in an interview last night that he would announce the sale in the next few weeks.


Cavs Lose Wilkins
Already scrambling to fill vacancies created by LARRY NANCE's retirement and BRAD DAUGHERTY's bad back, the Cleveland Cavaliers learned yesterday that starting guard GERALD WILKINS will miss the 1994-95 season because of a ruptured Achilles' tendon.
Wilkins was injured Tuesday night during the second quarter of an exhibition game against the Boston Celtics in Providence, R.I. (AP)


Key Has Surgery
JIMMY KEY, the ace Yankee left-hander who went 17-4 with a bothersome shoulder in a strike-shortened season, underwent arthroscopic surgery in Birmingham, Ala., yesterday.
Afterward, the Yankees said that Dr.
JAMES ANDREWS had found two possible sources of the problem and had treated both of them, a rotator cuff problem dating to 1989 and a bone spur.
Despite the surgery, the Yankees said they did not know if Key would be ready to start the 1995 season.


Compaq's Earnings Jump 88%
The Compaq Computer Corporation said today that third-quarter earnings jumped 88 percent as sales grew 63 percent, despite lower gross profit margins and expanded inventories.
The lower margins and higher inventories, analysts said, showed that the company had shed some slow-selling products through price cuts and had built up supplies in preparation for the crucial fourth quarter, when personal computer makers typically ring up their largest sales.


Nothing Is So Wrong With Esiason That Running Game Couldn't Help
Elegance is for San Francisco, where they should have a separate category for style points next to touchdowns.
But Boomer Esiason has been watching the Jets for so long, he understands there is only one thing that matters.


The Governor's Plan for Lilco
Gov.
Mario Cuomo's proposed takeover of the Long Island Lighting Company is clearly an election-year ploy.
Three weeks before elections, he says the takeover would yield a 10 percent cut in electricity bills for Long Island voters.
But whatever the Governor's motive, his proposal warrants serious attention.
Indeed, with additional safeguards the plan could yield sizable benefits to Lilco shareholders and customers.
At the core of the plan is a tax dodge.
If the state were to buy Lilco from its shareholders, the utility would no longer owe Federal taxes and could borrow at tax-free -- therefore low -- interest rates.
Lilco could use the low-cost loans to buy back shares, thereby eliminating dividends, and to replace existing high-cost loans.
The potential saving is huge because Lilco is buried in debt, in part because it built a $5.5 billion nuclear plant, Shoreham, which it never opened in the face of ferocious opposition from nearby residents and, well, Governor Cuomo.


John S. Nagel; Foundation Executive, 81
John S. Nagel, a retired Ford Foundation executive who focused on family planning in Latin America, died on Saturday at his home in Naples, Fla.
He was 81.
The cause was complications of lung cancer, his family said.


P.&amp; G. Picks Grey For Giorgio Line
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company said yesterday that it had named Grey Advertising in New York as the global agency on its newly acquired Giorgio Beverly Hills line of luxury fragrance brands.
The assignment, which had been expected, consolidates P.&amp; G.'s prestige fragrance business at Grey.
Billings were not disclosed.
Grey, which already handles P.&amp; G.'s other prestige fragrance lines -- Laura Biagiotti and Hugo Boss -- was awarded the Giorgio Beverly Hills line without a review.
Advertising for Giorgio Beverly Hills lines like Giorgio and Red had been handled in the United States by Eisaman, Johns &amp; Laws Advertising in Los Angeles for the last 12 years, while domestic advertising for the Wings brand had been at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Los Angeles for the last three years.
Butler, Lutos, Sutton, Wilkinson in London previously handled the media planning and buying portion for the line in Europe.


Calendar: An Auction, A House Tour and Shows
Benefit Auction  Takashimaya, 693 Fifth Avenue (54th Street); (212) 685-3480, extension 912.
Furniture and decorative objects from rooms created by 11 designers, including Michael DeSantis, Chessy Rayner, Noel Jeffrey and John Saladino, will be auctioned during a cocktail party on Wednesday at 7:30 P.M.
The event is sponsored by the New York Metropolitan Chapter of the American Society of Interior Designers.
Proceeds will benefit the Partnership for the Homeless.


Events: Shows for Books And a Variety of Crafts
Books as Art  Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street; (212) 708-9400.
A show of 140 books designed by more than 100 artists opens Sunday and continues through Jan. 24.
Artists represented include Toulouse-Lautrec, Matisse, Picasso and Alexander Calder.
Open Saturday through Tuesday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursday and Friday, noon to 8:30 P.M.
Admission is $8; students and those 65 and older, $5; children 15 and younger, no charge.


Pfizer Inc.(PFE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


No. 1 Post at Prudential Goes to Chase's No. 2
The Prudential Insurance Company of America, the nation's largest life insurance company and owner of major securities and mortgage lending firms, said yesterday that it has hired Arthur F. Ryan, the No. 2 executive at the Chase Manhattan Corporation, to be its new chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Ryan, 52, will succeed Robert C. Winters, who turns 63 in December.
Mr.
Winters has been with Prudential for 41 years and told its board in 1987 that he would retire before he was 63.


Mondesi Top Rookie
Outfielder RAUL MONDESI unanimously won the National League rookie of the year award yesterday, the third consecutive Dodger winner.
Mondesi, 23, batted .306 and led major league outfielders with 16 assists.
Dodgers catcher MIKE PIAZZA was a unanimous winner last year; first baseman ERIC KARROS won a closer vote in 1992.


Reebok Intl. Ltd.(RBK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nynex Corp.(NYN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Chief For First Interstate
First Interstate Bancorp said today that its president, William E. B. Siart, would become chief executive, effective Jan. 1.
He succeeds Edward M. Carson, who has led a remarkable turnaround of the banking company since 1990.


Region News Briefs; 416 Pounds of Cocaine Seized in Poughkeepsie
A raid on a house in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., yesterday turned up 416 pounds of cocaine, the largest cache of the drug ever found in Dutchess County, the state police said.
The police also arrested three Colombian citizens who are believed to have ties to the cocaine cartel based in Cali, Columbia, said Peter Coulthard, a state trooper.


Westinghouse Electric Corp.(WX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Signed John Hart, general manager, to a five-year contract extension through 1999.


Kuwait Journal; With War's Passions Spent, Love's in the Gulf Air
Most marriages here are arranged, couples on dates must often take chaperons, and magazines that discuss romance are heavily censored.
But love has finally triumphed, at least on the airways.
"Tonight might be a special night for all of you," crooned the radio host Talal al-Yagout above the soft murmuring of a saxophone.
"We get to talk about love, broken hearts, getting married, altogether in one episode.


Extension for Hart
JOHN HART, principal architect of the Cleveland Indians' turnaround, received a five-year contract yesterday to remain the team's general manager through 1999.
The deal includes club options for the years 2000 and 2001.


UST Inc.(UST,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Where Poets Are on a Roll
POETS need New York: it's a first-rate graduate school for moral indignation.
Federico Garcia-Lorca provides a classic example.
In 1929, Lorca sailed here from his native Spain, where, at 31, he was already acclaimed as a master.
His declared purpose in traveling was to study English at Columbia; his deeper purpose was to get away from home, which he was finding too lovely for words. (New York is "a dreadful place, and that's why I'm going," he wrote in anticipation of the city he knew about chiefly through novels and films.)
New York, then entering the harshest stages of the Depression, proved to be as wonderfully dreadful as Lorca had hoped.
Once he settled into his dorm room, he left it.
For several months, he boned up on Manhattan from Harlem to the Battery, meeting (and charming) Manhattanites along the way.
As Ian Gibson's biography relates the story of his trip, he seems to have had a pretty good time.


Jets' Casillas Seems to Be in Right Frame of Mind
Tony Casillas, the only defensive tackle on the Jets who married a psychiatrist, feels good when people meet him for the first time and tell him, "Say, you're no jerk."
"I'm a very complex person," he said today as the Jets returned to practice after a two-day layoff during their bye week.
"I have a reputation as being moody. But I work."


LAWMAKERS FACE MOST CLOSE RACES IN MANY DECADES
With the election 19 days away, there are more neck-and-neck contests for House and Senate seats than there have been in decades, a situation of particular peril for Democrats who now hold three-quarters of those seats.
Nearly 70 of the 435 House races and 10 of the 35 Senate races are among those considered too close to call, and at least 50 more House races and 10 more Senate races are highly competitive.
It would take a net gain of 40 seats for the Republicans to win control of the House, and 7 for them to take the Senate.


How Hester Prynne Got That Tell-Tale Letter
HESTER A Novel About the Early Hester Prynne By Christopher Bigsby 199 pages.
Viking. $21.95
We've met Hester, the spirited heroine of Christopher Bigsby's new novel, before, of course.
She's Hester Prynne, the dark lady of "The Scarlet Letter," Nathaniel Hawthorne's magisterial study of sin and salvation in Puritan New England.
Whereas "The Scarlet Letter" focused almost completely on the middle and later years of its characters' lives (and the consequences that sin and guilt have had on their emotional maturation), "Hester" dwells on their back stories, on the events that initially shaped their fates.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  ISRAELIS SHAKEN BY BUS ATTACK  A day after an attack on a bus in Tel Aviv that killed at least 21 people, Israelis resumed their lives, their stoicism shaken by a new sense of vulnerability.
A1  Hamas released a video showing what it said was the bomber.
A3


Georgia Gulf Corp.(GGC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Lalas Fears He May Not Play at Home
THIS is not exactly political exile.
Alexi Lalas walks out the door and is immediately recognized by his abundant red hair.
He looks like a human tie-dyed shirt, circa 1967, the Summer of Love in San Francisco.
He is the flamboyant, guitar-playing grunge-rock American who scored the goal that helped Padua beat Milan last Sunday.
"I walk into a trattoria, people recognize me, yeah," Lalas was saying over the telephone.
"It's amazing how one soccer game can change a city."


General Instrument Corp.(GIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sharpton Is Arrested in Protest of Street Vendor Ban


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the quarterly results of the Digital Equipment Corporation misstated the company's closing stock price on Wednesday.
It was $31.25, up $1.875.


Rockwell in Hostile Bid for Reliance Electric
The Rockwell International Corporation announced today a hostile $1.5 billion bid for the Reliance Electric Company, topping a $1.4 billion deal that the General Signal Corporation struck with Reliance in late August.
Both Reliance and General Signal were taken aback by Rockwell's bid.
"It came as a complete surprise," said Stephen Van Oss, a Reliance spokesman, who added that the matter was discussed at a regularly scheduled board meeting today.
He said the company would have no formal response until Rockwell began the tender offer on Friday.


Suspect in L.I.R.R. Slayings May Dismiss His Lawyer
Colin Ferguson, who is charged with killing six passengers on a Long Island Rail Road train, is considering dismissing William M. Kunstler as his lawyer to avoid using an insanity defense, a Nassau County Court judge said today.
The judge, Donald E. Belfi, said he had received several letters from Mr.
Ferguson indicating that he might want to change lawyers or defend himself.


Gas Blast in Texas Threatens Supplies
Two major gasoline pipelines exploded under the flooded San Jacinto River just outside Houston, injuring dozens of people, destroying houses and boats and raising fears in the futures market of a fuel shortage in the Northeast.
The recent evacuation of the area prevented further injuries.


A Greyhound Alumnus Is Named Chief
Greyhound Lines Inc. announced today that it would bring back Craig R. Lentzsch, a former vice chairman, to become president and chief executive of a company nearly overwhelmed by losses, debts and passenger desertions.
Mr.
Lentzsch, 46, was among the investors who took over Greyhound in a leveraged buyout in 1987.
The company filed for bankruptcy in 1990, the year after he left, and is now negotiating an emergency financial overhaul with shareholders and creditors to avoid a repetition.


U.S. Will Build Laser to Create Nuclear Fusion
In the first major step toward the restructuring of the nation's nuclear weapons complex for the post-cold-war era, the Energy Department has approved a proposal to build a giant $1.8 billion laser machine at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California.
The announcement, to be made by Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary, is planned for today.
The device is to generate miniature blasts of thermonuclear fusion energy for studying how the stars shine, how such nuclear fire may be harnessed on earth to generate electrical power and how the reliability of hydrogen bombs can be maintained without full-scale, explosive tests underground.


Ethyl Corp.(EY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
WALT DISNEY CO.,, Burbank, Calif., completed the sale of 74.6 million shares in Euro Disney S.C.A., operator of the theme park near Paris, to Prince Walid bin Talal of Saudi Arabia.


Thousands in Moscow Mourn Journalist Killed in Blast
With angry charges of murderous plots in high places, thousands of grieving Russians today filed past the coffin of a crusading journalist who has become the latest martyr in the campaign for democracy here.
The 27-year-old journalist, Dmitri Kholodov, was killed in his office on Monday when he opened a booby-trapped suitcase.
He had been told the suitcase contained documents that would help his investigations of corruption in the Russian army.


CHRONICLE
DEBORAH NORVILLE, the television newswoman whose job changes never fail to make news, is on the move again.
She is leaving CBS News to become the anchor of "Inside Edition," the syndicated program produced by King World Productions.
She joined CBS in 1992 as a correspondent on "Street Stories" and became a co-anchor of the short-lived "America Tonight."
"I would have loved to have stayed at CBS, but that would have involved an unpredictable reporting schedule," said Ms.
Norville, who is expecting her second child in December.
"It's been difficult enough over the last few years."


Wrong Answer for the Simpson Case
Judge Lance Ito is correct to defend O. J. Simpson's right to a fair trial, but secret procedures and ham-handed efforts at news censorship are not the way to guarantee that right.
Admittedly, the prejudicial publicity in this case has been intense, and tabloid publications and imitation news shows have been wildly irresponsible.
But Judge Ito should use his powers to manage the environment inside the courtroom, through steps such as immediate sequestration of potential jurors, rather than resort to futile efforts to control events on the outside.
Yesterday the judge closed his Los Angeles courtroom to all journalists and all spectators for key portions of the jury selection on the mistaken assumption that news coverage was a threat to proper jury questioning.
If higher courts adhere to Supreme Court precedent they will reverse this secrecy order without delay.


Cincinnati Bell Inc.(CSN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giuliani May Try a New Merger Strategy: Dismissal
A top Giuliani administration official said yesterday that if the courts did not allow the merger of the city's police forces, the administration would consider dismissing all 2,500 housing police officers and then rehiring them as members of the New York City Police Department.
The official, Paul A. Crotty, the city's Corporation Counsel, said the New York City Housing Authority had the power to simply decide it needed no police force.
The plan would take the merger issue out of the judicial and legislative arenas, where it has faced tough going.


Danaher Corp.(DHR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Back Is a Pain for Graf and Lendl
The bad back syndrome is striking the men's and women's tours with equal severity: top-ranked Steffi Graf isn't sure when or whether she'll play again this year, and 34-year-old Ivan Lendl is starting to wonder whether he'll play again at all.
Neither has been physically able to compete since the United States Open.
While it's extremely unlikely that Graf will lose her No. 1 ranking to Arantxa Sanchez Vicario by the year's end, it is a virtual certainty that Lendl will finish the season out of the Top 20 for the first time since 1978.
Lendl is currently ranked 53d.
The Goshen, Conn., resident has tried a barrage of treatments on his lower back this year, all to little or, at best, temporary avail.


Brighter Bulb Is Invented
The Department of Energy announced today that a company had invented a light bulb in which sulfur is bombarded by microwaves to produce an extremely bright light using much less energy than conventional bulbs.
The bulb was invented by Fusion Lighting Inc. in Rockville, Md., a suburb of Washington, under a contract with the Energy Department.


Coca-Cola Adds Burnett to Roster
The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that it had further widened its agency roster by naming Leo Burnett/Oslo, the Norwegian agency of the Leo Burnett Company in Chicago, to handle responsibilities for five brands in Norway.
Billings on the account, previously handled by McCann-Erickson Worldwide's agency in Oslo, Reklanens Hus McCann, were not disclosed.
Leo Burnett/Oslo was chosen, without a review, to produce local adaptations of advertising for Coca-Cola, Coca-Cola Light -- the overseas version of Diet Coke -- Sprite, Fanta and Tab X-tra; it will also handle local marketing and promotional activities.
It is the first time Burnett has worked for Coca-Cola.


Abroad at Home; A Widening Freedom
Twenty-five years after Earl Warren retired as Chief Justice, a conference at the University of Tulsa Law School last week considered what legacy his Supreme Court left.
As the conferees spoke, a startling testament to the continuing influence of the Warren Court came from half a world away.
The High Court of Australia, its equivalent of the U.S.
Supreme Court, handed down a decision putting constitutional limits for the first time on libel suits by political figures.
In doing so it borrowed from the Warren Court's revolutionary 1964 libel decision, New York Times v.
Sullivan.


Duracell International Inc.(DUR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Latest Deluge Stuns a Texas Town
After five floods in four years, people in Liberty County are used to seeing the Trinity River misbehave.
But the looks of amazement and dismay today on the faces of people in this sedate town 44 miles from Houston are visual evidence of the words on everyone's lips: No one has ever seen anything like this.
In some places, the river has wandered nine miles from its banks, officials said.
As many as 4,000 county residents were forced from their homes this morning by levee breaks.


A Kern Classic Lives On
Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein 2d may have changed the course of musical-theater history with "Show Boat" in 1927.
But who remembers their fifth and final Broadway collaboration, "Very Warm for May," which opened 12 years later and ran for only 59 performances?
If "Very Warm for May," which had the first of six full-length concert performances at Weill Recital Hall on Wednesday evening, is remembered at all, it is for one thing only.
The show introduced what many regard as the most perfect of all Kern melodies, "All the Things You Are." And the song's soaring rendition by Elizabeth Futral and John Hancock at the opening-night performance gave the three-hour concert production a momentary, badly needed lift.


Flooding Sets Off Blast of Major Fuel Pipeline
A pipeline big enough to carry one-sixth of the nation's gasoline supply suddenly ruptured under the flooded San Jacinto River east of Houston yesterday, sending flames 100 feet into the sky and igniting boats, a railroad trestle and homes on the river bank.
At least 69 people were treated for burns and smoke inhalation.
Emergency officials and the pipeline company said the river's currents were so strong that they had to shut the valves and watch the gasoline, perhaps 400,000 gallons, burn off.


Home Video
'Silverlake Life' Released
"Home video is extremely important to me," said Peter Friedman, the co-producer and co-director of "Silverlake Life: The View From Here." On Wednesday, New Video released the acclaimed documentary, which chronicles the decline and death of Tom Joslin, the film's original producer and director, and Mark Massi, Mr.
Joslin's companion of 22 years, both of whom had AIDS.


Germany's Claimants
To the Editor:
"A Wall of Resentment Now Divides Germany" (front page, Oct. 14) says people who seek to recover property in eastern Germany are "simply" those "who have dug up long-forgotten deeds." This neglects Nazi victims, particularly Jews, who make up a large percentage of those claimants.


Sounds Around Town
'Queen of the Boogie'
Hadda Brooks, Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, (212) 758-2272.
A contemporary of Dinah Washington, Ms.
Brooks enjoyed some of the most memorable rhythm-and-blues hits of the late 1940's, when she was nicknamed "queen of the boogie." Now almost 78, she is in remarkable vocal shape, and her gritty, rhythmically charged singing has lost little of its punch.
Her open-ended engagement at Michael's Pub coincides with the release of two albums: "Anytime, Anyplace, Anywhere" (DRG), her first new recording in 40 years, and "That's My Desire" (Virgin), a compilation of 25 of her hits from the 1940's and 50's.
Shows are at 9 and 11 tonight and tomorrow night.
There is a $20 music charge and a $15 minimum.
STEPHEN HOLDEN A McBroom Bouquet
Amanda McBroom, Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, (212) 632-5000.
The most talented cabaret performer to come out of Los Angeles in the last decade, Ms.
McBroom has a rich, throbbing contralto voice that stretches comfortably from Broadway to country-pop.
The composer of Bette Midler's hit "The Rose," she is also her own best interpreter.
Aside from a demonically intense version of Jacques Brel's "Carousel," the high points of her new show are original songs like "The Rose" and "Errol Flynn," a moving homage to her father, a B-movie actor who appeared in movies with the swashbuckling star.
Shows are at 8:30 and 11 tonight and tomorrow night.
There is a $35 cover charge and no minimum.
S.
H.


Sundstrand Corp.(SNS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Children
'Who Needs a Conductor Anyway?' Alice Tully Hall (212) 721-6500 Recommended ages: 7 to 13 Tomorrow
Skip the velvet dresses, navy blazers, patent-leather shoes and hair ribbons.
It's strictly dress-casual day at this new Lincoln Center classical-music concert for children.
Peter Schickele, or P. D. Q. Bach, is leading the program, the first in a series of "projects" called the Red, White and Bluejeans Music Machine with the American Symphony Orchestra.
Mr.
Schickele says he wants to refrain from using the word "concert," too, so as not to scare wary children.
All of which should create some healthy competition for the New York Philharmonic and the Little Orchestra Society, the big organizations in New York City offering classical music to children.


Sysco Corp.(SYY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Frank Battisti, 72, Federal Judge Presiding Over Demjanjuk Case
Frank Joseph Battisti, the Federal judge who presided over several important cases in Cleveland, including the deportation of John Demjanjuk, died on Wednesday at the Cleveland Clinic.
He was 72 and lived in Cleveland.
The cause was typhus and Rocky Mountain spotted fever, said Faye Kaufman, his secretary at the United States District Court for the Northern District of Ohio.


Allstate Corp.(ALL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kroger Co. (KR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 8


Art in Review
Chris van Wangenheim Staley-Wise Gallery 560 Broadway (at Prince Street) SoHo Through Oct. 29
Glitter and kinkiness are the hallmarks of Chris van Wangenheim's darkly decadent fashion photographs.
Van Wangenheim, a German who died in a car crash in 1981 at age 39, worked for Harper's Bazaar, Vogue and other magazines as well as for commercial clients.
This survey of his photographs from the 1970's suggests how contemporary his disturbing images remain.
Suggestions of sadism and bestiality give van Wangenheim's photographs more than a whiff of sensationalism.
In one image, a beautiful woman with a whip straddles a bare-chested man in chains; in another, a horse nuzzles a nude model lying on the studio floor.


Big Business Is Shifting Donations to Democrats
Some of the nation's largest and most heavily regulated companies, which two years ago raised millions of dollars for the Republican Party, have given considerably more this year to the Democrats.
Companies like American Financial, Archer Daniels Midland, Atlantic Richfield, Chevron and Occidental Petroleum have shifted their donations drastically, proving a fundamental axiom of American politics: While the campaign oratory plays heavily on anti-incumbency themes, what matters most when raising money is who controls Congress and Washington's regulatory apparatus.


On My Mind; Terror And the West
The bus creeps along, stops an instant for a traffic signal and disintegrates.
Later, police have a difficult time separating the bits of bone, deciding which belong to the corpses of passengers and which to the people torn apart in their offices and shops on Madison Avenue.
Is that what it will take?
Would Americans then understand the meaning to them of what happened in Tel Aviv?
Would we grasp that we are not bystanders far off but traveling on the road to our own Dizengoff Street?


What Penalty for a Killing in Passion?
With the Bobbitt case long since over, and the frenzy over the O. J. Simpson case dragging into its fifth month, legal experts on domestic violence, women's advocacy groups and tabloid television shows have fixed their attention on the case of a Maryland man who killed his wife after finding her in bed with another man.
For the tabloids, the case of Kenneth Peacock, 36 -- who pleaded guilty to killing his wife, Sandra, and was sentenced on Monday to 18 months in jail -- is the lurid story of a long-distance trucker who came home at the wrong time.


Arco Chemical Co. (RCM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lin Broadcasting Corp.(LINB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Food Aid Agency Protests Expected Cuts
To protest budget cuts by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, a nonprofit group that operates an emergency food referral service referred all calls from people seeking help to City Hall yesterday.
The directors of the Food and Hunger Hotline, which operates the referral service with $230,000 from the city's Human Resources Administration, said they took the step -- for a day only -- to protest cuts they fear will be made in the city's food assistance programs.


Corrections
A headline on Wednesday about an agreement between the United States and North Korea referred incorrectly in some copies to the source of more than $4 billion in aid proposed for North Korea.
As the article said, the bulk of the assistance would be provided by South Korea and Japan, not the United States.


Pataki Courts Black Voters As Jackson Backs Cuomo
On a campaign day that highlighted the importance of black voters, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo won a rousing endorsement from the Rev.
Jesse Jackson while his opponent, George E. Pataki, traveled to southeast Queens and Harlem to argue that black New Yorkers should vote Republican because they are so often the victims of violent crime.
Polls suggest that black voters will side overwhelmingly with Mr.
Cuomo on Nov. 8, as they have in his three previous elections.
But both campaigns also understand that a Cuomo victory may depend on a huge turnout by black voters, perhaps as large as the 50 percent turnout for David N. Dinkins, New York City's first black mayor, in last year's municipal elections.


U.S.-North Korea Accord Has a 10-Year Timetable
The new accord between the United States and North Korea outlines an elaborate timetable for steps by each side that would end in the complete dismantling of North Korea's nuclear program in about 10 years, according to details released today.
Viewed in terms of that long-term objective, the new accord is as about as good as anyone could reasonably have expected, Clinton Administration officials maintain.


Eaton Corp.(ETN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Devils Chip In And Buy Ice Time
With Bruce Driver, the team's player representative, leading the way, eight Devils skated for about 75 minutes this morning at the South Mountain Arena here.
Driver, Tommy Albelin, Ken Daneyko, Billy Guerin, Bobby Holik, Randy McKay, Aleksandr Semak and Valery Zelepukin were joined by four friends in a noncontact, unsupervised scrimmage and plan to do it again three times next week.


General Signal Corp.(GSX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Police Say Suspect Is Serial Rapist in Queens
Law-enforcement officials tried to assure the public yesterday that they had captured the man responsible for at least 14 sexual attacks in Jackson Heights, Queens, over the last three years, even though the suspect was formally charged in only five cases.
George Shaw, a 29-year-old hospital orderly from Far Rockaway, Queens, was arraigned yesterday in Criminal Court in Kew Gardens.
He was charged with the rape of a 15-year-old girl, the sodomizing of a 17-year-old girl and sexually abusing two other young women.
A fifth case involved charges of menacing and harassing a 15-year-old girl with a knife on Wednesday morning when a plainclothes police officer on stakeout arrested Mr.
Shaw.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the Paine Webber Group's proposed purchase of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company misspelled part of the name of an investment firm acquired by Paine Webber in 1980.
The firm was Blyth Eastman Dillon.


Salmonella Poisoning Outbreak May Be Linked to Tanker Trucks
An outbreak of salmonella poisoning that sickened at least 400 people in 16 states may have been caused by tanker trucks that carried raw eggs and then ice cream mix, Federal officials said today.
The ice cream brand was Schwan's, which recalled the tainted mix, the officials said.


The Spoken Word
ANDREW LLOYD WEBBER, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue and 82d Street, Manhattan.
The producer and Martin Gottfried, a drama critic and author, are to discuss Mr.
Lloyd Webber's new show, "Sunset Boulevard," which is to arrive on Broadway next month.
Tomorrow at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 570-3949.
DERSHOWITZ, KUNSTLER AND SLOTNICK, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue, Manhattan.
A discussion with the broadcaster Charlie Rose and the lawyers Alan Dershowitz, William Kunstler and Barry Slotnick.
Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
"HELICON NINE: KANSAS CITY-NEW YORK CELEBRATION," La Mama, La Galleries, 6 East First Street, East Village.
A reading by members of the Writers Place, a center in Kansas City that offers space for writers to give readings, do research and work on projects.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Suggested donation: $5; $2.50 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 505-2476.
POETRY READING AND SLAM, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
Reading by G. Hansberry, to be followed by a poetry slam, or competition.
Tonight at 10.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.


No Headline
"If God takes that Cadillac, it'll just have to go." GERALDINE CHERRY, looking at her car in flooded Liberty, Tex.  [ A12:6. ]


Gillette Co. (G,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wimbledon Grass Is Greener to Fox
Once again, Fox Sports is changing the rules. Now, the game is Wimbledon.
Television rights to the jewel of tennis tournaments would not, under ordinary circumstances, be the object of rampant price speculation and wide-eyed bidding.
Tennis ratings are mostly down.
Equipment sales are faltering.
There are few stars, most notably Andre Agassi, who blend athletic and entertainment skills.


Presidential Ground Breaking


Viola a Free Agent
FRANK VIOLA, DAVE STEWART and VINCE COLEMAN were among 14 players who became free agents yesterday after their clubs opted not to retain them by offering salary arbitration.
B.
J.
SURHOFF and MARK WILLIAMSON also filed for free agency.


VF Corp.(VFC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Bryn Terfel Brings the Met A Spirited New Figaro
ON most occasions, it would be worth trading in half a century of ordinary repertory for the pleasures of Mozart's "Nozze di Figaro." On Wednesday night, I might have kept Bach in reserve but would have happily given up everything else.
The performance at the Metropolitan Opera was extraordinary: supple, sometimes sexy and often achingly beautiful.
As the characters passed from bewilderment to understanding, the word enlightenment, often associated with this work and its era, took on a literal meaning.
Some of these pleasures came from the unveiling of a new voice at the Met, belonging to the Welsh bass-baritone Bryn Terfel.
Last summer, in Salzburg, Austria, he combined lyrical gifts, comic timing and virile energy as Leporello in "Don Giovanni," a role he will bring to the Met next month.
But this performance of Figaro was of a different order.
It justified the sense of occasion in the house itself, where 75 of Mr.
Terfel's Welsh friends and family members joined listeners from more local, less rural regions, who came not just for Mozart but for the spiritedness this singer brings to this music.


Warner-Lambert Co.(WLA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


It's Absurd, Cuomo Says
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said yesterday that it was "absurd" to suggest that he had forced the resignation of Gerard J. McKeon as president of the New York Racing Association.
McKeon retired on Wednesday after 24 years with the association, the last 13 as president.
He said that he was leaving for personal reasons, chiefly frustration because "the fate of racing lies ultimately in layers of regulatory bodies." But it seemed that his frustration had been prompted by the running feud between the N.Y.R.A. and the Governor over control of racing.


Stock Buyback For Times Co.
The New York Times Company said yesterday that its board had authorized the repurchase of up to $100 million of its class A common shares.
The stock repurchase program is the company's second in a year.
The Times Company said yesterday that it had spent all of the $150 million authorized under a program announced on Oct. 21, 1993.


Occidental Petroleum Corp.(OXY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Suicide Leads to Inquiry Into Rigging of a Port Authority Bid
The Manhattan District Attorney's office said yesterday that it was investigating whether Port Authority documents were stolen in a bid-rigging scheme.
They said the plot involved the early phases of planning for the proposed rail link between New York City's airports and Manhattan.
The inquiry involves a former consultant to the Port Authority, Richard Ablamsky, who committed suicide on Sept. 16.
Investigators are looking into whether he passed secret Port Authority documents to his employer, Frederic R. Harris Inc., thereby helping the Manhattan company win a $10 million contract as part of the rail project.


No Laurels to Custer
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 14 television review of "Lakota Woman" refers to "the 73-day siege of Wounded Knee, where 300 Sioux were killed by Lieut. Col. George Armstrong Custer's troops in 1890." The troops at Wounded Knee Creek in South Dakota in December 1890 were commanded by Gen.
Nelson A. Miles.
Colonel Custer had died 14 years before.
He and his 264 men were wiped out in the battle of Little Big Horn River in Montana by Sioux led by Chief Sitting Bull on June 25, 1876.
MARVIN S. WIENER  Forest Hills, Queens, Oct. 16, 1994


METRO DIGEST
RACE DRAWS MONEY FROM ALL OVER
To New Jersey voters, the fight for the United States Senate seat may seem to be about local issues: taxes, crime, jobs and so on.
But out in the rest of the country, in Texas and California, in New York and wherever else there burns a desire for influence or a lust for revenge, another crowd of campaign watchers has lined up to back one candidate or the other, and what they have to offer is not votes but money.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  POLICE SAY SUSPECT IS SERIAL RAPIST
Law-enforcement officials tried to assure the public that they had captured the man responsible for at least 14 sexual attacks in Jackson Heights, Queens, over the last three years, even though the suspect was formally charged in only five cases.
B3.
COURT VOIDS $2 MILLION AWARD IN SUIT
On a hot July night nine years ago, Ana Garcia joined a group of people who squeezed through a fence to get into a municipal pool in the Bronx.
She had been drinking, and drowned in three feet of water.
Her family won a $2 million negligence suit against the city.
Now the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court has thrown out the award, saying that the woman caused her own death.
B3.
FOOD AGENCY PROTESTS EXPECTED CUTS
To protest budget cuts by Mayor Giuliani, a nonprofit group that operates an emergency food referral service referred all calls from people seeking help to City Hall.
Mr.
Giuliani said the protest would have no effect on his decisions on where to cut spending as he tries to close a $1 billion gap in the city's $31.6 billion budget.
B2.
BID-RIGGING SCHEME IS INVESTIGATED
The Manhattan District Attorney's office said that it was investigating whether Port Authority documents were stolen in a bid-rigging scheme.
They said the plot involved the early phases of planning for a proposed rail link between the airports and Manhattan.
B5.
REGION  NEW LIGHT CAST ON BAWDY PAST
Hudson, N.Y., a small city on the banks of the Hudson River, is casting a nostalgic eye back to its bawdy history, when it was widely known as "the little town with the big red-light district." Other cities organize tours of their historic districts or gardens, but on Saturday, Hudson is focusing on self-guided tours of a street once lined with houses of ill-repute.
B6.
L.I.R.R.
SUSPECT MAY DISMISS KUNSTLER
Colin Ferguson, who is charged with killing six passengers on a Long Island Rail Road train, is considering dismissing William M. Kunstler as his lawyer to avoid using an insanity defense, a Nassau County Court judge said.
B6.
HARTFORD AGREES TO BACK SCHOOL PLAN
Hartford officials agreed to drop their opposition to hiring a private company to manage the public schools, even as test scores in Baltimore raised questions about the company's performance in schools it manages there.
B6.
CUOMO AND PATAKI COURT BLACK VOTERS
On a campaign day that highlighted the importance of the black vote, Governor Cuomo won a rousing endorsement from the Rev.
Jesse Jackson while his opponent, George E. Pataki, traveled to southeast Queens and Harlem to argue that black New Yorkers should vote Republican because they are so often the victims of violent crime.
B4.
Chronicle B2


Bettman Phones Goodenow
Commissioner Gary Bettman telephoned the National Hockey League Players Association yesterday in an effort to resume negotiations involving a new collective bargaining agreement.
The start of the season, scheduled for Oct. 1, has been postponed by a management lockout because of the lack of a contract.
Bob Goodenow, executive director of the union, didn't take the call because he was in Florida, visiting with Panther players in Miami and Lightning players in Tampa.
He is expected to respond to Bettman today.


Perkin-Elmer Corp.(PKN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On-Line Legislation Serves Only the Elite
To the Editor:
The United States Government Printing Office has announced that it has all Congressional bills available on-line as part of its G.P.O.
Access program.
The bills data base, it advises, contains all published versions of House and Senate bills introduced since the start of the 103d Congress.


2 Exchanges' Uncovered Short Sales Keep Rising
Short interest on the New York Stock Exchange continued its record-setting pace through mid-October, with uncovered short sales rising for the 12th consecutive month.
Short selling on the American Stock Exchange advanced for the third month in a row.
The short position on the Big Board advanced 1.1, percent to 1.8 billion shares.
On the American exchange, the percentage increase was much greater, with short interest up 9.8 percent, to 121.07 million shares.
The statistics cover trades settled by Oct. 14, reflecting transactions through Oct. 6.


American Medical Holdings Inc.(AMI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Lockheed Corp.(LK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


American Home Products (AHP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kimberly-Clark (KMB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Gary Hume Matthew Marks Gallery 1018 Madison Avenue (near 78th Street) Through Nov. 27
Gary Hume, a young Turk of recent English painting, is reconsidering things.
The works that made his reputation over the last few years, establishing him as a kind of British Peter Halley, were stringent if punchy abstractions grounded in the real.
Their symmetrical compositions of circles and squares were based on the size and design of restaurant kitchen doors; their colors tended toward the fluorescent; their surfaces of enamel on board had a skeptical gleam.
In his latest, decidedly transitional show, Mr.
Hume has expanded his options and confused them a bit, too.
His glistening enamels and inventive color sense are still at work and quite effective.
But his reality base now seems to be various photographs and snapshots, often of a rather personal, even sentimental nature, which have been schematized, abbreviated and silhouetted almost to the point of abstraction.


E. Wyatte Hicks, 68, Advertising Director
E.
Wyatte Hicks, an executive in the advertising industry, died on Sunday at the Sylvester Cancer Center in Miami.
He was 68 and had moved to Stuart, Fla., from New Canaan, Conn., in 1992.
He died of cancer, said his son Mark of New Canaan.


Documenting Gauchos And Their Landscape
"Life in a Boundless Land: The Gaucho Scenes of Juan Manuel Blanes" at the Americas Society is pretty much what its title says it is: a gathering of work by a 19th-century Uruguayan artist depicting herdsmen or gauchos set in the low-horizoned South American pampas.
The paintings are small, the terrain is featureless and the figures vary slightly from one to the next.
The result is a visually sleepy show, primarily of interest for what it documents: the landscape and culture of the Rio de la Plata region of Uruguay and Argentina, a part of the world largely unknown outside South America itself.
Its outstanding visual chronicler was Juan Manuel Blanes (1830-1901), who was born and trained in Montevideo.
While still in his 20's he established a reputation for painting contemporary political events, and as a witness to his country's devastating civil war, he had plenty of dramatic material to work from.


Textron Inc.(TXT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Walker L. Cisler, 97, Advocate of Nuclear Energy
Walker L. Cisler, an engineer who became chairman of the Detroit Edison Company and achieved international renown as an advocate of the peaceful use of nuclear energy, died on Tuesday at his home in Grosse Pointe, Mich.
He was 97.
Mr.
Cisler had been in failing health since a fall last winter, said Mary Kay Bean, a spokeswoman for Detroit Edison.


A Premature Prize for Mideast Peace?
To the Editor:
"A Prize to Encourage Mideast Peace" (editorial, Oct. 15), supporting the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to Yitzhak Rabin, Shimon Peres and Yasir Arafat, notes that in 1973 the prize was awarded to Henry Kissinger and Le Duc Tho, who had also engaged in past warfare.
But Le Duc Tho refused the prize, on the ground that the Vietnam war had not yet ended, United States troops were still occupying his country, and killing by both sides was continuing.
It might be fitting for this year's recipients also to refuse the honor.


Diner's Journal
Working District, Working Lunch
Even the approach to Follonico is appealing.
The two-year-old restaurant is on one of those dark streets just above the Flatiron District that has yet to be discovered by chic shops looking for low rents.
Walking down the street you have to dodge men wheeling dollies and unloading trucks; by the time you get there, Follonico seems like a cozy haven.


Stanley Works (SWK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Detective Is Found Not Guilty Of Selling Secrets to the Mafia
A New York City police detective assigned to an elite Federal-city unit that battles organized crime was acquitted yesterday in a trial on charges that he sold confidential information to mobsters.
A jury in Federal District Court in Brooklyn deliberated only about two hours before finding Detective Joseph L. Simone not guilty of charges that he had passed information to Mafia figures about investigative targets and about the identity of at least one Mafia turncoat cooperating with the authorities.
He was accused of having received about $1,500 for the information.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"ARTHUR AND LEILA," Playhouse 46, St.
Clement's Church, 423 West 46th Street, Clinton.
A comedy by Charlene Lee about mature Chinese-American siblings with differing values.
Presented by the Pan Asian Repertory; directed by Ron Nakahara.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.
Admission: $25; $18 for students.
Information: (212) 245-2660.
"DOWN BY THE OCEAN," St.
Peter's Church, 619 Lexington Avenue, at 54th Street.
A play by P. J. Barry spanning numerous summers and telling the story of four middle-aged brothers-in-law who have affairs with the same younger woman.
Presented by the York Theater Company.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2:30 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25 and $35.
Information: (212) 935-5820.
"PHILADELPHIA, HERE I COME!," Roundabout Theater at the Criterion Center, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.
A revival of a 1964 drama by Brian Friel, set in Ireland, about a father and his son, who is about to leave for America; with Pauline Flanagan, Robert Sean Leonard, Robert Stattel and Jim True; directed by Joe Dowling.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $47.50.
Information: (212) 869-8400.
"KING LEAR," 80 St.
Marks Place, near First Avenue, East Village.
The drama by Shakespeare; with Robin Leslie Brown, Arnie Burton, Joanne Camp and Robert Hock; directed by Shepard Sobel.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20 and $25.
Information: (212) 598-9802.
"A MODEST PROPOSAL," Ubu Repertory, 15 West 28th Street, Chelsea.
A satire about racism in provincial France, by Tilly; with Abdoulaye N'Gom, Fred Burrell and Elizabeth Perry; directed by Saundra McClain.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $18; $12 for students.
Information: (212) 679-7562.
PAUL TAYLOR DANCE COMPANY, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 P.M. and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15 to $42.
Information: (212) 581-1212.
HENRI CARTIER-BRESSON AND JOHN B. GREENE, Danziger Gallery, 130 Prince Street, SoHo.
Photographs of Paris from the 1930's to the 80's by Henri Cartier-Bresson and John B. Greene's photographs of Egypt from the mid-1800's.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: today and tomorrow from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 226-0056.
"GLANCING BACKWARD: EDITH WHARTON'S NEW YORK," National Academy of Design, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street.
An exhibition of paintings, drawings, sculpture and rare books that evokes the author's real life and the world she created in her writing.
Through Sunday.
Hours: today, noon to 8 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $3.50; $2 for students and the elderly; free for everyone Friday from 5 to 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 369-4880.
Closing Next Weekend
YOUNG PLAYWRIGHTS FESTIVAL, Papp Public/LuEsther Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
Plays by three writers under 19 years old: "The Basement at the Bottom at the End of the World," by Nadine Graham; "The Most Massive Woman Wins," by Madeleine George, and "The Love of Bullets," by Jerome D. Hairston.
Through Oct. 29.
Performances: Mondays through Fridays at 8 P.M.; Saturdays at 3 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25; $9 for students.
Information: (212) 307-1140.


Dow Corning Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy  Housing starts rose in September at the fastest pace so far this year.
A separate report by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia showed manufacturing activity accelerating in the region and the prices of raw materials and finished goods surging.
The reports pointed to unexpectedly robust growth, reviving fears of accelerating inflation.
Bond prices fell after the report, pushing up long-term interest rates to the brink of 8 percent.  [ Page D1. ] Bank examiners will be told to scrutinize derivatives held by banks, under a plan by the Treasury Department.  [ D2. ]


Speeding Rookie Is Spotted By Reeves
He is shy, and at first Thomas Randolph didn't want to be interviewed.
He would rather focus on what's ahead, the task facing him this Sunday.
He is a rookie cornerback who will be thrown into the fire, and he doesn't want to get burned.
His life, his pro football life, has officially begun, and Randolph just wants to make sure he is ready for it.
The news media, he thought, would be a distraction so he tried to avoid the spotlight this week.
Randolph usually keeps to himself anyway, and like most rookies, he is an observer, watching from the sidelines, learning from the veterans.
This week was different for him.
Now, he can no longer afford to simply watch and learn.


Cummins Engine Co.  (CUM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Dysfunctional Family Redefines The Concept
Every time someone approaches the Smith family trailer in Tracy Letts's "Killer Joe," a dog barks ominously somewhere outside, possibly to warn visitors.
The 29th Street Repertory might consider posting a pit bull outside the theater to caution patrons what to expect in Mr.
Letts's brutal and shocking first play.
What goes on in Ansel Smith's bug-ridden trailer outside Dallas shouldn't happen anywhere.
But anyone who has read a newspaper or watched television in the last year knows better.
Mr.
Letts wastes little time on introductions.
Chris, Ansel's son, shows up at 3 A.M. with a problem: Drug dealers are threatening his life unless he can pay $6,000.
Chris also has a solution: He knows of a Dallas cop who will murder his mother; mom has been stealing Chris's cocaine and has a $50,000 life insurance policy made out to his sister, Dottie.
When Ansel hesitates to conspire to kill his ex-wife, Chris reasons: "What good's she doing anybody? Who'd miss her?"


'Living Martyr' Leaves Taped Statement
The young man in the videotape wore a striped shirt and an intense look as he told how he was a "living martyr," someone about to give up his life in an attack on Israelis.
He was not the only Palestinian from the Hamas Islamic group ready for suicide, the man, Saleh Abdel Rahim al-Souwi, said, nor would his imminent action be the last of its kind.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.69
2.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.98
4.89
3.03
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.42
5.34
3.13
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.79
7.67
5.32
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.99
7.89
5.91
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.82
8.69
6.98
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.69
6.64
5.38
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Hamas Tries to Blow Up the Peace
The armed Islamic militants of Hamas knew exactly what they wanted to accomplish by bombing a crowded bus in the heart of Tel Aviv -- the most devastating act of terrorism against Israel in 16 years.
Their acknowledged goal is to destroy the growing momentum for negotiated peace.
To insure that they do not succeed, Israeli leaders and the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Yasir Arafat, urgently need to reassure a frightened and angry Israeli public by cracking down hard on the elusive Hamas terror network.


Dollar Hits Low Against Yen With More Declines Feared
The dollar continued its decline today, touching a record low, as traders reacted to renewed fears of inflation in the United States and comments by Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen that Washington had no immediate plans to support the currency.
The dollar briefly fell to 96.55 Japanese yen this morning, surpassing the 96.60 yen intraday low reached on July 12.


F.C.C. Issues Video-Network Rules
The Federal Communications Commission took steps today to let telephone companies move into the cable television business without forcing phone customers to foot the bill.
But the rules left unresolved precisely how the telephone companies are supposed to allocate the costs associated with the construction of video networks.


Vikings Find Offense When It Matters Most
For nearly four quarters, Warren Moon and the Minnesota Vikings' offense couldn't do anything tonight against Green Bay's smothering defense.
They were held to 22 yards rushing; Moon was sacked 4 times and was hurried into throwing 2 interceptions.
When it counted, though, the Vikings put together their only two sustained drives of the game and got two field goals from Fuad Reveiz -- a 29-yarder that tied the game at 10-10 with 17 seconds to play and a 27-yarder at 4 minutes 26 seconds into overtime -- to beat the Packers, 13-10.


Holocaust Composers
Works by composers who died during the Holocaust are part of a program of 20th-century Jewish music to be presented in Yonkers, N.Y., by the Oratorio Society of New York, Sunday at 3 P.M at Temple Emanu-El, 306 Rumsey Road.
The group, conducted by Lyndon Woodside, will perform music by Viktor Ullmann and Gideon Klein, who were imprisoned at the Terezin concentration camp near Prague.
Also on the program are Leonard Bernstein's "Chichester Psalms," Ernest Bloch's "Avodath Hakodesh" ("Sacred Service") and Czech and Slovak folk songs.
John Trout, a baritone, is the soloist.
Tickets: $15 to $36.
Information: (914) 963-0576.


Clorox Co. (CLX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


After Bombing, Israel Seals Off the Palestinians
Israel ordered its security forces today to get tough with Muslim radicals after one of the worst terrorist attacks in its history, a bus bombing that killed at least 21 people here.
But the only tangible sign so far has been an indefinite closing of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, an action that most directly affects not the suspected Hamas Islamic group, but tens of thousands of Palestinian laborers who are now cut off from jobs in Israel.
The restrictions could last a long time, officials said.


ACX Technologies Inc.(ACXT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Illinois Tool Works Inc.(ITW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Union Carbide Corp.(UK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Jules Olitski  Salander O'Reilly Gallery 20 East 79th Street Manhattan Through Oct. 29
Jules Olitski gets credit for remaining true to his school, that of Color Field painting, also known as Greenbergian abstraction.
His unrehabilitated formalism and stylistic consistency may be matched only by Donald Judd's, which is paradoxical, given the mutual antipathy they had for each other's efforts.


Ames Disclosing Espionage Secrets, Officials Say
Federal prosecutors said today that Aldrich H. Ames, the intelligence officer serving a life sentence as a confessed spy for Moscow, had provided the authorities with significant new information about espionage they could not have obtained anywhere else.
But they said there remained some areas where Mr.
Ames might still be withholding information, a judgment apparently based on evaluations of his candor using a polygraph examination.


Man Is Charged in 2 East Harlem Slayings
Solving two killings at a stroke, the police charged a 24-year-old man with two counts of murder yesterday in connection with separate incidents last year in East Harlem.
Detectives arrested Thomas Cintron, of 434 E. 115 St., after narcotics investigators working on other cases turned up evidence and witnesses in the two killings, officials said.


Clinton Finds Stride in Massachusetts
By the standards of an ordinary political autumn, it would not have been an unusual sight.
But in an angry election season when Bill Clinton has served more as punching bag than as President, his performance at a town hall rally in New England today, and the acclaim he found there, offered a hint that he had begun to discover his true campaign voice.
The rally, bursting with Democratic fervor, was something of a coming out for Mr.
Clinton, who has devoted most of his political energy this fall to raising money at events in hotel ballrooms, largely because so many Democratic candidates would rather not be seen with him in public.


BellSouth Corp.(BLS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Loctite Corp.(LOC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Uneasy Poses Along Campaign Trails of the Past
With Election Day just over the horizon, the Museum of Modern Art is offering a lively, if ultimately unsatisfying, examination of that modern electoral phenomenon, the complex mating dance between the politician and the camera.
"American Politicians: Photographs From 1843 to 1993" looks at the often convoluted relationship between photography and politics in the United States.
In many ways, this is a rewarding show, dense with both famous and little-known images from the last century and a half.
But for all its ambition, "American Politicians," organized by Susan Kismaric, curator in the museum's photography department, is surprisingly disjointed, throwing out intriguing hints about its subject but providing no coherent overview.


Chubb Corp.(CB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


McDonald's Corp.(MCD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Inside Art
First Lady's Garden Updates
It's doubtful that Jacqueline Kennedy, when she conceived of a First Lady's Garden at the White House, envisioned it filled with 20th-century sculpture.
Formal 19th-century garden statuary, perhaps, but nothing so bold as a black and red Calder mobile or a voluptuous woman by Gaston Lachaise or even a skinny, abstract white-painted bronze figure by Louise Bourgeois.


Southwestern Public Service Co.(SPS,N) reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


After Years of Losing, the Columbia Lions Say It's Their Turn
Jim Hudnall had heard all the kind words since last Saturday at Franklin Field, when Columbia's football team experienced the type of afternoon that was once considered a victory.
The Lions had held Pennsylvania, the unbeaten defending Ivy League champion, to four field goals.
They were within 6 points late in the game before losing, 12-3.
This is the place where the routine pain of the game has been compounded by a numbing series of disappointments, week after week and season after season.
This is the place where a strong effort against a first-place team would once have been placed in a psychic victory column.


TRW Inc.(TRW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Free Improvisation


Bobby Hurley's Road Back
The new house rental is only 10 minutes from Arco Arena.
Most of the other players live at least a half-hour away.
But Bobby Hurley wanted to reduce his driving time because, the truth is, there are moments when he doesn't much feel like getting behind the wheel of a car.
He always takes the freeway now, too, avoiding the flat, labyrinthian farmland roads that seem to stretch forever from the pastoral home of the Sacramento Kings.
Hurley does not want to see the intersection of Del Paso and El Centro again, if he can help it.


CHRONICLE
EDWIN COSSITT, the 1964 men's Canadian figure skating champion, said he decided several years ago that "the fashion, theater and ice skating communities were devastated by AIDS, and we should do something to bring those three disciplines together and use their talents collectively."
And so on he is producing and directing an evening called "Angels on Ice" on Monday at Madison Square Garden to benefit the Gay Men's Health Crisis.
Champion skaters will perform to music of Leonard Bernstein, Stephen Sondheim and others while wearing costumes by designers like Mark Eisen and Byron Lars.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: THE CHALLENGER Just Who Is Pataki, Anyway?; The Politics of Self-Deprecation and Sentimentality
Margaret Pataki is giving her son some campaign advice.
"Have you ever once mentioned that your mother's Italian, and that I was born on the Lower East Side?" she asks George, the Republican candidate for Governor, as he roams around the white frame house in Peekskill where he grew up, looking like a gangly overgrown kid in jeans and black oxfords.


Kaleria Fedicheva, Ballerina And Ballet Teacher, Dies at 58
Kaleria Fedicheva, a former ballerina with the Kirov Ballet in Leningrad who taught and staged the classics in the United States, died on Sept. 13 in Maribor, Slovenia, where she had been seeking medical treatment.
She was 58 years old and lived in Glen Cove, L.I.
Ms.
Fedicheva died of cancer, said Martin Fredmann, her former husband and the artistic director of the Colorado Ballet in Denver.


A Trackman's Perspective


Art in Review
Frank Stella Knoedler Gallery 19 East 70th Street Manhattan Through Nov. 1
It's hard to keep up with Frank Stella.
After years of increasingly sculptural reliefs, objects and mega-objects (remember the meteorlike amalgams shown at the 65 Thompson gallery two years ago?), he has zigged in a different direction and picked up speed, forsaking the cantilever, the in-your-face engineering and the various metals in various states, to make his art reach out and grab our attention in a new way.


Alternative Fuel Program Starts Rough
New York City has bought hundreds of cars, vans and pickup trucks that can run on natural gas or methanol, but city departments appear to be running them mostly on old-fashioned gasoline instead, or not running them at all.
The city paid up to $5,700 extra per vehicle to adapt or buy cars capable of burning compressed natural gas, which can reduce air pollution, but it has had trouble setting up fueling stations and persuading workers to use them.
In 1992 the city bought 17 Ford Tauruses that can run on methanol, but did not have a methanol station until a few weeks ago.


People
*
Tony Angotti, executive vice president and chief creative officer at Angotti, Thomas, Hedge, New York, was named to the new position of chairman; he continues as chief creative officer.


Strange Justice for Tom Potter
The Clinton Administration has displayed an alarming lack of political courage in giving up on Tom Potter, the former police chief of Portland, Ore., as a candidate to head an important new Justice Department program that would put as many as 100,000 more police officers on the nation's streets.
Mr.
Potter was encouraged to withdraw from consideration because he has been a strong and visible advocate of gay rights.
He said he withdrew after a Justice Department official told him the department was worried that his views could hamper his relations with conservative police chiefs around the country.


Anderson Returns Without Fireworks
Butch Beard, rookie coach, made the analogy yesterday.
Defending his decision not to play Kenny Anderson extensively during the preseason, Beard said if his All-Star guard came up lame before Nov. 4, his coaching career would effectively be dead.
Tonight, in the Nets' third preseason game -- a 117-112 victory over the Detroit Pistons -- eulogies were clearly not in order.


Colgate-Palmolive Co.  (CL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Computer Associates International Inc.(CA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Conflicting Views on Author of Simpson Book
Until Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald L. Goldman were slain last June, few people outside the chic boutiques of Rodeo Drive, the Starbucks in Brentwood, and charity circles of Beverly Hills had ever heard of Faye D. Resnick.
Even afterward, as the O. J. Simpson case spun out a huge cast of characters, she remained in the peripheral world of the tabloids.
But now, with a giant assist from Judge Lance A. Ito, who urged potential jurors to avoid Ms.
Resnick's new book about Mr.
Simpson and beseeched television personalities like Larry King and Connie Chung not to talk with her, Ms.
Resnick has strutted onto center stage.
And, like so many other players in the Manichaean Simpson drama, people have diametrically opposed views about her and what she has written.


What It Takes to Lift Haiti's Poor From Misery
To the Editor:
Re Michael Mandelbaum's "Can Aristide Be Haiti's Mandela?" (Op-Ed, Oct. 14):


Long Agency Career Ends Abruptly
Carl Spielvogel, who went from writing about advertising to helping remake the industry during the 1970's and 1980's, is leaving after a 34-year career.
Mr.
Spielvogel, chairman of Bates Worldwide in New York, unexpectedly said yesterday that he would resign, effective immediately, to "pursue other business opportunities" outside advertising.
After serving as the first advertising columnist for The New York Times from 1958 to 1960, Mr.
Spielvogel held top positions at four leading firms: McCann-Erickson Worldwide, the Interpublic Group of Companies, Backer &amp; Spielvogel and Bates, previously called Backer Spielvogel Bates.


Fleming Cos. (FLM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary on Oct. 13 about a British scholar, author and former Government official, Chaim Raphael, omitted mention of part of his work.
In addition to crime novels under the pen name Jocelyn Davey, Mr.
Raphael wrote articles and books under his own name about Jewish life and history and related subjects.
Those books include "A Feast of History," "The Springs of Jewish Life" and "The Road from Babylon," which the obituary erroneously included among the crime novels.
The book was reprinted as "The Sephardi Story."


Drowning Suit Award Reversed
On a hot July night nine years ago, a group of seven people who had been out drinking squeezed through a hole in a chain link fence to get into a municipal pool in the Bronx, joining about 100 others who had also broken in and were already in the water.
Ana Garcia, a 32-year-old member of the group, who had been drinking gin and whose blood-alcohol level was later measured at 0.23 percent, or twice the legal limit, stepped into the three-foot-deep water, fell beneath its surface and drowned.


Trying a Constitutional Tack to Curb Campaign Spending
In the 1992 elections, members of the House of Representatives, on average, outspent their challengers 3 to 1, raised more than eight times as much from political action committees and used up more in their own free-mailing privileges than their challengers spent altogether.
And nearly 9 out of 10 incumbents who sought re-election won.
To John Bonifaz, a 28-year-old Boston lawyer consumed by the nexus between private money and politics, those numbers are not just unfair.
They are also positively unconstitutional, he says, a barrier to free and equal participation in public life as high and wide as poll taxes, excessive filing fees or all-white primaries in the segregated South.


Miles to Go and Promises to Keep
Ted Corbitt, the last surviving spiritual elder of the modern running clan, insists that he is "no guru" and that he wants no one to follow him on 24-hour running "stunts" or to build philosophies from advice as spare as he is: "Keep moving. Do something useful."
Corbitt is 75 years old.
Tomorrow morning at 6, he will start moving around a 1.2-mile track at Juniper Valley Park in Queens.
Because he developed shin splints last week, he will probably walk instead of trot, the pace he assumed after a diagnosis of bronchial asthma 20 years ago.
His goal is to finish the Ted Corbitt 100-mile race -- sponsored by the Broadway Ultra Society to celebrate Corbitt's record of 13 hours 33 minutes 6 seconds, set in England in 1969 -- within 24 hours.
There is a 30-hour time limit.


Officials Give Up Opposition To Company to Run Schools
Hartford city officials agreed this week to drop their opposition to hiring a private company to manage the city's public schools, even as test scores released by Baltimore officials raised questions about the company's performance in schools it manages there.
The Hartford Board of Education voted on Oct. 3 to hire the company, Education Alternatives Inc. of Minneapolis, even though the city's Corporation Counsel refused to sign the contract, saying it gave the company too much control over the city's budget.


Bonds Skid On Fears Of Inflation
Fears of future inflation, heightened by two new Government reports showing that the economy continues to move ahead briskly, today sent bond prices lower and long-term interest rates up to the brink of 8 percent.
The fall in the bond market pushed the stock market lower, with the Dow dropping 24.89 points to 3,911.15.
Traders in both markets were also worried that the dollar fell to a post-World War II closing low against the Japanese yen and a two-year low against the German mark in New York.  [ Pages D6 and D15 ] .


Fingerhut Cos. (FHT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; Railroad stocks, it seems, are no longer run-of-the-mill.
THESE are heady times for mergers and acquisitions specialists with clients in the railroad industry.
The Union Pacific Corporation is trying to elbow in on Burlington Northern Inc.'s plans to merge with the Santa Fe Pacific Corporation; the Illinois Central Corporation is proposing to acquire the Kansas City Southern Railway, and a steady stream of smaller consolidations is in the works.
In most other industries, the high level of merger activity would have arbitragers and others who love to play the takeover scene salivating.
But railroad marriages often take years to win regulatory approval.
The Burlington Northern and Santa Fe, for example, expect clearance to merge in the spring of 1996, if everything goes smoothly.


City's Costly Cars Don't Fulfill Goal
Seeking to improve air quality, New York City has bought hundreds of cars, vans and trucks that can run on natural gas or methanol, paying up to $5,700 extra a vehicle.
Still, the city admits the cars are running mostly on old-fashioned gasoline, or not running at all.


Critic's Choice/Film; Subversive Intentions Behind the Humor
One of the best ways of insinuating subversive messages into a repressive culture has always been to present them in a humorous guise.
Take, for example, two pitch-black comedies by the Spanish director Luis Garcia Berlanga that are included in the series Spanish Eyes III: Classics of the Spanish Cinema, 1960-1975, which opens today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
On the surface, both films, which were made during the waning years of the Franco dictatorship, don't seem particularly political.
But peel away the humor, and you will find acerbic critiques of Spanish culture under Franco in which the bitterness is masked by farcical loquacity and absurdism.
Mr.
Berlanga's 1961 film, "Placido," which begins a six-night engagement this evening, is a chattery comedy about an impoverished man who spends the day before Christmas trying to avoid foreclosure on his motorbike.
The character's frantic dealings with bankers and lawyers are set against the film's satirical canvas of a provincial town putting on a showy Christmas campaign called "Seat a Poor Man at Your Table." With its harshly funny portrait of the penny-pinching gentry, of greedy nuns and aggressive salespeople pushing pressure cookers as miraculous kitchen tools, the film offers a scabrously mocking portrait of officialdom putting on a display that is as grotesque as it is hypocritical.


In New Jersey Senate Race, Money From All Over
Senator Frank R. Lautenberg of New Jersey has sponsored a law that bans smoking on most airline flights, so tobacco executives from all over the country are giving money to his Republican challenger, Chuck Haytaian.
But Mr.
Lautenberg, who is the head of a subcommittee that controls spending on transportation projects, has big fans in that arena; highway engineers, barge captains -- even the boat owners association of Alexandria, Va. -- are sending him campaign checks, big time.


Antiquarian Book Fair
More than 100 dealers from around the country and Canada will offer books, prints, maps and other items this weekend at the 15th Trinity Antiquarian Book Fair at the Trinity School, 101 West 91st Street, Manhattan.
Juvenile texts will be among the items on display, along with books on science fiction, Judaica, African-American history and the decorative arts.
Hours: Today, 6 to 10 P.M.; tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Tickets: Today, $10 (includes a reception and admission all weekend); tomorrow, $7 (includes Sunday admission); Sunday, $4.
Information: (212) 932-6937.


Yet More Houses, Yet Higher Rates


World News Briefs; Rights Group Reports Rwanda Atrocities
Revenge killings and abductions of Hutu people in Rwanda occurred by the hundreds if not thousands in many parts of the country, according to the findings of a report by Amnesty International.
The Amnesty report, issued on Wednesday, comes less than a month after the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees reported human rights abuses by the Tutsi-led army in Rwanda.


Wickes Lumber Co.(WIKS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


A Romeo Plays a Romeo. Hmm.
Warren Beatty isn't quite Cary Grant in "Love Affair," though he plays the same ladies' man Grant made so fabulously debonair in Leo McCarey's 1957 "An Affair to Remember." (Charles Boyer also played this role, in 1939.) Surprisingly, he isn't quite Warren Beatty either.
Never has Mr.
Beatty seemed less foxy or confident than he does playing out this star-crossed romance opposite his real-life spouse, Annette Bening, who has the once glamorous Deborah Kerr role (played earlier by Irene Dunne).
A rule of thumb for male stars looking to set off flirtatious sparks: not with your wife, you don't.
Not on screen.


Union Pacific Corp.(UNP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Martinez Needs Only a One-Way Ticket  The Wimbledon champion, Conchita Martinez, won't need a round-trip ticket to attend her coach's wedding in Switzerland after all.
Martinez, who had planned to take a day off from the Brighton International tournament in England today to fly to the wedding and back, was upset, 6-1, 6-3, yesterday by Larisa Neiland of Latvia, who had not taken a set from Martinez in their previous four meetings. (AP)


Schering-Plough Corp.(SGP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Treasury to Take Closer Look at Banks With Derivatives
The Treasury Department plans to order its bank examiners to conduct much more detailed reviews of bank holdings of derivatives, a senior Treasury official said.
The examiners will be given a thick volume of instructions on how to evaluate the riskiness of derivatives, said Douglas E. Harris, a senior deputy comptroller of the currency.


New York's Tax Bite
To the Editor:
It is repeatedly pointed out that New York City residents pay the highest income taxes anywhere in the United States except Alaska.
What is less well known is that New York City residents pay one of the lowest property taxes on residences anywhere in the United States.


Switzer Patches Discord Without Leaving Seam
When those charged with orchestrating unity are themselves not united, chaos usually follows.
This could have easily happened to the Dallas Cowboys.


Ryder System Inc.(R,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Executive Changes
FOX BROADCASTING CO., Beverly Hills, Calif., a unit of Fox Inc., appointed Lana Corbi and Adam Ware senior vice presidents of network distribution.
Ms.
Corbi will be based in Washington, Mr.
Ware in Los Angeles.


Michael Foods Inc.(MIKL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stocks Are Off Sharply As Interest Rates Rise
The stock market, rising for much of the month because of a steady string of higher earnings reports, plunged yesterday in heavy trading.
Stocks fell as yields came tormentingly close to 8 percent on long bonds, the highest level of corporate borrowing costs in nearly two and a half years.
The 30-year Treasury bond closed at 7.99 percent.


Hudson Casts New Light on Its Red-Light Past
This small city on the banks of the Hudson River is casting a nostalgic eye back to its bawdy history, when it was widely known as "the little town with the big red-light district."
Other cities organize tours of their historic districts or gardens, but on Saturday, Hudson is focusing on self-guided tours of a street once lined with houses of ill repute.


Compucom Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


ITT Is Considering the Sale Of Hotel Franchise Business
The ITT Corporation said yesterday that it had asked two investment banks to look into selling all or part of its hotel franchising business, which amounts to about 220 of its 395 Sheraton hotels and inns worldwide.
All but about a dozen of those franchises are in North America, and last year they accounted for about 40 percent of Sheraton's pretax earnings of $78 million.
The company declined to estimate how much it might get for the franchising business or to identify the investment bankers with which it is dealing.


Smoke-Free Zone of California Thrives
To the Editor:
My husband and I visited San Francisco and the wine country last summer.
Everywhere we went -- restaurants, hotels and other public places -- smoking was prohibited.
San Francisco is virtually smokeless and the wine country even more so.


Saber Software
Shares of Saber Software, a maker of network software, dropped sharply yesterday after the company reported a third-quarter operating profit of 9 cents a share, up from 8 cents in the quarter a year earlier but below analysts' expectations.


U.S. to Help Form Muslim-Croat Army in Bosnia
A United States military delegation will arrive soon in Bosnia to help the Muslim-dominated Government Army integrate its forces with those of its nominal allies, the Bosnian Croats, officials said today.
The dispatching of about 15 United States officers to Sarajevo, expected around the beginning of November, reflects the Clinton Administration's frustration over the failure of Bosnia's Muslims and Croats to turn the American-sponsored federation they formed last April into any sort of integrated military alliance.


Grey Awarded 3 Seagram Brands
The Seagram Company said yesterday that it had selected Grey Advertising in New York to handle advertising in the United States for three of its brands: Captain Morgan rums, Crown Royal Canadian whisky and Myers's rums.
The account, with billings estimated at $15 million, had been at DDB Needham Worldwide in New York until that agency was dismissed in June.


Walking! On 125th Street
Before this week, the business strip on Harlem's 125th Street was annoyingly -- and dangerously -- overcrowded.
As many as 1,000 illegal vendors of all kinds operated an outlaw market that left the sidewalks impassable.
Parents had to push children's strollers in the streets.
Legitimate businesses faced obstructed doorways, summonses for dirty sidewalks and unfair competition from vendors who paid neither rent nor taxes.
As the congestion escalated, fist fights broke out among the vendors over sidewalk spaces.


Riley Willing to Wait and See on Christie
Doug Christie said he has heard the rumors.
The talented -- if unproven -- 6-foot-6-inch swingman who was acquired by the Knicks from the Lakers a week ago for two second-round draft choices is now with his third team after less than two seasons in the league.
The prevailing knock on him is that he is hard to handle.


Commercial Metals Co.  (CMC,N) reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


G.M. Stock Falls on Results
Panicked investors dumped shares of the General Motors Corporation today after the company announced that despite strong car and truck sales and overall profitability, its core North American automotive operations fell back into the red during the third quarter.
G.M., which was the most-actively traded stock on the New York Stock Exchange, fell to a new low for the year, $42 a share, before recovering somewhat to close at $43.125, down $3.75 on the day.
Amid fears that the company's cost-cutters had lost their edge, nearly 16.8 million shares traded hands.
The sell-off accounted for 10.4 points of the 25-point decline on the Dow Jones industrial average.


On Stage, and Off
New Theater
It looks as if Times Square will get a new theater.
After three years of negotiations with its landlord, the Roundabout Theater Company has leased the old cabaret space on the second floor of its Criterion Center building.
Assuming a $1 million renovation goes well, it will open in the fall as a 399-seat Off Broadway theater.


Liver Patient Wins Suit Against Maker of Tylenol
A Federal court jury in suburban Virginia awarded $8.8 million today to a former White House aide who said the loss of his liver had resulted from his taking the pain reliever Tylenol in combination with his regular dinner consumption of wine.
The 39-year-old plaintiff, Antonio Benedi of Springfield, Va., who was appointments and scheduling secretary to President George Bush, was awarded $7.855 million in compensatory damages and an additional $1 million in punitive damages by the jury, sitting in Alexandria.


Second Mattingly Runs Onto Stage
The old sports order changeth, yielding place to new, and Don Mattingly fulfills his shattered athletic hopes in many ways, among others, it turned out yesterday, vicariously through his wife's planned participation in the New York City Marathon on Nov. 6.
Although his presence had been promised at a news conference with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani at City Hall, the Yankee first baseman, concerned that he would be a distraction, remained safely in his hotel room as Kim Mattingly was introduced as the first of the pseudo celebrities to enliven the marathon's 27,000-runner field.


JUDGE RESTRICTS SIMPSON COVERAGE
Expressing concern that the extraordinary publicity surrounding the O. J. Simpson murder trial could prejudice jurors, Judge Lance A. Ito of Superior Court today barred the press from his courtroom for portions of the jury selection proceedings that he ruled would be conducted in secret.
The unusual action came despite strong objections by lawyers representing news organizations and civil liberties groups, who argued that closing the proceedings would not shield jurors from the intense publicity surrounding the case and could ultimately cause them to be less honest in their answers than they would be in open court.


Peaceful Coexistence At the Solheim Cup
Here at the Greenbrier, the regal resort set amid the fall splendor of the Allegheny Mountains, there is almost nothing you can't get.
Unlimited golf.
Herbal body wraps.
Exfoliation.
Sam Snead and his dog sometimes hang out in the pro shop, and Sam will give you a tip for a price.
A mass Confederate grave sits near the Hilltop tennis courts.
The curious can even squeeze a bit of information from locals about the top-secret nuclear fallout bunker built under the hotel in the 1960's to house members of Congress in the event of an attack.


CHRONICLE
ANNA NICOLE SMITH, the voluptuous model, filed suit against New York magazine on Wednesday claiming unauthorized use of her photograph on the cover of its Aug. 22 issue for an article called "White Trash Nation." In the photo, she appeared squatting in a short skirt and cowboy boots and was eating a bag of chips.
That's not what she expected to see in print, her lawyer, T. PATRICK FREYDL, said yesterday.
The suit, brought in Superior Court in Los Angeles, seeks $5 million in damages to her reputation, plus punitive damages.


Looking for the Magic in Painting
Elizabeth Murray'S works are smart, animated and sensuously painted.
Contained within the curves and angled planes of her oddly shaped canvases are figures and objects: hands, babies, tables, coffee cups, palettes, brushes.
It can take a while to decode them.
They are nominally abstracted forms in flux, props in mostly domestic dramas of a psychological intensity and tenderness sometimes belied by the jazzy colors that Ms.
Murray prefers.
Her works suggest motion, fluidity.
They're full of demotic shapes drawn from the comics (she thought of becoming a commercial artist when she was young).
But they're also linked with painters like Cezanne, Miro, Klee, Johns and de Kooning.
Ms.
Murray is a trim woman with frizzled white hair.
She is warm, down to earth and modest.
Her voice is soft.
But her attitude, though gentle, is energetic and assured.
She's tireless.
On a visit to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, her eye is arrested by one unexpected thing or another, and she becomes rapt.
She moves while looking at a work, so the act of seeing is physical and alive.
She speaks with conviction, despite her solicitousness.
She talks reverently about the craft of painting, about the transformative ability of pigment on canvas.


Tyco International Ltd.(TYC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Beverly Enterprises Inc.(BEV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mead Corp.(MEA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Poems Coming Up On the Subway
In theory, "Poetry in Motion" puts up two new poems every month throughout New York City's buses and subway trains.
In practice, the schedule may vary.
Posters are also stolen, particularly in the subway.
If you wish to own a poster, the Metropolitan Transit Authority prefers that you buy one.
Sets of posters from the last year may be bought at the Transit Museum gift shop in the Main Concourse of Grand Central Terminal or at the Transit Museum at Boerum and Schermerhorn Streets in downtown Brooklyn.
Each poster is $4.
Beginning in November, "Poetry in Motion" will have a star turn on television, three times a day.
Poems from the series are to be broadcast to New Yorkers in the five boroughs over the Crosswalks Television Network, Channel 72, the New York City municipal education and employment channel, which is available on basic cable.


Snap-On Inc.(SNA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Race for Comptroller: McCall Calls London Extreme
Comptroller H. Carl McCall began his televised ad campaign yesterday, announcing he would spend $2 million in a blitz that underscores the vast disparity in financing between him and his Republican opponent.
Though polls show the race is close, Mr.
McCall's rival, Herbert London, has lagged far behind in raising money and has only $165,000 left -- no match for the money for the statewide ad campaign Mr.
McCall initiated.
Mr.
McCall unveiled one biographical ad tracing his life and political career, and this one, painting Mr.
London in harsh terms.
CANDIDATE H. Carl McCall


The Governor Always Eats First


AT&amp;T Corp.(T,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Zenith Electronics Corp.(ZE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


North Asserts President Made Illegal Offer to Aid Senator Robb
In a letter to Attorney General Janet Reno, Oliver L. North, the Virginia Republican candidate for the Senate, asserted today that former Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder was offered an ambassadorship in exchange for his endorsement of Mr.
North's opponent, Senator Charles S. Robb.
A White House official said that although Mr.
Clinton and Mr.
Wilder met for 20 minutes on Tuesday, an ambassador's position "was neither asked for nor offered."


Universal Health Services Inc.(UHS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Appealing to a Crucial Constituency


Mother of Nemerov Dies
Gertrude Russek Nemerov, whose family founded and ran the Russeks Fifth Avenue department store in Manhattan and whose children won fame in the world of arts and letters, died on Tuesday in Albuquerque, N.M.
She was 93.
Mrs.
Nemerov's son, the poet Howard Nemerov, won a Pulitzer Prize in 1978 and served as Poet Laureate of the United States from 1988 to 1990.
He died in 1991.
One of her daughters was the photographer Diane Arbus, who died in 1971.


In a Shaken Tel Aviv, Fear Now Rides the Buses
Yitzhak Razimor had one overwhelming concern today as he rode the No. 5 bus down Dizengoff Street, past the stores selling books and fashion boots and jewelry, past the fast-food outlets and past the little makeshift shrine of candles and flowers where at least 21 people died in a suicide bomber's attack on the same bus line on Wednesday.
"Fear," said the 29-year-old Mr.
Razimor, who works in the marketing section of a big bank, "I feel fear. I'm sitting in this bus and I'm not sure I'll get off again alive."


Northwest Airlines (NWAC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinton Restores Respect to Federal Judiciary
To the Editor:
Re "President's Judicial Appointments Are Diverse, but Well in the Mainstream" (news article, Oct. 17): I respond as a liberal, a soon-to-be law clerk for a United States Court of Appeals judge and as a former Senate Judiciary Committee intern who researched Supreme Court nominees.


Scana Corp.(SCG,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


I.B.M.'s Profits Exceed Wall St. Forecasts
I.B.M. said yesterday that its third-quarter earnings were significantly higher than the estimates of most Wall Street analysts, on surprisingly strong sales of its mid-size and mainframe computers and continued cost-cutting efforts.
But investors and many analysts restrained their enthusiasm, on concerns that the renewed strength of I.B.M.'s mainframe business might be short-lived and that most of the benefits from cost controls had already been realized.


Five Years Later: Eastern Europe, Post-Communism -- A special report; East Europe Watches the Bear, Warily
For nearly 50 years, from the West German border to the Pacific Ocean, the Soviet Union ruled its imprisoned republics and satellites with brutal, calculated imperialism backed by fearsome military strength.
But when the Soviet regime began to evaporate five years ago, in the biggest geopolitical event since the end of World War II, no one had planned for it -- least of all Russia's small band of democrats.


Restaurants
Each time an Italian restaurant opens in New York City, the owners have to come up with a compelling reason for customers to patronize their establishment instead of the 2,200 other Italian restaurants in town.
I don't think chocolate-covered eggplant quite works.


WHX Corp.(WHX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sounds Around Town
A Hampton Get-Together
Lionel Hampton, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
Mr.
Hampton's shows at the Blue Note are real occasions, a rare chance to hear music performed by masters, with not a weak link in the bunch.
Though there are be-boppers in the group, the solos are short and precise, all played with the sort of relaxation that informs the best swing sessions.
Mr.
Hampton will be host to Sweets Edison, Al Grey, James Moody, Benny Golson and others, and he will try to outplay them all.
Shows tonight through Sunday night are at 9 and 11:30.
Tickets are $45, with a $5 minimum.
PETER WATROUS Sounds of Africa
Africa Mondo Festival, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at West Houston Street, South Village, (212) 243-4940.
The popularity of West African music here has gone into a steady decline since its heyday in the 1980's, which says nothing about its quality.
The bills this weekend are exceptional.
Tonight's show pairs the Four Stars, from Zaire and based in Paris, with System Band, from Haiti but long based in New York City.
It's a real guitar thrill of a show, as both bands feature similar spidery playing.
Tomorrow's concert features Tabu Ley Rochereau, the Zairian singer, whose band can make a club go wild.
The shows tonight and tomorrow night start at 11 and 1, with an $18 cover.
P.
W.
Saxophone Improvisations
Joe Lovano, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South at 11th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
Mr.
Lovano is leading yet another band -- this one with the vocalist Judi Silvano, who blends into the ensemble -- and it may be his most adventurous group so far.
The band also features the trumpeter Tim Hagans, a fine improviser with a bristling attack.
Mr.
Lovano is the saxophonist of the moment, and he's a fertile, voluminous improviser, always ready to play and push himself.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 9:30, 11:30 and 1; on Sunday, at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M.
There is a $15 cover and a $10 minimum.
P.
W.


INSIDE
A Long-Anticipated Arrival at the Met
Bryn Terfel, the acclaimed bass-baritone from Wales, made his Metropolitan Opera debut on Wednesday in Mozart's "Nozze di Figaro." With him was Dawn Upshaw.
Edward Rothstein's review appears in Weekend, page C1.
Details of Nuclear Pact
Under an accord between the U.S. and North Korea, the North's nuclear program would be completely dismantled in about 10 years.
Page A8.
Basketball Star's Trip Back
The basketball star Bobby Hurley, recovered from an automobile collision, is back practicing, and avoids reliving the experience.
Page B9.


Martin Marietta (ML,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Advo Inc.(AD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Hannaford Brothers Co.  (HRD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Art in Review
'Metamorphoses' Museum at the Fashion Institute of Technology Seventh Avenue at 27th Street Through Oct. 29
Collage works and other combination prints dominate this ambitious show of computer-derived art; other artists incorporate computer-generated forms into photographic images.
In only a few cases, though, are the pictures as interesting as the processes used to create them.
Among those are Deanne Sokolin's black-and-white images of pieces of fabric, apparently wrapped around mysterious objects and floating in midair.
Kathleen Ruiz's photograph of an animal's spinal column, printed on thick, yellowing paper, evokes an ancient manuscript, while Peter Campus's manipulated color images suggest nature tinged with nightmare.


A Lilco Takeover Offers Relief to Long Islanders
To the Editor:
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposal to purchase the Long Island Lighting Company (news article, Oct. 14) will give much-needed relief to Long Island ratepayers, who pay the country's highest rates, while saving Lilco from bankruptcy, and at no cost to New York State taxpayers.


Radio-Station Intrigue In a Lucas Creation
Some movies are so big and so bad that they're funny, like "The Specialist." Others are bad in a grim and boring way, like "Radioland Murders." Even George Lucas makes mistakes, and "Radioland Murders" is one of his whoppers.
Mr.
Lucas, the "Star Wars" genius, created the story and served as executive producer and technical czar on the film, which is set in 1939 on the night a radio station is going national.
Penny (Mary Stuart Masterson) is the efficient secretary who keeps everything running.
She has decided to divorce her husband, Roger (Brian Benben), one of the show's writers.
He claims he was framed when Penny caught him in the sexy singer's dressing room.
And as the station's employees are murdered one by one, it seems that Roger is being framed for that, too.
In one night he has to solve the murders, save his marriage and finish writing a show that's already on the air.


Flextronics International Ltd. (FLEXF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2d Thoughts On the Backers Of Trade Bill
Only a year ago, labor leaders were threatening retribution against lawmakers who voted for the North American Free Trade Agreement.
At the very least, they vowed to withhold support in this year's elections.
But the closeness of many campaigns has brought a change of heart: Unions are supporting candidates who opposed them on one of the most important labor-related votes before Congress in years.


Four Phone Companies Join To Create Wireless Network
Four of the nation's biggest cellular telephone companies teamed up today to build a nationwide wireless network.
But their efforts to align with the MCI Communications Corporation, the long-distance company, apparently came to an abrupt stop.
The new alliance unites the cellular operations of three regional Bell companies -- the Bell Atlantic and Nynex Corporations, and U S West Inc. -- with Airtouch Communications, the cellular company that was recently spun off from the Pacific Telesis Group.





Reliance Electric Co.(REE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ben A. Kubasik, 65, Critic and Executive
Ben Andrew Kubasik, a former public-relations executive and film critic who wrote about television for New York Newsday, died on Wednesday at New Rochelle (N.Y.) Hospital.
He was 65 and lived in Larchmont, N.Y.
The cause was fungal pneumonia, said his son Christopher.


U.S. Puts Limit on Its Military Buildup in Gulf
With the confrontation with Iraq receding, the Pentagon said today that the American military buildup in the Persian Gulf would stop at about 13,000 ground troops, 275 aircraft and one aircraft carrier group.
At the height of the confrontation 10 days ago, the Pentagon planned to send nearly 40,000 ground troops as well as 600 planes and helicopters to the gulf in response to movements of elite Iraqi troops near the border with Kuwait.
A total of 155,000 American ground troops were on alert.


Marion Starling, 87, Scholar and Author
Prof.
Marion Wilson Starling, a scholar of African-American history and professor emeritus at Brooklyn College, died on Oct. 14 at her home in Manhattan.
She was 87.
The cause was a heart attack, said Richard Coniglione, a spokesman for Brooklyn College.


Fieldcrest Cannon (FLD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A New Quality in Brazil's Exports
Under the 10-acre roof of the Ford Motor Company's car-radio factory here, the modern face of Brazil's newly efficient export industries becomes as apparent as the plant's new Japanese robot, triple-checking electronic circuit boards with a laser's exacting eye.
"Under our quality-control program, we are cutting defects in half every two years," said Luis Carlos A. Oliveira, the quality and productivity manager for the Ford electronics plant in this industrial suburb north of Sao Paulo.
The factory, which employs 4,000 workers here in the Sao Paulo industrial belt, ranks among the world's largest manufacturers of car radios and automotive electronics.


Study Says 1 in 5 Americans Suffers From Chronic Pain
Nearly one in five American adults suffers from pain that has lasted at least six months and led them to seek a doctor's help, a new study shows.
In many cases, despite the doctor's care, the pain remained.
The findings are part of a national pain survey, conducted by Louis Harris &amp; Associates and released yesterday by the American Medical Association.


Union Electric Co.(UEP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Critic's Choice/Film; The Murder Is Easy; It's Disposal That's Hard
For diabolical wit, nothing surpasses Henri-Georges Clouzot's 1954 thriller, "Diabolique," which plunges viewers into a morally murky world, then takes off through a brilliant tale of suspense.
At a boys' school in a Paris suburb, it's hard to know whom the mean-spirited principal mistreats more: his sweet, pigtailed wife, a brunette fresh from the convent (Vera Clouzot, the director's real-life wife) or his hard-as-nails blond mistress (Simone Signoret), dangling a cigarette from her mouth.
Both women teach at the school, and form an unlikely friendship when they conspire to murder their lover.
That's just the start of the story, whose twists shouldn't be revealed.
Nothing will ever replace the jolt of seeing "Diabolique" for the first time.
It's enough to say that the murder is easy; getting rid of the body is hard.
Keep your eye on the big wicker trunk the women take on a trip and don't be surprised at anything that does or doesn't turn up at the bottom of the school's filthy swimming pool.
As the women wait to see if they got away with murder, Clouzot focuses on the effects of a bad conscience as much as on the trail of clues, and that pervasive sense of guilt raises the film beyond the level of a simple murder mystery.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the arrest of a man suspected in sex crimes in Queens misstated the given name of the arresting officer in some editions.
He is Peter Whitten, not Paul.


World News Briefs; Security Council Warns Bosnia to Withdraw
The Security Council told the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina today that it should withdraw its troops from the demilitarized zone around Mount Igman, near Sarajevo, or risk an intensification of fighting.
The warning was to be delivered to the Bosnian representative at the United Nations, Muhamed Sacirbey, by this month's Council President, Sir David Hannay of Britain.
The Council took no formal action in the form of a resolution or presidential statement, however.


CMS Energy To Acquire Niagara Unit
The CMS Energy Corporation said yesterday that it would acquire Hydra-Co, the unregulated independent power unit of the Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation, for more than $200 million.
The acquisition will increase by 20 percent the generating capacity of CMS Energy's independent power unit, CMS Generation Company, making it the nation's third-largest independent producer behind the Enron Corporation and Southern California Edison's Mission Energy unit.


PPG Industries(PPG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Daily News Will Move From Landmark to W. 33d Street
After 65 years of journalistic triumphs and tribulations in its landmark Art Deco tower on East 42d Street, The Daily News said yesterday that it would move its news, business and corporate operations next spring to a more prosaic West Side building occupied by back offices and an indoor skating rink.
The move will shunt the last vestiges of the newspaper's dwindling Manhattan operations from the 37-story News Building, at 220 East 42d Street, near Second Avenue, to a 16-story office building at 450 West 33d Street, between Ninth and Tenth Avenues, where they will be consolidated on a single floor of 100,000 square feet -- nearly three football fields.


Genuine Parts (GPC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thwarted Lust and Moping
Lou Barlow started Sebadoh's set on Thursday night at Tramps by saying, "I'm kind of nervous tonight," summing up Sebadoh's persona.
Sebadoh (pronounced SEB-uh-doe) has worked its way up the alternative-rock circuit with terse but tuneful songs about insecurity, thwarted lust and the kind of insight that comes from long hours of solitary moping.
"I guess I've got what it takes/To help you make this mistake," Lou Barlow sang in "License to Confuse," one of Sebadoh's harder rock songs.
Mr.
Barlow, on guitar, and Jason Lowenstein, on bass, are the passive and aggressive halves of the band's persona; Mr.
Barlow sings in an earnest, diffident tone, while Mr.
Lowenstein works himself up to yelling.
Some of the songs are fragmentary: verses without choruses, arrangements with hollows between the rhythm section and a high guitar line.


Bratton Joins Watch Over Harlem Boycott
As Police Commissioner William J. Bratton toured the street, about 20 sidewalk vendors picketed noisily in front of a half-dozen stores on 125th Street yesterday.
It was the fourth day of a boycott organized by the displaced vendors, which has produced mixed results.
The vendors, who were removed by the police from their customary places on the broad sidewalks of 125th Street on Monday, urged Harlem shoppers to bypass stores not owned by blacks.
Some responded to the demonstrators' pleas, but others ignored them.
Dozens of police officers on street patrol, on scooters and packed into cruising vans enforced an uneasy peace.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
General Motors stock continued to slide, after a week of setbacks for the company including a wider-than-expected loss in North America.
G.M. shares have fallen 12 percent in two days.  [ 39. ]


JAZZ
Recalling the Swell Tunes (And Short Takes) of 78's  Dance Theater Workshop
The saxophonist and clarinetist Kurt Hoffman, who played at Dance Theater Workshop on Monday night, clearly loves the music of the first few decades of the century.
He has even embraced the technological limitations of the recordings: every lovely, episodic tune he performed seemed to end quickly, as if he were sticking to the three-minute limit of a 78 r.p.m. disk.


At Least 32 People Die as a Bridge Collapses During Rush Hour in Seoul


Schlumberger Ltd.(SLB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Purchase by Hicks, Muse Is Called Off
Donald J. Carter announced today that he had pulled out of a $1 billion deal to sell control of Home Interiors and Gifts Inc. to the Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst investment firm.
A news release said the Home Interiors board had decided "to remain, at least for the present, an independent family-owned company." Those close to Mr.
Carter said that as Hicks, Muse had begun spelling out its vision for Home Interiors, he and his family had grown less comfortable with having to answer to outsiders.


A Freeze Is the Key to the Hot Offense at Syracuse
There are those quarterbacks who prefer to pass the football and shy from the rough-and-tumble aspects of the game.
Kevin Mason is not one of them.
"I like to run the ball," said Mason, a senior from Cheektowaga, N.Y., who waited four seasons at Syracuse to have the chance.
Mason has run with the ball, thrown the ball and has become an all-round inspiration for an Orange team that plays Temple tonight in Philadelphia.


As War Factions Shatter, Liberia Falls Into Chaos
From the smashed huts strung out along the main roads to the once-imposing buildings like the Intercontinental Hotel, which long ago became the domain of squatters, five years of civil war has left little in Liberia untouched by fighting.
As it has dragged on, what began as a civil war aimed at bringing down a dictator has instead become a freewheeling struggle that is confusing even to its various ethnically based factions.


Under Pressure, Whitman Vows Not to Appear With Bob Grant
Responding to pressure from a coalition of ministers, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman said today that she would never again be a guest of Bob Grant, whose radio talk show has become a political platform for some and an outrage to others who think he promotes bigotry.
The Governor's decision not only alienated Mr.
Grant, one of her most powerful political boosters, it also turned up the heat on the Republican candidate for the United States Senate, Chuck Haytaian, who has also been a frequent guest on the Bob Grant Show.


October in the City


Bradley Out Six Weeks
Philadelphia center SHAWN BRADLEY will miss up to six weeks with sprained ligaments in the same knee that kept him off the basketball court for two and a half months last season, the 76ers said yesterday.
The 7-6 center injured his left knee and skipped off the court in pain during Philadelphia's 105-98 exhibition victory Wednesday over Minnesota. (AP)


Francis Steegmuller, 88, Dies; Writer and Flaubert Expert
Francis Steegmuller, the American novelist, biographer and translator whose works on Gustav Flaubert illuminated the agonies and thrills of creating fiction, died at a Naples hospital on Thursday.
He was 88 and had homes in New York City, on Capri and in Naples.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife, the writer Shirley Hazzard.


California Energy Sweetens Its Bid for Magma
The California Energy Company raised its hostile takeover bid yesterday for a geothermal power competitor, the Magma Power Company, by 10 percent, to $924 million.
If the bid is successful, it would create the largest geothermal power company in the industry.


CHRONICLE
While his estranged wife is seeking refuge from the public eye in the United States, PRINCE CHARLES will try to explain his marital travails to his children, PRINCE WILLIAM, 12, and PRINCE HARRY, 10, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Father and sons are spending the weekend at Balmoral, the Scottish country home of Queen Elizabeth II.


This Foursome Format Seems Lost on the U.S.
By the time the final ripple had dissolved from the pond fronting the 16th green at the Greenbrier today, it was difficult to tell which was more surprising: Was it that the Europeans led the United States (again) after the first day of the Solheim Cup matches?
Or was it the identity of the players who led the way?
Actually, it was both.
The relatively obscure and callow team of Annika Sorenstam and Catrin Nilsmark of Sweden turned the tide toward Europe with a surprising 1-up victory over the American veterans Beth Daniel and Meg Mallon in the second foursomes match.
That victory, which followed a 3 and 2 opening-match triumph by Dottie Mochrie and Brandie Burton over Liselotte Neumann and Helen Alfredsson, began a run of three straight victories that left the underdog European team with a 3-2 lead.


Serbian Forces Cut Sarajevo Water Supply
To the Editor:
William Dorich's letter (Oct. 8) blaming the Bosnian Government for cutting off the water supply to Sarajevo is misleading.
It was cut off by besieging Serbian forces, which then directed much of their sniper fire at Sarajevans forced to carry water long distances from wells.
Providing an alternative source of water became a high priority for the Soros Humanitarian Foundation.
Under the direction of Fred Cuny, we built a system that became operational in November 1993 (not January 1993, as Mr. Dorich writes).
Indeed, we had disagreements with the Bosnian Government over delays it imposed before allowing the water to become available to Sarajevans.
Yet it is the Bosnian Serb forces that must be blamed for cutting off the supply and for murdering and maiming those carrying water.


THEATER
Becoming Obsessed With an Obsession  Watermark Theater
David Edelstein, who was a lively and obsessive film critic for The Village Voice and The New York Post, has resurfaced as a lively and obsessive playwright.
"Blaming Mom," an extended one-act comedy directed by Nela Wagman, is funny enough to obviate cries of "Critic, pan thyself," even if the obsessions get in the way of theatrical liveliness.


5 Die in Pennsylvania House Fire


Race for Comptroller: London Responds to MCCall
London's name then appears, followed by the phrase, "The people should arm themselves in self-defense." Next, Mr.
London's opponent, the incumbent Comptroller, H. Carl McCall is shown in black and white film, slightly speeded up, in a style reminiscent of wartime newsreels.
Superimposed is: "Carl McCall lies." Finally, the ad shows Mr.
London at a rally sponsored by the New York State Black Republican Council, grasping hands with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
ACCURACY On the charge that Mr.
McCall has mispresented his position, Mr.
London has said that gun laws are too stringent, but he does not advocate eliminating all controls.
He has also said that Jews in Brooklyn should arm themselves in self-defense.
On Social Security, the McCall ad says that Mr.
London favors scrapping it in favor of private insurance, while Mr.
London says that is merely one option to consider.
On abortion, Mr.
McCall's ad says Mr.
London oposed abortion even in cases of rape and incest.
Mr.
London's campaign says he has advocated legislation allowing abortions in these cases, although he is personally opposed to it.
SCORECARD Given the speed and heat of his response, Mr.
London is obviously concerned about the impact of Mr.
McCall's original ad.
But the response itself appears to be inflammatory and does not clarify who Mr.
London is or what he stands for.
For example, the headline, "Kill the Jews," is so laden with emotion and lacking explanation that the juxtaposition borders on suggesting that Mr.
McCall advocates that position.
IAN FISHER


Sports of The Times; End Run On a Very Hard Court
Inever cease to be amazed -- or entertained -- by the bizarre twists and turns of intercollegiate athletics.
The pro game is fairly straightforward.
It's a wolf in wolf's clothing.
Fans don't attend a game wondering whether players are being paid or being put up in penthouses by wealthy alumni.
Everyone is being paid and everyone has a penthouse of sorts.
The name of the game is winning, and everything has a price.


G.M. Stock Falls 12% In 2 Days
Investors continued to spurn the General Motors Corporation today, in a selloff that started with Thursday's disappointing earnings report and has lowered the total value of G.M. shares by $4.3 billion.
In all, the stock dropped 12 percent in the last two days, after G.M. announced that it had a bigger-than-expected loss in North America.
The drop capped a stunning week of setbacks and embarrassments that began with the Transportation Secretary accusing the No. 1 auto maker of knowingly selling millions of potentially lethal pickup trucks and being responsible for 150 deaths.


McCaw Decides Not to Join AT&amp;T Board
Craig O. McCaw, the cellular telephone pioneer who became a billionaire by selling his company to the AT&amp;T Corporation, announced today that he would not serve on AT&amp;T's board.
Mr.
McCaw, who became AT&amp;T's largest shareholder when the company bought McCaw Cellular Communications last month for $11.5 billion in stock, said he feared his future business ventures might pose a conflict of interest, should he serve as an AT&amp;T director.


A Range Defined, Nuance to Belting
Near the end of "Cabaret Sings the Movies," a concert on Thursday evening that was the most formal event in the Fifth Cabaret Convention at Town Hall, the singer Mary Cleere Haran took the stage and sang two numbers that defined the state of the art.
Accompanied by the pianist Richard Rodney Bennett, Ms.
Haran delivered a wistful, lighter-than-air "Affair to Remember," embellished with delicious little vocal dips and scoops.
"On the Atchison, Topeka and the Santa Fe," which followed, was taken slowly and built into a thrilling display of exuberant, sustained belting
Addressing the audience afterward, Ms.
Haran described the cabaret field as "a haven for complicated misfits in society," making sure not to exempt herself from that category.
She was right.
If one could generalize, the group portrait presented by the 17 singers who appeared in the three-hour show was dominated by sensitive young men and by women with bright, quirky personalities.
Nostalgia ruled the evening, for which the eternally perky Jane Powell and Robert Osborne, a columnist and critic for The Hollywood Reporter, were co-hosts.
Queried by Ms.
Haran about working for MGM in its golden days, Ms.
Powell remembered being such a star-struck fan that, she said, "I wasn't there when I was there."


Peter Murphy, A Trade Aide, Is Dead at 46
Peter O. Murphy, a former deputy United States trade representative who was the chief American negotiator of the United States-Canada Free Trade Agreement in 1988, died on Thursday at his home in Chevy Chase, Md.
He was 46.
Mr.
Murphy died of a brain tumor, said Dorothy Dwoskin, the assistant United States trade representative for multilateral trade negotiations, who was a former aide and a friend.


Last One Out, Turn Off the TV; Labor Strife Has Sports Bar Owners Crying in Their Beers
Peter Kramer opened Lee Mazzilli's Sports Cafe on the Upper West Side in June, the week the Rangers won the Stanley Cup for the first time in 54 years.
The Yankees seemed destined for the American League playoffs and maybe even the World Series.
Mr.
Kramer's long oak bar was crowded.
The tables in the back were filled with neck-craning fans, staring up at the 100-channel video screens.
What a difference a baseball strike can make. Not to mention a hockey lockout.


Public &amp; Private; Same Old Math
Warning to American women: The moment you say "I do," the value of your life on the open judicial market plummets.
That's one conclusion you can draw from the sentencing this week of Kenneth Peacock, who killed his wife after he found her in bed with another man.
The Maryland truck driver got a mere 18 months for shooting the 31-year-old woman with a hunting rifle in a classic Drove-Me-to-It defense.


DQE (DQE,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


Times Mirror Co.(TMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


CLINTON TO MAKE A VISIT TO SYRIA ON MIDEAST TRIP
President Clinton said today that he would travel to Damascus during his trip to the Middle East next week to coax Syria toward peace with Israel, despite concerns that he would risk criticism for visiting a country linked to terrorism.
At a news conference in which he vigorously defended the Administration's foreign and domestic policies, Mr.
Clinton said he was going to the Middle East because it was important "to stand with our friends at this moment when they're standing up for peace and the enemies of peace are trying to derail them."


In New York, Race for Governor Is Dividing Husbands and Wives
A visitor to this well-informed and well-heeled hamlet, where party affiliations stand in near balance, might wonder these days if the Democrats are the women and the Republicans are the men they married.
Men talk passionately about taxes and the business climate, many saying Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has been bad for both.
Women talk passionately about education and abortion rights, many saying they don't trust State Senator George E. Pataki.


Adjustable Mortgages: Bigger Payments Loom
WITH no certain end in sight to rising interest rates, homeowners who have adjustable mortgages are bracing for bigger payments.
Although the potential pain is limited by annual and lifetime caps on loan rates -- usually two and six percentage points, respectively -- such increases can make a sizable dent in a household budget.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Spanish Soprano In Puccini's 'Boheme'  Metropolitan Opera House
Against the mountainous odds of the overblown Franco Zeffirelli production, Ainhoa Arteta, a young Spanish soprano, made a promising Metropolitan Opera debut on Thursday evening in Puccini's "Boheme." She took over the role of Mimi with smooth legato and a distinctive mix of buoyant lightness and rich, dark timbre.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.70
2.95
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.98
4.98
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.42
5.42
3.13
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.78
7.79
5.39
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.97
7.99
5.98
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.82
7.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.71
6.69
5.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Again, Killing in Rwanda
When Rwanda's Hutu-led Government slaughtered hundreds of thousands of Tutsi six months ago, the world watched helplessly and was embarrassed by its helplessness.
Although French forces belatedly intervened on a United Nations humanitarian mission, this was not the U.N.'s finest hour.
Eventually, a Tutsi-led rebel army drove the genocidal Hutu regime from power.
Now there are disturbing reports from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and Amnesty International that Tutsi forces are taking murderous revenge against Hutu civilians.
The U.N. bureaucracy, it seems, would rather not hear about it.
But these new charges deserve serious international attention and more.


Burlington Northern (BNI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Helene Heinemann, Social Worker, 88
Helene Thurman Martin Heinemann, a retired geriatric social worker, died on Thursday at the Crosslands retirement community in Kennett Square, Pa., near Philadelphia.
She was 88 and lived in New Canaan and Washington, Conn., before moving to Crosslands in 1977.
Her death followed a long illness, her family said.


CHRONICLE
Barbara Smith is not the only woman to venture into new territory this week.
LOIS WYSE, the author, columnist, poet and advertising executive, has started her own publishing company on Fifth Avenue with two other women: HELENE SILVER, a former editorial director of Crown Arts and Letters, a division of Crown Publishing, and PAT ROSENWALD, chairwoman of the Big Apple Circus.
The idea came when they were talking about New York nine months or so ago, Ms.
Wyse said, "about how we love it, don't want to leave it and are always glad to come back." They formed City &amp; Company, their publishing house.


Corrections
A brief report in Weekend yesterday about a performance by the Oratorio Society of New York tomorrow at 3 P.M. at Temple Emanu-El in Yonkers misstated the telephone number for information.
It is (914) 963-0575.


Dr. Arthur Pollister, 91, Researcher Who Peered Deeply Into Cells
Dr.
Arthur Wagg Pollister, a zoologist at Columbia University who helped unravel the secrets of the cells that make up all living matter, died on Tuesday at the Peter Becker Community in Harleysville, Pa., where he lived for several years.
He was 91.
He suffered a brief illness, said his son, James.


Surgery for Krzyzewski
Duke Coach MIKE KRZYZEWSKI underwent back surgery yesterday in Durham, N.C., and will miss about a week of practice, school officials said.
Krzyzewski, who has won 2 national titles in 14 seasons at Duke, had the operation on a disk at Duke University Medical Center.
He was in good condition and is expected to be released in a few days. (AP)


Starks's 31 Come Amid The Fouls
By the fourth quarter last night, fans at Madison Square Garden needed a reason to stay interested.
John Starks provided it.
Scoring 12 consecutive points during a 17-0 run by the Knicks that overcame a 100-85 deficit, Starks sparked New York to a 113-100 victory over the Utah Jazz.
Starks finished the exhibition game with 31 points.


Pataki Says 2 Republicans Deserve D'Amato's Apology
Rushing to stamp out the latest brushfire raging in his own party, State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, called on his patron, United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, to apologize for making disparaging comments about New York City's Mayor and suggestive remarks about Mr.
Pataki's running mate.
Mr.
D'Amato was quoted on WCBS-TV Thursday night as having called Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani "ungrateful" for not endorsing Mr.
Pataki.
And he said that he might support a challenger against the Republican Mayor if he seeks re-election in 1997.


Market Falls, Buffeted by Slide in G.M.
Buffeted by the decline of one its leading stocks, General Motors, the stock market seemed yesterday to drift back into last month's trading range.
The Dow Jones industrial average, hovering above 3,900 for the last five sessions, dropped below that level yesterday in active trading of 315.31 million shares.
A stable bond market and a slight rise in the value of the dollar did not stop the slide.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about the new president of Long Island Jewish Medical Center, Dr.
David R. Dantzker, misstated one of his academic affiliations.
His chairmanship of the department of internal medicine is at Long Island Jewish; he is a professor at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.


Giuliani Is Said to Plan Cut Of $100 Million to Transit
Only hours after the New York City Transit Authority announced that it expected to end the year with a rosy surplus of $103 million, a senior aide to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that the administration would cut its contribution to the authority by almost exactly that amount.
The cut is to be part of the Mayor's effort to close a $1 billion budget gap.
It would be the first time the Mayor has trimmed the city's contribution to the authority, which runs the city's subways and buses.


POP
A Pioneer of New Wave In a Later Incarnation  Irving Plaza
New wave bands don't disappear.
They fragment into side projects.
On Thursday night at Irving Plaza, Richard Butler, who sang in the English band the Psychedelic Furs until he decided to strike out for new creative territory three years ago, played with his new group, Love Spit Love.
On record, Mr.
Butler's band mates can update his voice, which helped define the British new wave sound.
But in concert, the same musicians (with a new bassist) seemed less like a band than a distraction.


INSIDE
A Selloff in G.M. Stock
General Motors stock continued to slide after a week of setbacks for the company, including a big loss in North America.
The stock fell 12 percent in two days.
Page 39.
Houston Spill Continues
Thousands of gallons of oil from the rupture of at least two major pipelines have spilled into the waters near flooded Houston.
Page 8.
Golf Greens Gouging Asia
Booming economies across Asia have led to a rush to build golf courses on some of the last stretches of Asian wilderness.
Page 3.


Quantum Corp.(QNTM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief article yesterday about the Virginia Senate race referred incorrectly to a letter written by the Republican candidate, Oliver L. North, to Attorney General Janet Reno.
Mr.
North asked Ms.
Reno to investigate news reports that former Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder had been offered an ambassadorship in exchange for his endorsement of Senator Charles S. Robb.
Mr.
North did not assert that such an offer was made.
The White House has denied the report.


METRO DIGEST
POLITICS DIVIDES HUSBANDS AND WIVES
In Chappaqua, N.Y., where party affiliations stand in near balance, a visitor might wonder these days whether the Democrats are the women and the Republicans are the men.
Men talk passionately about taxes and the business climate, many saying Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has been bad for both.
Women talk passionately about education and abortion rights, many saying they don't trust State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican challenger.
That gender gap has already been seen in the polls, and some suggest it may be widening.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY


Harris Corp.(HRS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


An Opera With Roots Medieval
When Paul C. Echols died last month, he had just started preparing a revival of "Romance of the Rose," an opera using ancient materials that he had assembled for his Mannes Camerata student ensemble in 1988.
Calling the work "a 15th-century music drama," Mr.
Echols drew his text from "Le Roman de la Rose," the chivalric poem that Guillaume de Lorris began in the 1230's and Jean de Meun completed several decades later.
Popular and courtly love songs and dances by Busnois, Isaac, Dufay and other 15th-century composers are interpolated for emotional amplification.
Mr.
Echols knew that this blending of court and popular styles would have been inconceivable in the 15th century.
But he was a master at making arcane styles accessible to modern listeners, and if he was ahistorical in his presentation, he insisted that the music and dance performances be grounded in period styles.
Michael Ganio, Dorothy Olsson and Grant Herreid, in taking up the directorial duties after Mr.
Echols's death, honored that standard.


Long Bond Comes Back From Selloff
After a three-day selloff in reaction to robust economic data, prices of long-term bonds rebounded yesterday from early weakness as the dollar rose as well.
The dollar, down sharply in early trading, regained much of its lost ground amid rumors that the Federal Reserve Board was intervening in the currency markets and as the Treasury issued a reassuring statement from Secretary Lloyd Bentsen.
But the reversal did not come fast enough to keep the dollar from setting a new post-World War II low against the Japanese yen and reaching a two-year low against the German mark.


U.S. and North Korea Sign Pact to End Nuclear Dispute; North Urged to Cut Force
Defense Secretary William J. Perry urged North Korea today to reduce its army and move its forces away from the border with South Korea, saying the United States would not withdraw any of its 37,000 troops here unless the North cuts back.
"We are not considering any reductions in the level of troops in Korea," Mr.
Perry said.
"The level of our military forces here is determined by the level of conventional forces in North Korea."


Taker of Photos Is in the Picture to Stay
AUSTIN V. HANSEN was 12 years old when he began taking pictures.
He grew up to be a professional photographer, with a body of work resting inside the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture.
But he started out with an Eastman Hawkeye camera, made of cardboard and imitation leather.


Phelps Dodge (PD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For the Bond Buyers, Will Pain Turn to Gain?
MARCIA SPIEGELMAN is no lackadaisical investor.
Since retiring from her staff job at the United Nations, she has read energetically about finances.
But one question still puzzles her: "My bond funds are all minus this year. With bonds paying 8 percent, are they a good buy again?"
The experts are asking the same thing.
After a 13-year rally because of declining interest rates, bonds have been buffeted in 1994.
Short-term rates, raised five times by the Federal Reserve, jumped from 3 percent to 4.75 percent, and long rates went from 6.25 percent to 7.97 percent at yesterday's close.


Letter: On Baseball; Let Owners Earn Antitrust Privilege
To the Editor:
In considering whether or not to end the exemption from the antitrust laws enjoyed by major league baseball, Congress would do well to focus on the change in baseball's circumstances since Fay Vincent was forced out as commissioner.
Major league baseball is no ordinary private business but akin to a public utility.
With its absence of competition and the ability to prevent others from entering the business, it has monopoly power.


Comsat (CMCSK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Judge Reopebs Trial Of Simpson to Press
Reversing an order from the day before, Judge Lance A. Ito allowed reporters back into his courtroom yesterday to cover the O. J. Simpson trial and listen to the questioning of prospective jurors.
But the judge's decision to reopen the hearings was largely overshadowed by the release of transcripts of a closed session on Wednesday in which Mr.
Simpson described fleeing the police, prompting his lawyer to threaten to quit if he continued talking.


Growth-Stock Group: Not for Short Term
Growth funds can give a portfolio some muscle over time, but they do not pack the same punch year after year, as the one-year returns show.
"It's appropriate to have some exposure to growth funds if you have a longer-term outlook, three to five years," said Jennifer Newport, an analyst for Morningstar Mutual Funds in Chicago, "but it's not the place to put money you are going to need tomorrow because growth-stock funds are volatile."


DANCE
Nine Daredevils Demonstrate The Value of Cooperation  City Center
It was do-or-die time on Wednesday night at City Center, when the Paul Taylor Dance Company presented its only performance this season of "Esplanade." The dance can seldom have been performed with more nuance, joy and daredevil athletics.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-7  CLINTON TO VISIT SYRIA  President Clinton said that he will visit Syria, even though he might be criticized for visiting a nation accused of sponsoring terrorism, in the hope of prodding it toward peace with Israel.  1


Observer; God's Angry Land
Anger has become the national habit.
You see it on the sullen faces of fashion models who have obviously been told that anger sells.
It pours out of the radio all day.
Washington journalism hams snarl and shout at each other on television.
Generations exchange sneers on TV and printed page.
Ordinary people abuse Congressmen and President with shockingly personal insults.
Rudeness is a justifiable way of showing you can no longer control the fury within.
Vile speech, justified on the same ground, is inescapable.
America is angry at Washington, angry at the press, angry at immigrants, angry at television, angry at traffic, angry at people who are well off and angry at people who are poor, angry at blacks and angry at whites.
The old are angry at the young, the young angry at the old.
Suburbs are angry at cities, cities are angry at suburbs, and rustic America is angry at both whenever urban and suburban intruders threaten the peaceful rustic sense of having escaped from God's Angry Land.


First Data Corp.(FDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sun Co.(SUN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


From the Netherlands, Probing Questions About Existence and Death
The Netherlands Dance Theater's second bill of ballets by Jiri Kylian is definitely something to fax home about.
The five works on the program, all of them quirky and inventive, often bold and always fabulously danced and staged, were given their United States premieres on Thursday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music with Princess Margriet of the Netherlands, sister of Queen Beatrix, in attendance.
The program, part of the Next Wave Festival, will be repeated tonight at the academy (30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene) and should not be missed.


Daily News to Leave Longtime Home


A Russian Oil Giant Grows Powerful
For years, a group of Western oil companies negotiated with Azerbaijan, seeking a deal to develop some of the former Soviet republic's vast oil reserves.
Then, early this year, the Azeris stunned the consortium with the news that a new company would be joining them at the table: Lukoil, Russia's biggest oil producer.
Azerbaijan's decision to grant a 10 percent stake in the project to Lukoil, confirmed in a recent preliminary agreement with the consortium, was motivated in part by the tangled political relationship between Russia and the other former Soviet republics and by Moscow's insistence that it share in the oil wealth around the Caspian Sea.


The Joys Of Travel
President Clinton has always prided himself as being a total immersion President on the domestic front, in command of both policies and personalities.
But with his domestic agenda on hold and the prospect of sweeping Republican victories in Congressional elections, there is not much Mr.
Clinton can do at home these days.


Time to Heed Military Lesson of the Gulf War; Let Iraqi People Live
To the Editor:
Few in this country have an idea what sanctions are doing to the Iraqi people.
With assets tightly frozen, even hospitals do not have basic medicines.
Hypodermic needles are used over and over by frustrated doctors.
No surgery is performed that can possibly wait, but unavoidable surgery is sometimes done without anesthesia.
Relief organizations can respond to less than 10 percent of Iraq's needs.
Schools are as hard-hit as hospitals.
Notebooks would be a luxury and pencils have become stumps.
Besides, the children might bring home a worthless dinar or two if they beg rather than go to school.


Corrections
An article yesterday about tours of the former red-light district in Hudson, N.Y., quoted Paul Czajka, the District Attorney of Columbia County, incorrectly.
His statement that everybody in the Army in Europe knew about Hudson's reputation referred to his father's recollection of service there in World War II, not his own.


'Thousands' Of Human Experiments
The President's Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments said today that the number of radiation experiments conducted by the Government and the military from 1944 to 1974 was likely to be "in the thousands," many times more than previously believed.
The committee issued an interim report halfway through its projected one-year term.
The panel was charged by President Clinton with searching out information on human radiation experiments in the United States, determining their ethical validity and suggesting whether the victims should be compensated.


Make Room for Civility on the Sidewalks
To the Editor:
There have been plenty of campaigns regarding safety in the streets.
How about safety on the sidewalks?
Bicyclists and skaters roll as a matter of course on the most crowded sidewalks.
Pedestrians used to look to sidewalks as a place of relative safety from cars, but now they often must leap into the gutter to avoid the other-wheeled marauders.


Suspense? Yes. Horror? Of Course
Science-fiction horror, like other kinds of movie violence, has escalated in sophistication so sharply that yesterday's sure-fire tricks for grabbing audiences by the throat are liable to be today's ho-hum special effects.
Those who cowered in terror through "Alien," in which extraterrestrial monsters exploded out of people's bodies, aren't likely to be overly impressed by the invaders in "The Puppet Masters," a science-fiction thriller adapted from Robert A. Heinlein's novel.
To be sure, these slimy, lizardlike parasites that leech themselves onto people's backs and control their minds and nervous systems are creepy.
But in generating nightmarish anxiety, they can't hold a candle to the gut-busting surprise-attackers in "Alien."


Israel and Guerrillas Exchange Shelling
Still recovering from the devastating bus bombing in Tel Aviv, Israel fought on a different front today, with its forces shelling Islamic guerrillas in southern Lebanon and the guerrillas firing rockets at northern Israeli towns.
The rocket attacks by the pro-Iranian Party of God sent Israelis into bomb shelters in the northern Galilee, but no injuries were reported, and damage was said to be light.


CHRONICLE
It has been eight years since BARBARA SMITH opened the successful restaurant on Eighth Avenue that bears the better part of her name, so it was time, she decided, to expand.
Last night, she opened a new place in Union Station in Washington, on the spot, she said, "where the Presidential trains used to back up into the station." A celebratory party will be held at the restaurant, B. Smith's Union Station, on Wednesday.
"I was a pioneer on Eighth Avenue, and now I don't feel so much like a pioneer," Ms.
Smith said, speaking from Washington.
"I am coming here with a history."


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Potpourri of Massenet From Cleopatra to Cinderella  Gould Hall
The operas of Jules Massenet, wildly acclaimed in the late 19th century and then contemptuously dismissed through much of the 20th, have managed to keep a foothold in the repertory.
If anything, they have risen in the public's esteem.
"Manon," "Werther" and "Thais" are produced fairly often, and lately there has been renewed interest in "Herodiade," scheduled for both the San Francisco Opera and the Opera Orchestra of New York this season.
Opera Manhattan weighed in on Wednesday night with an evening of Massenet excerpts. .


Bridge
If one is allowed to look at both partnership hands, picking the most desirable contract is usually easy.
Look, for example, at the North-South hands shown in the diagram and decide where you would wish to be.
The obvious contracts are seven no-trump and seven clubs, both of which succeed if the clubs split 3-2 and fail otherwise.
They have a 68 percent chance.
But once you think of seven diamonds, it should be clear that this is superior.
Since a 13th trick can be maneuvered by ruffing a heart, the club split is not necessary.
The contract will fail only if the diamonds split worse than 4-2, if the hearts are worse than 6-2, or if there is an opening ruff.
The contract has an 81 percent chance.
Note that it would be worse without the diamond ten, for an opening club lead, from a four-card holding or a singleton, would complicate matters.


She Strays, He Shoots, Judge Winks
In Towson, Md., this week, a Baltimore County judge named Robert E. Cahill did all husbands with tempers and wandering wives a big favor.
He said they could shoot to kill with near-impunity.
All they have to do in return is serve 18 months in jail and perform 50 hours of community service in -- what else? -- a domestic violence program.
That is the sentence (half what the prosecution recommended) he handed down to Kenneth Peacock, who in February shot his wife in the head after -- considerably after -- he found her in bed with another man.
Before he put a bullet in her brain, Mr.
Peacock indulged in a little wine, a little beer and several hours of argument with his errant spouse.


Air Products &amp; Chemicals Inc.(APD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


FEINSTEIN FAULTS ALIENS PROPOSAL
Saying it might cost her re-election, Senator Dianne Feinstein today declared her opposition to a hotly disputed California ballot proposal aimed at stemming the flood of illegal immigrants across the state's southern border.
"It raises state and Federal constitutional issues and makes no provision whatsoever to deport illegal aliens and reduce their number," the Democratic Senator said of the proposal, which on Thursday won the support of Representative Michael Huffington, her Republican challenger in a closely contested race.


Major Accepts I.R.A.'s Truce As Authentic
Prime Minister John Major accepted the seven-week-old Irish Republican Army cease-fire as genuine today and said that if it continued, Britain would hold "exploratory talks" with I.R.A. representatives before the end of the year.
His commitment means the struggle for peace in Northern Ireland is soon to enter a new phase -- direct talks between the British Government and Sinn Fein, the political arm for the organization London has long reviled as terrorist.


RESULTS PLUS
HARNESS RACING  Incredible Abe is Incredible  Incredible Abe, driven by Italo Tamborrino, a 24-1 shot, stunned favored Victory Dream with a strong stretch effort to capture the $400,000 Cadillac Breeders Crown 3-year-old colt and gelding trot at Garden State Park in Cherry Hill, N.J.
Parked behind Victory Dream and driver Mike LaChance for most of the mile, Incredible Abe made his move from the outside at the top of the stretch and stormed to an all-age track record of 1:541/5 .
Bullville Victory, winner this season of two-thirds of trotting's triple crown (Yonkers Trot and Kentucky Futurity) figured to be Victory Dream's primary challenge, but broke before the half and was not a factor.
Incredible Abe, who won by three-quarters of a length, paid $51.80, $15.80 and $14.00 on a $2 wager across the board.
Victory Dream, who won the most prestigious leg of the triple crown in the Cadillac Hambletonian, paid $4.40 and $5.20.
Gollytoo, with Jeff Fout, returned $8.40 to show.


Time Warner Halts on NBC
Time Warner Inc. has abandoned its plan to acquire a minority stake in NBC from the General Electric Company, the chairman of Time Warner, Gerald M. Levin, told analysts on Thursday at a conference in New York.
"We are not going to be making any major investments unless it is to broaden our cable footprint," Mr.
Levin said.
He described the company's efforts to acquire a 49 percent stake in NBC as "on the back burner."


How Rich We Are! And Yet How Poor
To the Editor:
Oh, how rich we Americans have become!
Our private net worth after discounting for inflation has increased over the last 50 years by fivefold.
On a per capita basis and in real (inflation-corrected) terms, Americans are three times richer than we were 50 years ago.


Longtime Rival Backs Senator Robb
One of the nation's most bitter political rivalries was put aside tonight when L. Douglas Wilder, the former Governor of Virginia, endorsed Senator Charles S. Robb's quest for re-election.
Appearing at a fund-raising dinner here, Mr.
Wilder and Mr.
Robb stood together with President Clinton as a crowd of 800 watched a 17-year rivalry come to a symbolic end with a poignant handshake.
The handshake united the state's two leading Democrats in Senator Robb's struggle to defeat his Republican challenger, Oliver L. North.


Players and Owners Debate Service Time
The Major League Baseball Players Association wants players to be credited with service time for the days they were on strike this past season, but the grievance the union filed yesterday may require legal action to force the owners to agree to arbitrate it.
In other words, it was business as usual in the continuing labor skirmishes between the two sides in the 10-week-old strike.


Time to Heed Military Lesson of the Gulf War
To the Editor:
James Burton (letter, Oct. 13) did indeed set off an eight-month debate in the Naval Institute Proceedings about the last hours of the 1991 Persian Gulf war.
But it was about the wrong issue.
Mr. Burton somehow overlooked an entire Allied corps.


Pair May Be Responsible for Carjackings
The police said yesterday that they believed a string of 11 carjackings and one attempted carjacking in Queens during the last two weeks might be the work of the same pair of robbers.
The carjackings, which took place in five precincts in eastern and northeastern Queens from Oct. 6 to 19, have followed a similar pattern, the police said, in which one man approaches motorists with a small black handgun as they are parking their cars near their homes in the evening.


World News Briefs; Haiti Checks Police Rolls For Rights Violators
Five Haitian colonels appointed by President Jean-Bertrand Aristide began examining the rosters of the police force today to determine who would be allowed to stay on the job and who would be weeded out as a violator of human rights, American officials said.
The restructuring of the joint army and police force, has dominated much of the President's first week in office.
Aides to Father Aristide have said he intends to curtail the army sharply and instead build up a professional national police force.


Burt Lancaster, Rugged Circus Acrobat Turned Hollywood Star, Is Dead at 80
Burt Lancaster, the rugged former circus acrobat who achieved Hollywood stardom in 1946 in his first film, "The Killers," and maintained a magnetic screen presence in some 70 movies that spanned 45 years, died on Thursday at his home in Century City, Calif.
He was 80.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, Susan.


Time to Heed Military Lesson of the Gulf War; World Should Pay Us
To the Editor:
Senior Pentagon officials have estimated that costs for the current military buildup in the Persian Gulf to defend Kuwait could be more than $1 billion.
Saudi Arabia and five other gulf nations agreed to pay for much of this cost.
The United States is now truly the world's police force, with branches of the armed services deployed over most of the planet.
So why shouldn't we be amply rewarded monetarily?


Clinton Delivers Sharp Jabs At G.O.P. and 2 of Its Icons
President Clinton directed his sharpest jabs of the political campaign at the Republican Party and its icons today, citing Representative Newt Gingrich and the Senate candidate Oliver L. North in a nationally broadcast news conference.
Responding to questions at the White House, Mr.
Clinton repeatedly chided Mr.
Gingrich, the House Republican whip and author of his party's fall election strategy, for calling the President an "enemy of normal Americans" in a private meeting this month.


AIDS Council to Review Guide for High Schools
Helen and Joe, two high school students, have not yet become sexually involved, although their feelings for each other are growing and they are both concerned about avoiding infection with H.I.V.
"What would Helen and Joe need to know in order to practice safer sex if they decide to become sexually involved?" asks a new guide to teaching about AIDS prevention, written for use in New York City high schools.


As the Rumors End, Malone Content To Stay With Jazz
Would Karl Malone enjoy playing for the Knicks? Yes, he would.
Does he think it will happen?
Hardly, unless the Knicks had a wild notion to trade Patrick Ewing.


U.S. and North Korea Sign Pact to End Nuclear Dispute
After almost four months of difficult negotiations, the United States and North Korea signed an agreement today to end their dispute over North Korea's nuclear program but kept secret many details of how the accord will be put into effect.
The chief American negotiator, Robert L. Gallucci, said the two sides had signed a separate confidential document that is more specific than the four-page "agreed framework" that was made public after its signing at the North Korean mission to the United Nations here.


Advanced Micro Says Court Gives It Round in Intel Fight
Advanced Micro Devices Inc. said today that it had won a skirmish in its long-running battle with the Intel Corporation over the rights to manufacture compatible versions of Intel's family of microprocessor chips.
The company claimed victory despite a ruling by a Federal judge late today that issued a preliminary injunction against Advanced Micro Devices, preventing it from taking new orders for the disputed microprocessor or starting new production of chips that contain the disputed software.


N.H.L. Talk About Talking
Three weeks and 115 missed games into what was supposed to be the National Hockey League season, the principal negotiators have finally talked about the resumption of talks aimed at ending the league's lockout of its players.
After having no communications for eight days, Commissioner Gary Bettman and Bob Goodenow, chief of the players union, spoke by telephone Thursday night and again yesterday.
They set no date for their next bargaining session, but a person familiar with their conversations said they expected to meet sometime next week.


Don't Unlock Her Diary
To the Editor:
A Fort Lauderdale, Fla., detective was charged with sexually molesting his 12-year-old daughter, and she was ordered jailed for not surrendering her diary (news article, Oct. 14).
I know enough about diaries and pre-teen-agers to speculate that she wrote about her breasts, her period, her changing friends and crushes, and that having her words perused by grown-men lawyers would feel excruciatingly embarrassing.


Governor and Her Rival Meet in Debate
Gov.
Ann W. Richards of Texas repeatedly attacked her Republican opponent, George W. Bush, tonight as someone whose inexperience in government could prove disastrous for the State.
But Mr.
Bush sought to turn his experience into an asset, declaring: "I proudly proclaim I have never held office. I have been in the business world all my adult life. I have met a payroll."
Meeting in Dallas for the only scheduled debate of their gubernatorial campaign, and locked in a race that polls suggest is a dead heat, the Democratic Governor and Mr.
Bush, the eldest son of the former President, clashed on proposals for education, crime and welfare overhaul, and even casino gambling, which Ms.
Richards described as "a cheesy way to make money."


Two Candidates Spar Bitterly As London Releases New Ad
There were new attacks yesterday in an already bitter race for comptroller: The Republican challenger, Herbert London, released a stark television ad questioning the honesty of the incumbent, H. Carl McCall, and the two candidates sparred in a debate on nearly every subject but what they would do on the job.
Mr.
London's ad, in response to a television attack by Mr.
McCall, opens with white letters against a black screen asking, "Kill the Jews?" and goes on to say that Mr.
McCall had mischaracterized statements attributed to Mr.
London about citizens' arming themselves.


University Announces Tuition Cut
Trying to stop the drain of students to lower-cost state colleges, the University of Rochester will announce today that it is reducing tuition by $5,000 a year for state residents.
The move, which marks the first time a leading private university has cut tuition to compete against state schools, is an acknowledgement that even well-regarded educational institutions are in danger of pricing themselves out of the market.


No Headline
"I've heard about guys putting the ball in a sauna. Some guys would take weights and drop them on the ball to soften it. It's ridiculous the extent some kickers will go through to work the football." -- DAVID TREADWELL, place-kicker for the Giants.  [ 1:3. ]


Defendant In Crown Hts. Files for Trial As Juvenile
Defense lawyers argued yesterday that the teen-ager charged with violating the civil rights of a Hasidic Jew who was fatally stabbed during the 1991 racial violence in Crown Heights should be tried as a juvenile because he has never been convicted of any crime and does not have a history of behavioral problems.
In papers filed in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, the lawyers for Lemrick Nelson Jr., 19, disputed prosecution arguments that Mr.
Nelson should be tried as an adult.
Prosecutors say that his prospects for successful juvenile rehabilitation are limited, that he has a history of academic and disciplinary problems in school and has had run-ins with the law since the Crown Heights violence.


N.F.L. Likes Its Footballs Raw, Not Baked
David Treadwell, the Giants' place-kicker, laughs when he talks about the strange things kickers can do to balls in the National Football League.
One recipe calls for the brand-new Wilson balls to be baked like pizzas in an oven and another for the balls to be tumbled in a dryer like a load of laundry.
The point is to make kicking easier and the ball travel farther.
"I've heard about guys putting the ball in a sauna," Treadwell said this week.
"Some guys would take weights and drop them on the ball to soften it. It's ridiculous the extent some kickers will go through to work the football."


Putting on the Blitz: Jets Are Forced to Duck and Cover
The Jets have been blitzed until it hurts.
Their bodies, their game plan, their pass routes and quarterback are battered.
"Compared to where we were a year ago, I'd say blitzing against the Jets is up four to one," the offensive line coach, Larry Beightol, said today.
"We're getting blitzed 35 percent of the time."


Lilco Begins Study Of Takeover Offer
The Long Island Lighting Company told state officials today that it had begun a "serious evaluation" of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposal for a state takeover of the company.
In a letter to the heads of the Long Island Power Authority and the New York Power Authority, Lilco's chairman, William J. Catacosinos, said the company expected to contact the state next week to discuss the proposal "in detail." The authorities would be the lead state agencies in acquiring and running Lilco.


Monsanto Co.(MTC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hershey Foods (HSY,NX) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Modern Parable of the Talents, Apt Lesson From 'Nunsense'
In his 1987 book, "The Only Other Investment Guide You'll Ever Need," the financial writer Andrew Tobias offered a devilish challenge.
Here's $25,000, he said, and three real investments he'd sunk his own money into: Some Iowa farmland, a real estate partnership with apartment houses and roadside inns, and a musical comedy about four dead nuns.
Pick one, he said, before you turn the page.
Great fortunes are made by the Bold Stroke.


Finding a Second Career That's a Perfect Fit
Stuart F. Frizzell spent 26 years in the retailing business before he branched out on his own.
He had harbored entrepreneurial desires, for years, but the final push came from his employer, who presented him with a severance package in 1988.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
Following is a look at today's top high school football games in the Public Schools Athletic League and Catholic High Schools Football League and for Long Island, New Jersey and Connecticut.
Team records are in parentheses.
Long Island  East Islip (3-0-1) at West Islip (4-0), 2 P.M.
Key Players: West Islip's offensive line of Tim Starke, Jim Kruer, Joe LaBatt, Jason Beit and Doug DeStafano has towed the Lions to their undefeated record.
This aggressive unit has created daylight for Jonah Sheirant (34 carries for 193 yards, 2 touchdowns), Matt Botz (37 carries for 316 yards, 5 touchdowns) and Scott Coppo (29 carries for 292 yards, 5 touchdowns).
Coppo, who is also the team's kicker, leads the Lions in scoring with 49 points.
East Islip's top players are Mike Cables, qb; Kerri Murphy, tb; Chris Strezzerri, fb; Jimmy Deitz, wr; Jayson LaDuca, g-lb, and two-way tackle Barry McCerry.


Where Composer Rests
To the Editor:
Regrettably, your fascinating Oct. 16 article concerning John Cashman and the famous people buried in Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn fails to mention the composer Louis Moreau Gottschalk, who, in his day, was probably the most famous of the famous.
JERRY KAHN Brooklyn, Oct. 16, 1994


Simpson Judge Reopens Trial Coverage
Reversing an order limiting reporters' access, Judge Lance A. Ito allowed journalists back into his courtroom today to cover the O. J. Simpson trial, but then postponed a hearing on whether evidence removed from Mr.
Simpson's Ford Bronco could be admitted.
The judge issued his restrictions on Thursday after both sides expressed concern that the enormous publicity surrounding the case could prejudice jurors.
But he reversed course this morning when one of Mr.
Simpson's lawyers, Robert L. Shapiro, said members of the defense team had become so caught up in protecting their client that their request had gone too far.
They asked the judge to reverse his ruling.


Corrections
An article in Your Money last Saturday about changes in the tax law on household employees misstated the effective date of a new reporting requirement under a bill recently passed by Congress.
Beginning with the 1995 tax year, households with domestic employees would be allowed to pay Federal taxes for those employees once a year on their personal tax forms, rather than quarterly as they do now.


Who's Puffing Up the Price on Cereal?
To the Editor:
Has anyone investigated the price of breakfast cereal lately?
To me, a single parent who has been trying to make ends meet for the last year, the most outrageously priced supermarket necessity for my children is a box of cereal.
At $4 to $5 for a box of artificially processed and flavored wheat flour or corn meal, I don't think I am being paranoid when I suspect a conspiracy among manufacturers to keep the prices high.


DNA Testing Frees a Long-Jailed Man
Edward W. Honaker, a welder imprisoned for 10 years on a rape conviction, today became the latest on a growing list of inmates freed because genetic technology unavailable at the time of their trials showed their innocence.
After being freed today, Mr.
Honaker, 44, said: "The only thing I compare it with is the birth of my first child. This is more of a resurrection."


Ames's Wife Draws Sentence Of Five Years' Imprisonment
The wife of Aldrich H. Ames, the confessed spy for Moscow, was sentenced today to 63 months in prison after begging a Federal district judge for mercy and telling him, "The worst part of this ordeal is dealing day by day with the knowledge, pain and humiliation of having helped my husband betray our country."
The sentence, imposed by Judge Claude M. Hilton, was the shortest set out by Federal sentencing guidelines and was in keeping with a plea bargain between prosecutors and the defendant, Rosario C. Ames, which called for a term of 63 to 72 months.


N.A.A.C.P. Settles With Chavis, Ending Lawsuit
The N.A.A.C.P. today settled with its former executive director, Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., ending a lawsuit in which Mr.
Chavis said he had been wrongfully dismissed.
Neither Lawrence Greenwald, the lawyer for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, nor lawyers for Mr.
Chavis would disclose details of the settlement, which was reached with the aid of a court-appointed mediator.
Both sides said documents relating to the agreement would be made public on Monday.


Texans Striving to Contain Pipeline Spills
As a thick plume of black smoke from burning oil continued to hang over the San Jacinto River today, cleanup crews fought to contain a growing oil spill caused by pipeline ruptures.
In the second disaster to hit the Houston area this week after heavy rainfall and flooding, thousands of gallons of fuel have spilled into the waters east of the city, pouring into already flooded residential areas, coating trees and forcing the closing of one of the nation's most important industrial waterways.


Why a Man Chooses To Live as a Woman
To the Editor:
I enjoyed your review of the movie "I Like It Like That" (Oct. 14).
However, it perpetuates the confusion between transvestite fetishism and gender identity disorder.


Despite Omens, Health Care Drops From Campaign Stage
Health care legislation, which dominated Capitol Hill for most of the year, is playing only a tiny role in this year's Congressional elections.
A few candidates discuss the issue in campaign appearances, usually if they played major roles in the unsuccessful effort to get a bill passed, and occasionally if their opponents did.


It's Rangers-Devils, the Sequel. Well, Almost.
Corey Schwab, 23, a soft-featured Canadian goalie from a hamlet in Saskatchewan, was preparing his stick, wrapping black tape scrupulously around the nub, his concentration broken only by the stack of wall pennants awaiting his autograph.
Celebrity, he is learning, has its price.


Union Pacific Corp.(UNP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mobil Earnings Fall 24.5%, Signaling Industry Trend
In a report that points to how the big oil companies performed in the third quarter, the Mobil Corporation said yesterday that earnings fell 24.5 percent in the quarter, as lower prices for natural gas and weak refining margins more than offset slightly higher oil prices.
Earnings fell to $503 million, or $1.23 a share, from $666 million, or $1.63 a share, in the corresponding quarter last year.
The company took a charge of $25 million in the most recent quarter, while the year-earlier quarter had a special gain of $53 million.


The Police Merger, Act III
Mayors Edward Koch and David Dinkins both failed in their attempts to merge New York City's three police forces, largely because of opposition from the Transit and Housing Police and their allies in Albany.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani came to City Hall with an excellent chance to succeed, given his law enforcement background and police support.
But Mr.
Giuliani too is encountering resistance.
Public housing residents, their fears inflamed by the housing cops, worry about a loss of protection if the Housing Police are swallowed by the N.Y.P.D.
Also, a State Supreme Court judge ruled this week that the Mayor would first need to win the approval of the City Council and the State Legislature.


Bell Atlantic Corp.(BEL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lamond Murray Signs
LAMOND MURRAY, the seventh pick in the National Basketball Association draft, signed a 5-year, $13.5 million contract with the Los Angeles Clippers yesterday, ending a two-week holdout.
"I wasn't looking to get $100 million or anything like that," said Murray, referring to the reported amount the top pick GLENN ROBINSON is seeking from the Milwaukee Bucks.
"I wasn't thinking I could get that kind of money. All I was trying to do was get what I felt was due to me for being the No. 7 pick."


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Zdenek Macal Leading The Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall
The New York Philharmonic's most recent visitor is from just across the river.
Zdenek Macal, who last year took over as artistic director and conductor of the New Jersey Symphony, led the Philharmonic on Thursday night in Mussorgsky, Stravinsky and Berlioz.
Cho-Liang Lin was the soloist in the Stravinsky Violin Concerto.


LTV Corp.(LTV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Two Men, High Leaps, Good Catches And Crashes
Hubbard Street Dance Chicago makes dancing look like fun.
What was most fun on Wednesday night, when the troupe presented a new program at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street) were two familiar works by Twyla Tharp, "Sue's Leg" and "Nine Sinatra Songs." There was also a New York premiere: Daniel Ezralow's "Read My Hips." Despite its punning title, it was not fun.
But just what Mr.
Ezralow did have in mind never grew clear.
Michel Colombier's taped score and Howell Binkley's lighting got "Read My Hips" off to an explosive start with booms and flashes.
The movements for a cast of 13 were always sharp and incisive.
At one point, Lynn Sheppard commanded the stage like a surly boss.
A duet for Alberto J. Arias and Patrick Mullaney was notable both for the skillful way one man would catch the other in leaps and for the moments when the choreography required the jumper to be ignored and crash to the floor.


No Headline
Rabbi Shlomo Carlebach, the foremost songwriter in contemporary Judaism, who used his music to inspire and unite Jews around the world, died on Thursday at Western Queens Community Hospital.
He was 69 and lived in Manhattan, Toronto and Moshav Or Modiin, Israel.
The cause of death was a heart attack, according to his sister-in-law, Hadassa Carlebach.


What Rough Beast at Tight End?
How many linebackers does it take to stop a 280-pound tight end?
The Giants hope it takes just one.
Unfortunately, the linebacker who will spend a lot of time covering that 280-pound tight end, the Steelers' Eric Green, on Sunday is the Giants' second choice for the job.


Ex-B.C.C.I. Chief Pleads Not Guilty to State Charges
The former chief executive of the failed Bank of Credit and Commerce International pleaded not guilty yesterday to New York State charges that he was a key figure in the largest fraud in international banking history.
The executive, Swaleh Naqvi, has already pleaded guilty to similar Federal charges and was sentenced on Wednesday under a plea-bargain agreement to more than eight years in prison, one of the longest sentences given anyone so far in the case.


Maytag Corp.(MYG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Burt Lancaster Is Dead


A Spy's Wife Is Sentenced


Planned '95 County Budget Includes 6 Percent Tax Rise
Blaming state mandates for driving up the cost of government, the Westchester County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, today proposed a budget for 1995 that would require an almost 6 percent increase in overall county property taxes.
It is the first property-tax increase Mr. O'Rourke has proposed since 1991.


Headaches in a Harvest of Plenty
When David Rothermel recently lined up his rumbling combine with his first eight rows of corn in his field at Dwight, Ill., he smiled wistfully at a visitor's suggestion that the season's finish line was in sight.
"There's still a lot that can happen," he cautioned as he lowered the the churning teeth of the cutting head on the bright red Case International combine into the corn.


U.S. and North Korea Sign Pact to End Nuclear Dispute
After almost four months of difficult negotiations, the United States and North Korea signed an agreement today to end their dispute over North Korea's nuclear program but kept secret many details of how the accord will be put into effect.
The chief American negotiator, Robert L. Gallucci, said the two sides had signed a separate confidential document that is more specific than the four-page "agreed framework" that was made public after its signing at the North Korean mission to the United Nations here.


Soweto Journal; It's More Than What You See on Television
The Danish businessmen and the couple from Mauritius had, of course, heard of this place called Soweto, the red dirt township of myth and the evening news.
And so early on a Saturday morning, they were here in a minivan with a man named Jimmy Ntintili, seeing for themselves what lay beyond the scarred steppes of the old gold mines south of Johannesburg, where the police had shot children for protesting, where traitors to the struggle had been burned alive and where blacks, big and small, were consigned to live without electricity or running water under apartheid.


Beliefs
In a year when a book called "How We Die" (Knopf) was on the best-seller list for months, Americans continue to grapple with the question, "How should we die?"
Michigan's Supreme Court is trying to decide whether Dr.
Jack Kevorkian should be convicted as Dr.
Death or acquitted as Dr.
Mercy, and whether either the Michigan or the Federal Constitution grants the dying a right to doctor-assisted suicide.


Corrections
A film review in Weekend yesterday about "Love Affair" referred incorrectly in some copies to one of Katharine Hepburn's film credits.
"On Golden Pond" was the last major film in which she starred, not the last feature film she made.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BALL CORP., Muncie, Ind., has agreed to sell part of its Eratum division to Datum Inc., Anaheim, Calif., for cash and stock valued at $26.5 million.
FIRST FIDELITY BANCORPORATION, Newark, has received Government approval to consolidate its New York division, an operator of 64 offices, into its largest bank, First Fidelity Bank N.A.


FORE! Golf in Asia Hits Enironmental Rough
Where once there was a dense tropical forest, today there is the 17th hole.
A triangular flag marked with the number is planted in the middle of this construction site, 250 acres of red earth carved out of the rain forest in the cool highlands above the Malaysian capital.
Soon this will be the golf course of the High Hill Resort, the largest mountain resort in Malaysia.
Advance memberships begin at $12,000.


Man Guilty Of Murder In the Killing Of a Student
A 36-year-old man whose obsession with a young woman led to her suicide and the slaying of her fiance was convicted of murder today by a Nassau County jury.
Rejecting an insanity defense, jurors took just five hours to find the man, Chandran Nathan of Richmond Hill, Queens, guilty of killing a 20-year-old medical student, Shaleen Wadhwani, in the doorway of the Wadhwani family's home in Manhasset, L.I., in May.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  TEXAS RANGERS -- Announced that Chris James and Oddibe McDowell, outfielders, elected free agency.
National League


Poorer Rodman Back
DENNIS RODMAN made it to practice yesterday and participated in a two-hour workout with the team he stood up Thursday night.
Rodman was fined $15,000 after missing the San Antonio Spurs' 125-109 exhibition victory over the Milwaukee Bucks.
Team officials and Rodman agreed on one thing yesterday -- they will not talk to the news media about Thursday's incident.
Rodman was active during a short scrimmage, but Spurs Coach BOB HILL had to yell at him to shoot free throws.
Rodman had removed his shoes and was sitting alone on the bench when Hill spotted him.
"Get your shoes on, and get in there," Hill yelled.


INSIDE
Refugees' Peril in Rwanda
Reports are surfacing of abductions and killings in Rwanda, and concern has been expressed that some people might be abusing the powers of the new Government.
Page 14.
No Job Gains for Disabled
After four years, the Americans With Disabilities Act has not led to an increase in the number of people with physical and mental impairments in the work force.
Page 22.
Gunshots Breed Speciality
As hospitals in urban areas experience growing numbers of patients with gunshot wounds, many are developing a new breed of doctors to specialize in treating them.
Page 32.
Church Joins Catholics
Upset that the Episcopal Church was not supporting their traditionalist views, a Texas congregation joined the Roman Catholics.
Page 26.
Kennedy Science Aide Dies
Jerome B. Wiesner, an electrical engineer who was president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, is dead at 79.
Page 45.


In War Over Euclid Hall, Issue Is Trustworthiness
To the Editor:
As the co-founder and co-chairman of the Congressional Hotel Advisory Committee, the community oversight body for the West End Intergenerational Residence on West End Avenue and 83d Street, I can say with some authority that the Soapbox essay contains numerous errors.
It claims, for example, that the city "cannot totally restrict referrals by age." As long as there is a sufficient pool from which to draw suitable applicants over 50 years of age (which the city continuously -- and wrongly -- claims it does not have) there is no reason why Euclid Hall cannot be what it was originally conceived to be: a residence for homeless people over 50.


WINTER FORECAST: FRIGID. BUT DON'T BE FOOLED
GLOBAL WARMING IS a topic that my friends tend to avoid around me, out of politeness.
They know I wrote a book about it a few years ago, and they assume I got the story wrong.
The long-term forecast that everyone is talking about right now is the one in the Old Farmer's Almanac, which says this winter will be as bad as the last one, stormy and cold.


Robin Feldman And Tim Lung
Robin Feldman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Feldman of Philadelphia, is to be married there today to K. Tim Lung, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
F.
George Lung of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
Judge Charles R. Weiner of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania is to officiate at the Pyramid Club.


Commercial Property/55 Wall Street; For Film Makers at Least, a Lemon Becomes a Plum
IF one person's meat is another's poison, can one person's unusable space be another's to-die-for setting?
Apparently so.
Just look at 55 Wall Street, that 152-year-old landmarked building just off William Street.
Its 29,000-square-foot rotunda, once home to Citibank, has sat tenantless for almost three years.
More than half of its upstairs office space is empty, too.
Potential tenants continually come to look, but not that many look twice.


CBS Clarifies Chinese Spy Report After Protest
After months of protests from Asian-Americans over a CBS News report about Chinese spies in the United States, the network broadcast an unusual "clarification" on its Friday evening newscast.
"It was not our intention," said Connie Chung, co-anchor of the CBS Evening News, "to leave the impression that there were more than a small number of such individuals among the many tens of thousands of legitimate Chinese students, visitors and immigrants who come to the United States every year. If we left an incorrect impression, we regret it."


Cocaine and Al Capone
To the Editor:
As the medical consultant for Laurence Bergreen's biography of Al Capone, I would like to respond to Robert Sabbag's comments (Letters, Sept. 18), which are somewhat misleading.


Linking the Computers in the Schools
When a seventh-grader transferred to Intermediate School 88 in Brooklyn last week, Judy Gordon, the school secretary, signed on to a computer network linking I.S. 88 with the Board of Education's central data base and called the student's report cards and immunization records to her screen.
Stuart Heier, the assistant principal, sat at another terminal in I.S. 88's office, using the network to analyze student reading scores.
And minutes later Eugene S. Weiss, the principal, used the computer at his office desk to print out a list of the students absent that day.


Give the Lady Her Due
To the Editor:
Reading "A Proud Flagship Keeps On Rollin' in Deeper Currents"  [ Sept. 25 ] , one would think that Jerome Kern, Oscar Hammerstein 2d or Harold Prince had originated "Show Boat," with its bouncing vigorous story of multiracial tensions and marital struggles.
Edna Ferber, the novel's creator, barely gets a mention.
In fact, her body of work, some of which has a deep undercurrent of feminism (read "Roast Beef, Medium," about a traveling saleswoman), is still lively and pertinent.
JANE BRADFORD  La Jolla, Calif.


POSTINGS: A Two-Floor Store for Liz Claiborne; A New Presence On Fifth Avenue
After nearly 15 years with its vacant second floor as a dark hole punched into the sleek retail facade of Fifth Avenue north of Rockefeller Center, 650 Fifth Avenue, at 52d Street, has acquired a premium tenant.
Liz Claiborne Inc., the publicly held apparel manufacturer and retailer, announced plans last week for a two-level, 15,000-square-foot store in the building.
Herb Yellin, the building's leasing agent and a director at Colliers ABR Inc., put the value of the 15-year lease at $30 million and said that an additional $8 million would be spent by the landlord and Liz Claiborne on construction.
A spokesman said that the store, which the company considers its flagship outlet, would open next fall.


Elizabeth Hager, Edward P. York 3d
Elizabeth Campbell Hager, the daughter of Mrs.
Andrew D. Hart Jr. of New York, and the late Peter A. Hager, was married yesterday to Edward Palmer York 3d, a son of Rose K. York of Stonington, Conn., and Mr.
York Jr. of Christiansted, V.I.
The Rev.
Raymond Izbicki, a priest of the Old Catholic Church, performed the ceremony at the Union Club in New York.
Ms.
Hager, 39, is keeping her name.
She is an associate at the Bridge Gate Group, an executive search firm in San Francisco.
She graduated from Brown University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.


Jazz Rounded The Bases First
To the Editor:
In his article on Ken Burns's "Baseball"  [ "Hits, Runs and Memories," Sept. 18 ] , Richard Sandomir quotes the film maker, in a reference to Jackie Robinson, as saying: "April 15, 1947, the day of Jackie's first game, is the next great racial landmark in this country after the Civil War." As important as the moment was, the ground had been laid in the field of jazz 10 years earlier with the introduction of Teddy Wilson into the Benny Goodman Trio.
By 1947 jazz was fairly well integrated.


Running for House, Away From Capital
Around the New York region, candidates for Congress are trying to show how little they have been touched by Potomac fever.


Corrections
The Behind the Wheel column in Automobiles today, about the Volvo 960, describes the car's drivetrain incorrectly.
As noted in an accompanying table, it has rear-wheel drive.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
DAYS OF THE DEAD By Kathryn Lasky.
Photographs by Christopher G. Knight. 48 pp.
New York: Hyperion. $15.95. (Ages 8 to 12) MARIA MOLINA AND THE DAYS OF THE DEAD By Kathleen Krull.
Illustrated by Enrique O. Sanchez.
Unpaged.
New York: Macmillan. $15.95. (Ages 5 to 8) DAY OF THE DEAD  A Mexican-American Celebration.
By Diane Hoyt-Goldsmith.
Photographs by Lawrence Migdale. 32 pp.
New York: Holiday House. $15.95. (Ages 8 to 12)


British-Irish Talks Set
Prime Ministers Albert Reynolds of Ireland and John Major of Britain will discuss constitutional issues involving sovereignty in Northern Ireland and the establishment of cross-border institutions between Ulster and the Irish Republic at a meeting on Monday, Irish officials said today.
The issues are sensitive politically to both sides, and Irish officials said the meeting, a step toward formal talks on a settlement in Northern Ireland, would be a working session, not just a photo opportunity.


What About Eleanor Steber?
To the Editor:
There seems to be an inclination by this generation of reviewers to overlook Eleanor Steber .


City News Briefs; Officials Deny Wachtler An Early Release
Sol Wachtler's request for early release from a Brooklyn halfway house where he has lived since August has been denied by Federal prison officials, who said the former Chief Judge of New York State went to a $500-a-plate dinner last weekend after being refused permission to attend, a prosecutor said yesterday.
The unauthorized night out at Long Island University's C. W. Post campus in Greenvale, L.I., on Oct. 15 to attend a testimonial dinner for Arthur Waldbaum, the supermarket owner, will cost Mr.
Wachtler about a week, said Michael Guadagno, an Assistant United States Attorney in Newark.


More Than Just a Shrine to Red Meat
BIG, bold and bountiful beef is the hallmark of steakhouses, and Hunters Grill fits the mold.
It also scores with sensational side dishes and interesting chicken, fish and pasta offerings, making this newcomer to Stony Brook more than just a shrine to red meat.
The name Hunters Grill also describes the decor.
Classic dark-green walls are dotted with hunt prints.
A balcony in the main dining room is filled with a casual scattering of saddles, riding boots, assorted suitcases and trunks, bales of hay, antique farm tools and old-fashion wood chairs.
A bay window holds a seasonal dried floral arrangement, and the bar is decked with a fresh bouquet.


Cathryn Garland, Michael O'Hanlon
Cathryn Ann Garland, the daughter of Joan Garland and Paul Griffith Garland of Greenwich, Conn., and Michael Edward O'Hanlon, a son of Dr.
Edward and Frieda O'Hanlon of Canandaigua, N.Y., were married yesterday in Chestertown, Md.
The Rev.
Glenn Catley performed the ceremony at the First United Methodist Church.
Ms.
Garland, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a writer at the Discovery Channel, the cable television network, in Bethesda, Md.
The bride graduated from Wellesley College and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
Her father is a retired lawyer.
Her mother is a psychologist with the Mead Counseling Service in Greenwich.


In the Region/Connecticut; Easing Corporate Relocation to Fairfield County
FROM January 1993 through the second quarter of this year 58 companies moved into Fairfield County from out of state, occupying 1.3 million square feet of space and bringing with them nearly 4,000 employes.
Since 1989 there have been 289 such incoming corporate moves, according to Sacia, (formerly known as the Southwestern Area Commerce and Industry Association) based in Stamford.


The Serene Timeout
A day or two observing the five shoeshine posts in front of Grand Central Terminal reveals the following: the attraction is often less in the shine than in the process itself.
The shoeshine is a serene timeout.
There is a sense of social elevation.
Sitting up above the passing crowds, a customer feels plucked from the masses, superior in view and therefore in stature.
Customers stare out in regal detachment at the jostling scene on East 42d Street.


Correction
A picture caption on Oct. 9 about a house being built in Katonah, N.Y., confused the mortgage amount with the cost of the house.
As noted in the article, on adjustable-rate mortgages, the mortgage was for $450,000; the price was not made public.


Concession on 'Security Blanket'
Campaigning to create a tax district to finance the hiring of up to 500 private guards, proponents now say they would exempt the owners of rent-regulated apartments from having to pay.
The exemption, which could allay some opposition, was announced in the first public presentation of the plan, at a meeting last week of Community Board 8.
The proponents promised "a continuous blanket of security" with patrols triple the level provided by city police.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
Amsterdam Avenue will be closed between 86th and 96th Streets, from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Amsterdam Avenue Fall Festival.


A Day, and a Long One at That, in the Park


Autissier Hits Land
The French, who are apt to adulate ocean racers the way Americans revere football players, acquired a new maritime heroine today.
After setting a blistering pace across the Atlantic Ocean, the solo sailor Isabelle Autissier arrived in Cape Town, 1,200 miles ahead of her next closest rival in the BOC single-handed yacht race around the world.
"Barring a gear failure, she has such a commanding lead now that it seems impossible for anyone to catch her in the remaining 16,000 miles of the race," said Mark Schrader, the BOC race director, from Cape Town.


THE VIETNAM IN ME
Tim O'Brien's honest and moving story struck a personal chord in my heart.
As a young teen-ager in the 1960's, I remember all too clearly the horrors of the My Lai massacre.
As for O'Brien's guilt, obsession and subsequent troubled life, I urge him to have faith in the fact that he's been blessed with an ability to write clearly and eloquently about a subject almost too painful for Americans to bear, even 25 years after the fact.


Dinner in Florence
To the Editor: Just to thank you for "What's Doing in Florence" (March 27).


Wild-Card Candidate Shakes Up The Cuomo-Pataki Calculations
New York's gubernatorial campaign stormed today into western New York, a critical battleground where the political terrain has shifted because of the wild-card candidacy of B. Thomas Golisano, a favorite son with exceedingly deep pockets who appeals to this region's independent spirit.
While traveling in western New York today, both Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and his Republican opponent, State Senator George E. Pataki, made an issue of Mr.
Golisano's potential to split the anti-Cuomo vote in what remains a tight race.


Tech Notes; Tape Back-Up for Mobile PC's
TODAY'S portable computers are as powerful as desktop PC's and capable of carrying all the information a traveling executive needs to do business on the run.
But they present a challenge: How to make back-up copies of all that data in case the computer crashes while on the road.
With some laptop and notebook computers capable of storing more than 500 million bytes of data -- the equivalent of the entire Encyclopaedia Britannica -- there are no perfect solutions.


Fitness Feed, Olden Days And a Collector's Cookie
UPTOWN -- In an age when New Yorkers oil their bread and flee from cholesterol as if it were napalm, there was some rather alarming food at Nino's Italian restaurant, on the Upper East Side on Oct. 17, where a surprise 50th birthday party was in progress for Radu Teodorescu, fitness guru to the stars.
"I train intensively with Radu before my climbs," said the mountain climber Sandy Pittman as trays of fried shrimp and mozzarella sticks drifted overhead like clouds past a summit.
"I can't be in Everest condition all the time."


Councilwoman Comforts Immigrants
Last weekend's street celebrations of democracy's return to Haiti were over in Crown Heights.
The echoes of the public speeches about hope and justice had died out along Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn.
But in a first-floor office on New York Avenue in Crown Heights early last week, a modest, muted project in the realization of democracy carried on.
Caribbean immigrants came through the doors of City Councilwoman Una Clarke's district office at 648 New York Avenue.
Afraid or angry, curious or emboldened, they sought advice, help, citizenship papers and voting forms.


New Therapy Found a Help For Arthritis
An experimental new immune therapy for rheumatoid arthritis has shown significant promise in two small short-term studies being reported by researchers in England.
The results of the studies, sponsored by the maker of the experimental drug, were published yesterday in The Lancet, an international medical journal.
One study found impressive responses among 73 individuals with active rheumatoid arthritis for whom other therapies had failed and who received one intravenous injection of the experimental drug.
The second reported the drug could be used successfully against recurrences of the condition.


Monreale's Medieval Splendor
"IN a little more than one hour we reached the small town or village of Monte Reale, inhabited by a good-looking peasantry, whose prosperity is due to a flourishing manufactory of macaroni. The interior of their church, a very ancient one, was decorated with antique columns of granite."
L.
Simond, the young English gentleman who wrote these words while touring Sicily in 1818, must surely have suffered from one of the worst cases of cultural blinkers in the history of travel.
It is difficult to imagine how anyone, no matter how absorbed by the pursuit of classical antiquities, could enter the cathedral of Monreale and not remark upon the mosaics.
There are, after all, some 6,340 square meters of them: hundreds of thousands of glass tesserae, the elements of mosaics, that cover the walls; multicolored figures from the Old and New Testaments that flutter against a golden background in a circular dance culminating in the great Christ Pantocrator who rises, 60 feet tall, above the altar.
This church, founded by the Norman King William II in 1175, we now recognize to be unique in Western art.


Another Locked Door Facing N.H.L. Players
As the National Hockey League lockout begins its fourth week, some players are taking part-time jobs with European teams in Russia, Finland, Norway and Germany.
More than a dozen are there now and the number should increase even though the Swedish Elite League announced yesterday that it would not accept N.H.L. players during the current labor standoff unless they sign for the full season.
But other N.H.L. players, looking for work on this continent, have been rebuffed by teams in the International Hockey League, a minor league circuit with teams playing in large arenas and in big-league cities such as Chicago, Detroit, Denver, Atlanta, Houston and San Diego.


UP AND COMING: Camryn Manheim; An 'Amazon' Without Inhibitions
"FAT IS NOT A FOUR-letter word," says Camryn Manheim, when asked how she prefers to be described.
The 5-foot-10-inch and "way over 200 pounds" actress has landed her first movie role -- replete with a nude scene -- in Alan Parker's "Road to Wellville." The film, which opens on Friday, centers on the eccentric turn-of-the-century inventor Dr.
John Harvey Kellogg (Anthony Hopkins) and the rich and famous who stayed at his spa, the Battle Creek Sanatorium.
Ms.
Manheim plays Virginia Cranehill, the sexually knowing confidante who helps liberate the repressed Elinor Lightbody (Bridget Fonda).
The 33-year-old Ms.
Manheim was not always this confident.
At New York University, when she was studying acting, she gravitated toward older, character parts because of her weight; Virginia is someone her age.
Not until the playwright Tony Kushner ("Angels in America") directed her in the final play of her college career did she get to be the ingenue.


From Rundown to Upscale, High-Rises Change a Street
Years ago, upper York Avenue was full of gas stations and rundown buildings.
But since the early 80's, a proliferation of residential high-rises has pushed the boundaries of the posh Upper East Side north.
Now, with the completion of the Brittany -- a 36-story luxury rental on the site of the old A.S.P.C.A. building -- one real-estate company is redefining the northern edge of Yorkville.


Most South Africans Treat Domestics Well
To the Editor:
"Hard Life Is Getting Harder for South Africa's Domestics" (front page, Oct. 17) cannot be allowed to go unchallenged.
Certainly, there are many employers in South Africa who underpay and overwork their domestics, as in every country where supply of such employees exceeds demand.
But to depict this as the norm and supply absurd examples offends honest journalism.


Freud Terminable
EATING PAVLOVA By D. M. Thomas. 231 pp. New York:  Carroll &amp; Graf Publishers. $21.


Mary A. Cohalan, James P. Slattery Jr.
Mary Aisling Cohalan, the daughter of Mary Lou Cohalan and Justice Peter F. Cohalan, both of Sayville, L.I., was married yesterday to James Patrick Slattery Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Slattery of Oakdale, L.I.
Msgr.
Charles W. Swiger performed the ceremony at Our Lady of the Snow Church in Blue Point, L.I.
Mrs.
Slattery, 26, is a substitute teacher of English and environmental studies in the Milwaukee public schools.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her mother is the director of the Islip Art Museum in East Islip, L.I.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tues.
Existing-home sales, Sept., mils., ann. rate
3.9
3.85
Consumer confidence index, October
88.4
88.8
Wed.
Durable-goods orders, Sept., pct. chg.
6.1
0.9
Thurs.
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
326
320
Fri.
Gross domestic product, 3d qtr., pct. chg.
4.1
2.9
Budget balance, August, $ billions
-24.2
8.0
This Week's Developments
Tues.
Treasury to auction $17.25 billion in two-year notes
Wed.
Treasury to auction $11 billion in five-year notes
Thurs.
Bundesbank Council meeting


Sharon Moerdler, David A. Green
Sharon Michele Moerdler, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles G. Moerdler of Riverdale, the Bronx, is to be married today to Dr.
David Alan Green, the son of Gay Green of Rochester and Keith Green of Albuquerque, N.M.
Rabbi Israel Miller is to perform the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 27, is an associate at Baer, Marks &amp; Upham, a law firm in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College and from the Jewish Theological Seminary.
She received a law degree from Fordham University and a master's degree in public administration from Columbia University.
Her father is a senior partner in the law firm Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavin and is also the vice chairman and a commissioner of the New York State Insurance Fund.


You're Smart If You Know What Race You Are
AS the conversation about race and racism swells to a cacophony of accusations, defenses and rationalizations, one question seems not to have been addressed: what do we mean by race, anyhow?
At first blush the answer seems self-evident.
There are black people, and yellow people, and white people and red people, aren't there?
Everyone knows that.


Lost Soul II


The Executive Computer; Cutting the Data Umbilical Cord With Infrared Sensors
I.B.M. is hoping to make it as easy to send data from one computer to another as it is to change channels on your television set or open your garage door.
The company last week announced new Thinkpad 755 notebook computers with built-in infrared sensors similar to the ones used in TV remote controls and automatic garage door openers.
Now instead of climbing over your desk to attach a cable from the notebook to your office computer, or bending and stretching in other unnatural ways to reach the plug, owners of the new Thinkpad can point the notebook computer in the direction of the desktop PC and press a key or two.
Bingo -- a day's worth of work has been "squirted" into the desktop machine.


Corrections
A letter to the editor last Sunday about Fiorello H. La Guardia carried a misprinted signature.
It was from Morton B. Lawrence.


Manchurian Ghosts
BABA A Return to China Upon My Father's Shoulders.
By Belle Yang.
Illustrated by the author. 211 pp.
New York: Harcourt Brace &amp; Company.


It's Payback Time for Nets' Higgins
Sean Higgins was recently explaining how money had little to do with his return to the National Basketball Association when Sleepy Floyd stopped by to pay a debt.
"Here's some of it," Floyd said, pulling a $100 bill from his money clip and handing it to a smiling Higgins.


Cape Breton Hike
To the Editor: Alfred LeBlanc's "Across Cape Breton" (June 26) stated that to see the coast between Pollett Cover and Meat Cove one must arrange a boat tour.
However, we used the Meat Cove Campground -- breathtakingly situated on bluffs above the Gulf of St.
Lawrence beyond the hamlet of Capstick -- as a base while we hiked just several of the trails maintained by Kenneth McLellan.


Correction
A picture caption last Sunday about Yasir Arafat misidentified one of two men appearing at a ceremony with him and misstated the date.
The man at Mr.
Arafat's left was Harry Birnholz, deputy director for the United States Agency for International Development, not an aide to Mr.
Arafat.
The event was in July, not August.


A Good, Sharp 'Paddywack'
DANIEL MAGEE'S "PADDYWACK," WHICH is opening the new season at the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven, is an angry play, and so entertaining that not until the final scene do you get the full measure of the intensity of the playwright's feelings.
Though set in London and free of poeticizing, "Paddywack" is as Irish as anything by Brian Friel.
The scale of the play is small, but it's also as politically committed as Sean O'Casey's early work.
By saying that, I don't mean to place Mr.
Magee, who comes from the Roman Catholic working class in Belfast, in a league with either Mr.
Friel or O'Casey.
It's only to emphasize that on the basis of this one play, he seems to be a refreshingly aggressive new Irish voice.
No sad songs for him.
He speaks tough, efficient prose.
"Paddywack" is initially about bigotry, but it's also about politics.
At the play's center is Damien, a young Belfast construction worker who says he has come to London looking for work.
He's polite and wellspoken, but he's also terribly sure of himself.
For a member of the working class, he has a surprisingly large vocabulary, as well as the kind of ferocious wit that withers the opposition in any argument.


A Time Bomb in His Chest
RAISING LAZARUS By Robert Jon Pensack and Dwight Arnan Williams. 315 pp.
New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $22.95.


Amy Vroom Harr, James Peter Healy
Amy Vroom Harr, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Karl G. Harr Jr. of Chevy Chase, Md., was married yesterday to James Peter Healy, the son of Dorothy Healy and Judge James P. Healy, both of Tacoma, Wash.
The Rev.
Louise J. Lusignan performed the ceremony at St.
Columba's Episcopal Church in Washington.
The bride, 33, is a foreign currency trader at J. P. Morgan in London.
She graduated from Vassar College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father, who was a special assistant to President Dwight D. Eisenhower for security operations coordination, retired as the president of the Aerospace Industries Association in Washington.


Stunning Changes in Japan's Economy
JAPAN'S longest economic slump since the end of World War II is finally ending.
But that has brought little cheer at Sakawa Seisakujo, a 60-person company in Tokyo that makes guide rails for elevators.
Sakawa, like most Japanese companies, prides itself on the quality of its work.
Elevators in Japan rarely jiggle or creak.
But now, companies in other parts of Asia are learning to produce rails that are nearly as good but are priced 30 to 40 percent lower, prompting Japan's elevator manufacturers to start buying foreign-made rails.


BEST SELLERS: October 23, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work in their small Maine town.
2
2
8
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
3
1
3
TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching Hour" and "Lasher."
4
4
34
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
5
3
5
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
6
6
18
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
7
5
6
THE BODY FARM, by Patricia Cornwell. (Scribners, $23.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates the kidnapping and murder of a small North Carolina girl.
8
8
3
WILD HORSES, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) A film maker pursues the secret confided to him by a dying racing expert.
9
7
115
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
10
9
13
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's casual visit to a small town changes the lives of many of its inhabitants, as well as her own.
11
12
20
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
12
13
6
MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins, $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about aboriginal philosophy.
13
16
4
ONE TRUE THING, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) A woman who cared for her fatally ill mother is charged with killing her.
14
11
5
BROTHERS AND SISTERS, by Bebe Moore Campbell. (Putnam, $22.95.) The loyalties of a black woman are tested by colleagues' behavior in a Los Angeles bank.
15
10
8
A SON OF THE CIRCUS, by John Irving. (Random House, $25.) Returning to his native India, a Canadian physician encounters a murderer he once knew.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
6
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The former First Lady's life.
2
2
4
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales.
3
7
3
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and opinions.
4
10
2
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus.
5
3
7
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage.
6
4
2
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the country singer.
7
5
5
BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An illustrated history of the game.
8
6
4
ALL'S FAIR, by Mary Matalin and James Carville with Peter Knobler. (Random House and Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The 1992 Presidential campaign.
9
9
44
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories.
10
8
33
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
11
13
2
NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World War II.
12
12
13
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Addison-Wesley, $23.) Women whose mothers have died.
13
11
76
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
14
3
THE LAST BUS TO ALBUQUERQUE, by Lewis Grizzard.
Edited by Gerrie Ferris. (Longstreet, $20.) A collection of essays by the late syndicated humorist.
15
5
TRUE NORTH, by Jill Ker Conway. (Knopf, $23.) A memoir by a former president of Smith College.
16*
15
2
RUNNING FROM SAFETY, by Richard Bach. (Morrow, $23.) A middle-aged man's reflections on life.
17*
4
BETTER THAN SEX, by Hunter S. Thompson. (Random House, $23.) The 1992 Presidential campaign as seen by the gonzo journalist.
18*
9
THE KENNEDY WOMEN, by Laurence Leamer. (Villard, $27.50.) Five generations of a family.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
74
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
2
26
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
3
4
MAGIC EYE III, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
4
4
2
REAL MOMENTS, by Barbara De Angelis. (Delacorte, $21.95.) Ways to cope with life's problems.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 8, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE BELL CURVE: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray. (Free Press, $30.) The evidence the authors see indicates to them that society is layered in rough accordance with I.Q. and that I.Q. is largely heritable, findings they believe society needs to take note of.
THE FOLLOWING STORY, by Cees Nooteboom. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace, $14.95.) An insignificant man who has experienced transformation by imagination awaits his turn at death in this "Eurofable" by a Dutch novelist.
IN THE LAKE OF THE WOODS, by Tim O'Brien. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) This grim, telling novel deals with the incapacity to register reality of a politician whose disappearance from the record of the My Lai massacre precedes his vanishing from the earth.
NATURALIST, by Edward O. Wilson. (Shearwater/Island Press, $24.95.) A memoir by a distinguished biologist who has never lost his boyhood enchantment with nature, though he has suffered abuse for his sociobiological synthesis.
THE PHYSICS OF IMMORTALITY: Modern Cosmology, God and the Resurrection of the Dead, by Frank J. Tipler. (Doubleday, $24.95.) Life is eternal, says a mathematical physicist, given the nature of this universe; a 123-page mathematical appendix is offered for skeptics.
THE SCIENCE OF DESIRE: The Search for the Gay Gene and the Biology of Behavior, by Dean Hamer and Peter Copeland. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A readable, cautious account, by a scientist and a journalist, of an investigation into whether homosexuality is genetically determined.
SNOW FALLING ON CEDARS, by David Guterson. (Harcourt Brace, $21.95.) A handsomely constructed, densely packed first novel whose characters are those who suffered and those who profited from the internment of Japanese-Americans in World War II, called upon by a criminal trial to act decently later on.
STALIN AND THE BOMB: The Soviet Union and Atomic Energy, 1939-1956, by David Holloway. (Yale University, $30.) A superb history, showing how Stalin both helped and hindered his nuclear scientists, and telling more about the Soviet H-bomb project than is known about our own.
TAFT, by Ann Patchett. (Richard Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) This generous novel concerns abandonment, dislocation and the recovery of community in a Memphis bar whose owner is a surrogate parent to two displaced teen-agers.
WHAT I LIVED FOR, by Joyce Carol Oates. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $23.95.) Ms.
Oates shrewdly dissects the national myths of manhood and success in a novel whose easily confused hero understands less than the reader does of what passes through his own mind.
WHO WILL RUN THE FROG HOSPITAL? by Lorrie Moore. (Knopf, $20.) A sad, witty, disillusioned fairy tale whose heroine, approaching 40, recalls the illusion of limitless possibility she used to feel.


Glass On A Grand Scale
IN THE DARKENED LOBBY OF THE Brooklyn Museum, mammoth glass butterflies seem to cling to a wall like so many eerie insects from outer space.
The work, which is called "The Brooklyn Wall," comprises 32 brilliantly colored blown-glass forms and is the largest ever made by the Seattle artist Dale Chihuly.
Butterfly magic is a specialty of Mr.
Chihuly.
The museum's shimmering display of the red, orange, yellow, blue and green glass globs, which some people liken to anemones, covers a surface 20 feet high by 65 feet long.
Some of these undulating pieces, already giant size at four feet wide or more, seem bigger than they actually are, their reflections exploding in rainbow pinwheels in the dimmed hall where the exhibition is located.


Islam Bent Into Ideology: Vengeful Vision of Hope
THE carnage unleashed last week by a suicide bomber on a Tel Aviv bus, following by hours the murder of two more foreigners by Islamic militants in Algeria, were reminders, if any were needed, that the heady Middle East peace process and the end of the cold war have done little to stem the march of revolutionary Islam.
It is more than two decades since clerics began to mobilize the downtrodden Shiites of Lebanon, and it has been 15 years since the ayatollahs seized Iran.
Yet nowhere has the Islamic revolutionaries' promise -- of a true social revolution for the forgotten Muslim -- been achieved.


Erika K. Suresky, Andrew Targum
Erika Kim Suresky, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Suresky of Westport, Conn., was married there last evening to Andrew Scott Targum, the son of Dr.
Emanuel Targum and Judge Anne E. Targum of New York.
Rabbi Robert Orkand officiated at Rolling Hills Country Club.
Mrs.
Targum, 27, is the exhibit manager for the Palisades Institute for Research Services, a company in New York that arranges trade shows and conferences.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is a private investor and a consultant to the pharmaceuticals industry, in Wilton.


Inept Oilers Amaze Even Moon
Vikings quarterback Warren Moon knew things wouldn't be rosy for the Oilers once the team traded him to Minnesota this past April.
But even Moon, who played in Houston for 10 seasons, couldn't fathom the depths to which the Oilers offense would sink without him at the helm.
The Oilers are 1-5 and have scored just 87 points -- the third-fewest in the league behind Arizona (68) and Tampa Bay (80) -- and appear lost.
"I'm surprised it's as bad as it is," Moon said.
"Not trying to blow my own horn, but I felt they wouldn't do as well offensively without me.


More Suggestions For Serving Pears
A PEAR is a complicated fruit.
You can't eat it right off the tree like an apple.
If it is allowed to ripen fully before picked, the flesh will be gritty.
If it is harvested too early, the pear never becomes sweet or juicy.
Pears should be picked just before they are ripe, then left for several days at room temperature.
When they are ready, buy a good piece of Roquefort and a bottle of Sauternes and settle down for a treat.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 9 about Congressional campaigns misstated the position of the Republican-Conservative candidate in the 19th District, Andrew C. Hartzell Jr., on a section of the Federal crime law that banned many assault weapons.
Mr.
Hartzell said he supports the ban but would have voted against the law because of other provisions.


More Suggestions For Serving Pears
A PEAR is a complicated fruit.
You can't eat it right off the tree like an apple.
If it is allowed to ripen fully before picked, the flesh will be gritty.
If it is harvested too early, the pear never becomes sweet or juicy.
Pears should be picked just before they are ripe, then left for several days at room temperature.
When they are ready, buy a good piece of Roquefort and a bottle of Sauternes and settle down for a treat.


Job Performance Belies Disability Myths
DISPELLING myths is a good way to celebrate National Disability Employment Awareness Month.
At a recent breakfast reception, sponsored by Arrowwood Conference Centers, the job performance of those who received the 1994 Westchester Achievement Awards showed that given employment opportunities, people with disabilities are eager to become a valuable part of the work force.


STREET LIFE


The Stultification of Washington
ARROGANT CAPITAL Washington, Wall Street, and the Frustration of American Politics.
By Kevin Phillips. 231 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $22.95.


In Brooklyn, Sun, Sand . . . Siegfried?
HISTORICAL EXCAVATIONS CAN SOMETIMES be news in themselves, altering our understanding of the present.
Such is the case with Joseph Horowitz's fascinating new book, "Wagner Nights: An American History." One of its illustrations is a cover from a concert program of July 6, 1889.
"Brighton Beach" proclaims the heading, in letters ornamented with banners.
Underneath is a sketch of the 3,000-seat seaside music pavilion that was once a major attraction in Brooklyn.
There, for eight summers, Anton Seidl conducted members of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra in concerts that drew workers and children, wealthy sponsors and Coney Island tourists, with the promise of compositions by Beethoven, Liszt, Grieg, Mendelssohn, Dvorak and, most often, Wagner.
Attendance records were broken not by barbershop quartets but by concerts featuring works like Walther's Prize Song from "Die Meistersinger."
"All the social and intellectual factors of Brooklyn life are present," The Brooklyn Daily Eagle wrote of Seidl's concerts, "and the crowd there is unlike any gathered anywhere outside of Bayreuth." According to The Musical Courier, the audiences were quieter than those in Manhattan concert halls; during the concerts the nearby Coney Island beaches were deserted.
The concerts were sponsored by the Seidl Society, an organization of women who adored Wagner and were transported by the abilities of the conductor, who had studied with the master.
The concert program showed a woman gazing into space, hearing, no doubt, strains of Wagner to the accompaniment of breakers.


Carnival Air: It's Not the Clown of the Skies Anymore
AVIE COHEN, a resident of North Miami Beach who sells bakery equipment, was livid after his first two attempts to fly to New York on Carnival Air Lines.
"They had one flight a day, and both times the flight was delayed," he said, recalling the troubles Carnival had three years ago in its early days as a scheduled airline.


Who Won in the Korea Deal
THE Clinton Administration said last week that the agreement it signed with North Korea was about nuclear non-proliferation -- a bargain that made Asia and the 83,000 American troops based there safe from a hostile state with a bomb and a 40-year-old grudge.
Maybe so.
But critics are already saying it only pushed the most urgent non-proliferation issues five years or more down the road.
"It's a leap of faith," one State Department official conceded, a bet that when Kim Il Sung was tucked into a glass coffin in July, capitalist spirits rose from the grave -- and that the bargain will give North Korea time to accomplish a Vietnam-style revival, a Communist system with lots of Japanese television plants.


Nascar Planning To Slow Down
When Ernie Irvan's Ford Thunderbird veered into the wall at Michigan International Speedway on Aug. 20, the cause was a tire failure.
Although Goodyear, which made the tire, says it still does not know why the tire failed, Nascar, the sanctioning body that runs big-time stock car racing, is planning some major rules changes to slow the cars.
Kevin Triplett, a Nascar spokesman, said last week that the organization was considering four rule changes for the 1995 season to offset the increase in speeds that have occurred at most Winston Cup tracks this year, mostly as a result of the raging tire battle between Goodyear and Hoosier, a racing-tire company in Indiana.


Choose Your Outplacement Wisely
To the Editor:
As a founder of an outplacement firm, I appreciate the distress experienced by many participants in the job hunting process.
Having provided outplacement services for over 11 years, I understand that, regrettably, some individuals are disappointed with the transition services that have been engaged for them by their former employers.
I was disappointed by the unbalanced treatment of the subject.
The majority of our participants express satisfaction and appreciation for the outplacement assistance we provide.
Further evidence is that more than 90 percent of our alumni agree to be networking contacts for new clients, and many provide us with job leads.


The Editor's Name Is Familiar
FOR an entrepreneur trying to appeal to the technologically precocious and multimedia-minded members of Generation X, David Lauren is rather old-fashioned.
"I like a magazine that you can read," said Mr.
Lauren, 22, the editor in chief and publisher of Swing, a general-interest magazine for people in their 20's.
It will arrive on newsstands this week (and won't be available on CD-ROM or the Internet).


What's on Your Mind, Kid?
THE PHILOSOPHY OF CHILDHOOD By Gareth B. Matthews. 136 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.


West Texas Added To Vintage Train Run
D.R.C.
Rail Tours of Houston, which has been traversing the Copper Canyon in northern Mexico since early this year, has recently begun offering trips to west Texas, with a side trip by bus to Big Bend National Park.
The four-day tour -- aboard a restored South Orient Express train with Vista Dome and observation-parlor cars dating from the 1940's and 50's and given a Victorian look with wood paneling, etched-glass dividers and rich fabrics -- follows the original South Orient tracks from Fort Worth to Presidio, Tex.


Data Bank/October 23, 1994
Data Bank/October 23, 1994
Mfg. Inventory-Sales Ratio
Aug.
July
June
Current dollars
1.39
1.42
1.40
Merchandise Exports
In billions
$59.7
$56.3
$58.3
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$69.5
$67.5
$67.4
Housing Starts
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,461
1,439
1,358
Personal Income
Percent change
0.4
0.5
0.5
Weekly Jobless Claims
Oct. 14
Oct. 7
Sept. 30
In thousands
326
329
319
6-Month Treasury Bills
Oct. 21
Oct. 14
Oct. 7
Rate in percent
5.42
5.25
5.32
Gold
Friday A.M. London fix, per ounce
$390.80
$387.40
$391.00


Correction
The Sports of the Times column last Sunday, about female sportswriters, referred incorrectly to the Vietnamese Government's admission of American news correspondents.
Kristin Huckshorn of The San Jose Mercury News was not the first admitted; she was preceded by George Esper of The Associated Press.


Driving in France
To the Editor: Coincidentally, my wife and I were in much the same part of France in May as Susan Spano ("Roaming Through the Rugged Cevennes," July 31), but some distance to the west in the spectacular valleys of the Dordogne and Lot Rivers.
We also drove a small Peugeot, purchased rather than rented (for two weeks) from Peugeot itself.
There are many advantages of such an arrangement: One pays the rental fee before leaving, and this entitles one to a brand new car.
These "broken in" vehicles are later sold in Europe.
Peugeot's agent in the New York area is Auto France of Ramsey, N.J., (800) 572-9655.


Old Bathhouse to Come Alive
For nearly 30 years, Public Bath 7 in Park Slope has sat empty, its pool drained long ago and its neo-Renaissance facade a striking reminder of the early part of the century, when municipal public baths served the many without indoor plumbing.
But a businessman from Maine has decided that remodeling the building, which is on the corner of Fourth Avenue and President Street, would be cheaper than leasing office space in downtown Brooklyn.
He has made a down payment on the $350,000 site, where he will run his computer consulting business, rent offices and possibly open a restaurant.


Three Waves of Immigration
In 1980, the United States established a comprehensive policy on refugees, funding resettlement programs and accepting the United Nations' definition of refugees as persons leaving their countries on well-founded fears of persecution for racial, religious, political or other reasons.
Prior to the Refugee Act of 1980, refugees had been defined more narrowly as those fleeing Communist countries or the Middle East.


On Lust, Liaisons and Laws
IT'S the talk of Lisbon Falls, Me.
A 28-year-old teacher stands accused of having intercourse with three adolescents.
Because the age gap between the teacher and the teen-agers, who were 14 and 15 at the time, was more than 10 years, the teacher faces felony charges of sexual abuse of a minor.
A conviction could mean a five-year prison sentence.
But in this case, the teen-agers are boys and the fourth-grade teacher, Kelly Galligan, is a woman.
Does that change things?
Most laws that make such liaisons a crime make no reference to gender, although they are based on statutory rape laws that presumed the adult to be a man and the minor a girl.
But as Maine's law is being applied, it collides with society's ancient belief that, while such liaisons are seductions when the adolescents are female, they are coming-of-age rituals for boys.


Sherin Knowles, Charles Spofford
Sherin Whiting Knowles, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Knowles Jr. of Pittsburgh, was married yesterday to Charles McKown Spofford, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Nicholas Spofford of Bedford, N.Y.
The Rev.
James B. Simons performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Michael's of the Valley Church in Rector, Pa.
Mrs.
Spofford, 26, is the manager of W. M. Anderson Photographer, a photography shop in Concord, Mass.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the general partner in Loyalhanna Venture Fund in Pittsburgh.
Mr.
Spofford, 28, was until recently the operations manager for the World Cup events held in the corporate hospitality village at Foxboro Stadium in Foxboro, Mass.
His father is an investment manager at Ingalls &amp; Snyder, a New York investment firm.
The bridegroom's grandfather the late Charles M. Spofford was a deputy United States representative to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and a former vice chairman of Lincoln Center.


McAda Does It Again in Army's Victory
Ronnie McAda, the hero in Army's upset of Louisville a week ago, surpassed that performance today with an electrifying effort that led to another dramatic Cadet victory.
On a team that normally eschews the pass, McAda lifted Army to a 25-24 comeback victory over The Citadel when he hit on 5 of 7 passes for 83 yards to set up a 24-yard field goal by Kurt Heiss as time expired before a crowd of 33,430 at Michie Stadium.


Sound Bytes; The Tiger Of Software
JOHN P. IMLAY JR. may not have the name recognition of a Bill Gates or Phillipe Kahn, but in the software industry, he is a legend.
After joining Atlanta-based Management Science America Inc. as chairman in 1971, when it was a near-bankrupt start-up, he built it into one of the largest mainframe software vendors, with revenues of $258 million and 2,500 employees.
Mr.
Imlay, with marketing savvy and a quick wit, earned a reputation as a super salesman.
When he sold M.S.A. to Dun &amp; Bradstreet in 1989 for $333 million, he realized a personal profit of $53 million.
He is now chairman of Dun &amp; Bradstreet Software, the $550 million software arm of D.&amp; B., and part owner of the Atlanta Falcons football team.


Garth W. Bray and Kathryn H. Baxter
Kathryn Hall Baxter, the daughter of Mary Ann McAfee and James N. Baxter, both of New York, was married on Friday to Garth William Bray, a son of Vega and Dr.
Garth M. Bray of Montreal.
The Rev.
Dr.
Charles Colwell performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of St.
Barnabas in Irvington-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Ms.
Baxter, 28, is keeping her name.
She is a lawyer at the Legal Aid Society in Brooklyn.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University, and she and her husband received law degrees from Northeastern University.
Her father is the president of Global Investment Alliance, an investment company in New York.


Exhibit on Pocahontas And Her Legends
Many generations of schoolchildren have learned the story of Pocahontas, the young Powhatan Indian woman whose entreaties to her father saved Capt.
John Smith of the Jamestown settlement in Virginia from execution.
Next year is believed to be the 400th anniversary of the birth of Pocahontas.
Her story, and the legend that sprang from it, will be the subject of an exhibition scheduled to open tomorrow at the Virginia Historical Society in Richmond.
Using about 100 objects, including paintings, sculpture, prints, drawings, documents, photographs and artifacts, the exhibition considers the accuracy of the oft-told story and the images it has inspired.


Caroline R. Gelb, Todd McGovern
Caroline Rose Gelb, a daughter of Judith and Leslie Gelb of New York, is to be married today in New York to Todd Steven McGovern, a son of Constance and Dr.
John McGovern of Traverse City, Mich.
Judge Kimba Wood of the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York is to officiate at the Lotos Club.
The bride, 28, graduated from the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor.
She was until recently a city planner at the New York City Department of Sanitation.
Her father is the president of the Council on Foreign Relations in New York.


G.M. Head Quits Club After Black Is Barred
The president and chief executive of the General Motors Corporation has resigned from the Bloomfield Hills Country Club after a black vice president of G.M. was denied membership in the club, an exclusive bastion of the auto industry's top executives.
John F. Smith Jr., G.M.'s president, resigned from the club after the application of Roy S. Roberts, a black vice president and the general manager of the GMC Truck Division, was rejected, said a club member who would speak only anonymously.


A SENSE OF PLACE
Gov. Christine Todd Whitman, Governor's Mansion, Trenton, N.J.
Dear Governor:
CONGRATULATIONS on your exciting new campaign to promote tourism in the state!
Many residents are no doubt delighted that you have approved a $3.5 million new advertising campaign that will broadcast the glories of the Garden State, not only in neighboring commonwealths but also in Europe and (where else!) Canada, that inexhaustible fount of tourist visitors to our shores.
Unfortunately, your campaign has a serious fault that will keep it from being as effective as it could be.
A fault that can be easily remedied -- if you will accept a modest proposal.


Nancy D. Super, Michael M. Gaba
Dr.
Nancy Deborah Super, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey Super of New York, was married last evening to Michael Moss Gaba, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Gaba of Rockville Centre, L.I.
Rabbi Philip Hiat performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
Dr.
Gaba, 28, is a resident in obstetrics and gynecology at the medical center of George Washington University, from which she received her medical degree.
She graduated cum laude from Vassar College.
Her father is the director of internal auditing at Coltec Industries, an industrial holding company in New York.
Her mother, Susan Super, is a physical education teacher of children with special needs in the New York City public schools.


Rights Groups Report Abuses In Indonesia
Less than a month before President Clinton travels to Indonesia for a summit meeting with Asian leaders, human rights groups are warning of a deterioration in human rights there, including the recent banning of newspapers and magazines, stepped-up harassment of labor activists and new instances of torture by the military and the police.
Diplomats and human rights groups say Mr.
Clinton's impending visit may be part of the reason the Government of President Suharto is eager to silence critics during the meeting of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, which starts in November.


Elizabeth Schuler, David E. Warner
Elizabeth Platt Schuler, a daughter of Joan and C. Harold Schuler of Huntingdon Valley, Pa., was married yesterday to David E. Warner, a son of Helen and Earl L. Warner of Vineland, N.J.
The Rev.
Ruth L. Kirk performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church in Glenside, Pa.
Mrs.
Warner, 26, graduated from Susquehanna University and is a registered nurse at Abington (Pa.) Memorial Hospital.
Her father is the director of sales and marketing for the News Channel, a cable news station in West Chester, Pa.
Her mother teaches the fifth grade at the Meadowbrook (Pa.) School.


What Do Men Want? Perhaps, Says Restaurant, Private TV?
A new restaurant in TriBeCa has taken an unusual step in bathroom accouterments.
The American Renaissance Restaurant, at 260 West Broadway, has inset two 13-inch Mitsubishi television sets above the two black porcelain urinals in the men's bathroom.


Finding a Temporary Place to Call Home
IT can be a nightmare.
In early summer, Dr.
Arthur I. Pober, just named head of the video-game industry's ratings council, quickly had to find a temporary place to stay.
The lease on his old apartment had expired and the co-op he had recently bought and was renovating was not yet fit for human habitation.
So he took a room at a nearby hotel, not far from his office.
"I knew I was in trouble the moment I got in the elevator," Dr.
Pober said.
"The bellman looked at me and said: 'Why are you staying here? I wouldn't stay here.' "


HAROLD BLOOM: COLOSSUS AMONG CRITICS
As someone who has taught at several New York City campuses, I am pleased to report that Harold Bloom's "resentniks" -- that "rabblement" of Marxists, Feminists, French Structuralists and New Historicists who would supplant the Classics with special-interest ideological texts -- are in truth but a small, albeit vocal, minority of zealots ("Harold Bloom: Colossus Among Critics," by Adam Begley, Sept. 25).


State Becomes a Part of Celebrating Marconi's Achievements
NEW JERSEY is once again taking its turn on the world stage this year.
This time, along with Bologna, Italy, as academics, scientists, historians, corporate leaders and a small army of amateur radio operators home in on Guglielmo Marconi in this 100th anniversary of the inventor's initial experiments with electromagnetic waves and the 95th anniversary of the first practical demonstration, from this shore town to Manhattan, of wireless telegraphy in America.


Almost Sort of Counts: Rutgers Ties the Eagles
Rutgers came close today, close to a significant victory in the Big East against a ranked, favored opponent.
Such an achievement has eluded the Scarlet Knights since the founding of the conference in football in 1991.
The opponent today was Boston College, a two-touchdown favorite ranked No. 22 in the Associated Press (No. 23 by CNN/USA Today).
And the result, a 7-7 tie, displeased the Eagles and gave no special pleasure to Doug Graber, the coach of the Scarlet Knights.


A Long Battle To Recover Jewish Assets
Having made little headway with the previous Government, the president of the World Jewish Congress, Edgar Bronfman, met this week with Hungary's new leaders to negotiate the recovery of property seized from Jews by the Nazis and then taken over by the Communists.
Mr.
Bronfman said that Prime Minister Gyula Horn had reacted favorably but had also urged patience because of the Government's economic constraints.


Sharon Suss, Mark Moskowitz
Sharon Gail Suss, a daughter of Annabelle and Melvin Suss of Melville, L.I., is to be married there today to Mark David Moskowitz, the son of Barbara Moskowitz of Forest Hills, Queens, and the late Norman Moskowitz.
Rabbi Ian Jacknis is to officiate at the South Huntington Jewish Center.


A Shrimp Toast
When I was growing up in Columbus, Ohio, the epitome of elegant dining was the Jai Lai, a sprawling restaurant whose walls were made of exotic-fish tanks, about the size you find in municipal aquariums built to house beluga whales.
Each tank was meant to represent a different marine kingdom -- one full of darting, florescent bluefish, another, giant Asian goldfish.
Even during broad daylight, dining at the Jai Lai was like eating in some underwater cave.
Decor notwithstanding, the seafood served there was always frozen and breaded, except for the shrimp, which came plain with cocktail sauce, or sauteed in butter and garlic.
Since I was still at an age when I wanted nothing but to imitate my mother's elegance, I had what she did: shrimp cocktail followed by scampi.
While my father and brothers would hunker down with a prime rib, I sat perched in an overstuffed chair, cutting my shrimp into delicate morsels, and feeling the first stir of epicurean superiority.
Yes, I would sigh, agreeing with my mother, nothing was quite as delicious.


A Close Source (Wife) Says Reeves Is Staying
There have been rumors, quiet talk actually, that Dan Reeves has been sparring with Giants General Manager George Young.
That Reeves, wanting to do his own drafting as well as coaching, just as he did in Denver, might bolt from the team and take a job with the Carolina Panthers down South, where he was born and reared.
The rumors don't make much sense since the expansion team already has a general manager, but they are there nonetheless.
Pam Reeves has heard the rumors and has one thing to say: Don't believe them.
She knows.
She knows Dan Reeves better than anyone and in her first extensive interview since arriving in New York last year, she said her husband isn't going anywhere and will fulfill his five-year contract.


Death of an Artist Adds to Haiti's Toll
Louisaine St.
Fleurant, a 70-year-old artist whose paintings find form in a simple, concrete-floored bedroom here but hang in collections around the world, heard of her son's death shortly after his battered corpse was found.
As human rights workers added another name to a long list, computers in Port-au-Prince, Miami and New York ticked up the total, plus one.
He was one of 3,000 or one of 5,000.
The numbers are imprecise.
For three years, as the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide spoke at a distance of "genocide" and the "diaspora," the death toll mounted with every charred, knifed, shot or badly beaten body that was found.


REALLY BIG TRUCKS
"I think the more ridiculous I've got with the vehicles, the more they seem to like it. I mean, that's the American way, isn't it?" -- BOB CHANDLER, FATHER OF THE MONSTER TRUCK
WHO SAYS AMERICA DOESN'T make anything anymore?
Oh, sure, you can wring your hands over losing the automobile industry to Japan, Germany, Korea, Mexico and so on; and yes, steel manufacturing went off somewhere and didn't come back; and it is true we're not making computers, baseballs, VCR's, fax machines, toasters, athletic shoes and such.


Race for Connecticut Governor: Rowland on 'Media Madness'
CANDIDATE: John G. Rowland PRODUCER: Greg Stevens &amp; Company, Alexandria, Va.
SCRIPT: Mr.
The words, "John Rowland for Governor," appear at the bottom of the screen at the beginning and end of the ad.
ACCURACY: Mr.
Rowland was divorced earlier this year, and it is true that for the several months The Hartford Courant has tried to obtain documents regarding a police visit to the house of Mr.
Rowland's former wife, Deborah, in response to an argument between the two of them.
The Middlebury Police have released a brief summary of the incident, describing it as a "nonviolent" family dispute, but the town and both Rowlands have opposed providing any additional documents.
The Hartford Courant is challenging this position before the state's Freedom of Information Commission.
The newspaper's stories about the incident have not been featured prominently and have never speculated about or hinted at what may have occurred.
Its coverage has focused on the legal wrangling over whether the documents should be available to the public.
Similar stories have appeared in other newspapers and on television and radio news programs.
None of Mr.
Rowland's gubernatorial opponents have referred to the stories; it is unclear to whom he is referring when he mentions "political enemies." SCORECARD: Mr.
Rowland has been the front-runner in the race since January, but in recent weeks his lead has narrowed, and he appears to be losing support among Republican women.
This commercial is a bold attempt by Mr.
Rowland to defuse a growing problem.
Attacking the media has sometimes worked well for candidates; the risk is that the commercial will add fuel to the fire, sustaining the controversy and making more people aware of it.
JONATHAN RABINOVITZ


Son of Slain Civil Rights Leader Succeeds Mother as Head of Group
The youngest son of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., Dexter Scott King, has been named chairman and chief executive of the Martin Luther King Jr.
Center for Nonviolent Social Change, taking over from his mother, Coretta Scott King, who had run the center virtually since its founding in 1968.
In was the second time that Mr.
King, 33, had been elected to direct the nonprofit group, which seeks to preserve and promote his father's legacy.
Five years ago in an emotional ceremony at Ebenezer Baptist Church, where his father was pastor, Dexter King took over as president, only to resign four months later amid reports of managerial and personal differences with his mother and older members of the board of directors.


RETURNS OF THE DAY
Raine's article hit home. In fact, my husband suspected me of having written it.
The man who raped Raine could have been the same man who raped me in Boston on July 5, 1976, just one day after he'd gotten off parole for the same crime.
"You're never getting out of here" was the line he used on me, but after all his years of experience, I imagine his wording might have evolved to the more explicit "I'm going to kill you."


Reseeding Puts Scallops On Track
SCALLOPS are more abundant in Long Island waters this year than since the brown tides of the mid-1980's devastated the population, marine experts say.
And with the efforts of bay-management programs and other projects, next year should be even better, they add.
All 200 boats that participated in the opening day of scallop season this month returned with 10 bushels filled, said Christopher Smith, marine agent for the Cornell Cooperative Extension in Riverhead.
"The stocks are gradually building themselves back from the brown tides," he added.


Richard A. Cohen, Kimberly S. Smith
Kimberly Sue Smith, a daughter of Joyce and Larry Smith of Knoxville, Tenn., was married on Thursday in Crossville, Tenn., to Richard Alan Cohen, a son of Barbara and Arnold L. Cohen of North Woodmere, L.I.
Chief Justice Charles O'Brien of the Tennessee Supreme Court in Nashville officiated at the home of Jean and Leo Simpson, friends of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Cohen, 27, graduated from Miami University.
She is a Los Angeles-based actress known as Kim Carroway.
She is also the West Coast director and producer of the Miss Junior America Beauty Pageant, a national contest of which her parents are the owners.


Ecuador
To the Editor: On Aug. 6, we arrived in the Simon Bolivar International Airport in Guayaquil, Ecuador, on a flight from New York.
We had intended to spend a few days in Guayaquil with family and friends before heading for the Galapagos Islands for vacation.
After Customs, a taxi driver offered to take us to our destination.
He drove me, my husband, my aunt, my 12-year-old nephew and two friends who had come to the airport to greet us in his old pickup truck..


Eileen F. Ruston, Michael Meyers
Eileen Fran Ruston, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Henry Ruston of Brooklyn, is to be married today to Michael Alan Meyers, the son of Myra McKenna of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and Joseph G. Meyers of Feasterville, Pa.
Rabbi Fred Hyman is to perform the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
The bride, 28, is an accounts manager in New York at QMS Inc., a computer-printer manufacturer.
She graduated from Emory University.
Her father is a professor of computer science at the Polytechnic University of New York, and her mother is an adjunct lecturer in mathematics at Kingsborough Community College, both in Brooklyn.


G.O.P. IS EXPECTING TO MAKE BIG GAINS IN GOVERNOR RACES
Led by three aggressive, conservative newcomers, Republicans appear poised for significant gains in races for governor, with candidates ahead or in tight races in the nation's eight biggest and most politically important states.
The Democratic Governors in three of the states are slightly behind or dead even in most polls, facing three inexperienced challengers.
In New York, State Senator George Pataki is giving Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo the race of his career, while President George Bush's eldest son, George W., seeks to unseat Gov.
Ann W. Richards in Texas.
Another Bush son, Jeb, is leading Gov.
Lawton Chiles in Florida.  [ Page 18. ]


John and Woody and Mary-Louise and Mia
THE EYEBROWS HOP, WRITHE, point at each other like toy swords.
The hands fly out to the camera, bounce up and down, flap, nestle together.
There is the pleading look, the cringing look, the fawning look, the meek, inoffensive, attentive look.
The stammer, the broken phrase, the mumbled aside.
The flashing glasses.
The Brooklyn whine.
Not since Groucho Marx has a screen persona invited mimicry like Woody Allen's.
All of which was sure to be terrible news for whoever got the "Woody Allen role" in the director's new period comedy, "Bullets Over Broadway." The Woody Allen character in the film is David Shayne (John Cusack, as it turned out), a playwright of vaulting ambition but limited talent.
Given a chance to direct his new play on Broadway David finds that one actress's bodyguard, played by Chazz Palminteri, is a far more gifted playwright than he.


Whither the Universe? Sideways!
VOYAGE TO THE GREAT ATTRACTOR Exploring Intergalactic Space.
By Alan Dressler.
Illustrated. 355 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


Caroline Jansing, Neal Perry Vohr
Caroline Curry Jansing, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Curry Jansing of Hobe Sound, Fla., was married there yesterday to Neal Perry Vohr, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Vohr of Schenectady, N.Y.
The Rev.
Seymour St.
John officiated at the Christ Memorial Chapel.
The bride is a kindergarten teacher at the Green Vale School in Glen Head, L.I.
She graduated from Lake Forest College.
Her father retired as the chairman of the Independent Election Corporation of America, proxy solicitors in Lake Success, L.I.


Wall Street; Paine Webber: Beautification Set
YOU don't need to be a brain surgeon to figure out that it hasn't been much fun to be a stock broker at Kidder, Peabody in recent months.
As Kidder became a fixture in the bad-news headlines for its bond scandal this year, its brokers faced increasing embarrassment with customers who questioned just what sort of joint they were doing business with.
Now, with the proposed marriage of Kidder and Paine Webber, Kidder brokers get another beauty on their plate: the lineup of "proprietary" Paine Webber mutual funds that they'll be expected to peddle.
If mutual funds could have a bad hair day, Paine Webber by now would be in the waiting room for a complete beauty makeover.


Ilene B. Feldman, Bryan Steinberg
Ilene Beth Feldman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry Feldman of Baldwin, L.I., is to be married today to Dr.
Bryan Martin Steinberg, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jorge Steinberg of Forest Hills, Queens.
Rabbi Arnold Marans is to perform the ceremony at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
The bride, 26, is the coordinator of associate programs at Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn, a law firm in New York.
She is also a certified public accountant.
She graduated from the State University at Albany.
Her father is the director of hearing-education services for the New York City Board of Education.
Her mother, Joan Feldman, is a teacher of language and hearing-impaired children at Public School 207 in Howard Beach, Queens.


Despotism Revisited
To the Editor:
Gino A. Soave contends that Edith Mirante's comments on Myanmar, formerly Burma (Viewpoints, Aug. 28), are "culturally biased." Unlike Ms.
Mirante, Mr.
Soave does not quote any Burmese and omits mentioning Myanmar's elected representatives and their repeated calls for sanctions against Myanmar's dictatorship, the State Law and Order Restoration Council.


So, When Will Investors Try Out?
They came from 5 states, 322 of them, semipro players, former college stars, and even two 14-year-olds from nearby Hudson Catholic High School.
They gathered at Kean College today to try out for a professional soccer league that was meant as the legacy of the World Cup but right now is still an idea whose time has yet to come.
Today's tryout was conducted by Major League Soccer, the first of 16 it has planned to stock teams for the new enterprise that was supposed to be in place shortly after the World Cup ended in July.
Despite promising "major announcements" several times in the last several months, the league, scheduled to start in April, is still in the business-plan stage.


Learning Just How Little Is Known About The Brain
SUPPOSE, in a science-fiction fantasy, that the people on earth wanted to teleport one of their kind to a distant world.
The most efficient way, it seems, would be to transmit the genetic code -- the compact sequences of instructions for generating kidneys, lungs, a heart, a liver, a pancreas, muscles, bones, and so forth, and assembling them into a woman or a man.
Where this plan would fail utterly is with the overwhelmingly intricate, constantly changing organ called the brain.


Having Some Fun With the Barbara Stanwyck Role
ALTHOUGH Linda Fiorentino has appeared in 14 films in the past 10 years, her name is only vaguely recognizable.
After receiving acclaim for her feisty scene-stealing roles as a downtown artist in Martin Scorsese's "After Hours" (1985) and the wife of an art collector in 1920's Paris in Alan Rudolph's "Moderns" (1988), Ms.
Fiorentino virtually dropped from view.
With the director John Dahl's B-movie noir "The Last Seduction," however, the 34-year-old Ms.
Fiorentino is back.
Already released in Europe, the film opens in New York this week.
In a role that she acknowledges "Barbara Stanwyck would have gotten if she were alive," the petite and very slender Ms.
Fiorentino plays Bridget, a sleek seductress who, like the femmes fatales of Stanwyck's day, will stop at nothing to get her way.
Coldhearted enough to double-cross her husband (Bill Pullman) after she persuades him to pull off a drug deal, Bridget heads to an upstate New York town where she involves a gullible hick (Peter Berg) in a murderous scheme.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
AROUND TOWN Art Breaks Out in Public In Art Fund's Fall Display
Did you ever see a new sculpture or other piece of art pop up in your neighborhood and not know where it came from?
Chances are that it is part of a Public Art Fund project, which tries "to incorporate current art work into our daily lives," said James M. Clark, its executive director.


Port-au-Prince, the Liberation Gallery
THE return of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide to Haiti on Oct. 15 unleashed not only the pent-up political energy of his people but also their remarkable artistic ingenuity, held in check by three years of brutal military rule.
In the days leading up to the return of the President, his supporters embarked on an explosion of expression to welcome and cheer his arrival, suddenly transforming a drab and dirty capital into a giant canvas for their joy.
In their eagerness to convey that exhilaration and leave a memorial to an extraordinary moment, Haitians seemed able to take advantage of every square inch of space around them.
Some whitewashed the walls that had been covered with anti-Aristide or anti-American graffiti and painted them over with exuberant murals.
Others did the same on the surfaces of streets, setting up roadblocks to ask for contributions from passers-by.
Barren patches of dirt beside the roads blossomed as the President's admirers arranged pebbles into messages of thanks and hope.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
POLITICS  BETTER THAN SEX  Confessions of a Political Junkie.
Gonzo Papers Volume 4.
By Hunter S. Thompson.
Random House, $23.


The Political Scion vs. the Veteran Politician
"It's not working," Jeb Bush said one afternoon this week, as he cruised down I-75 in the motor home with the bedroom in the back and the work space in the front that he uses to tour Florida in his campaign for governor.
The "it" on Mr.
Bush's mind toward the end of a campaign in which he stands an excellent chance of defeating Gov.
Lawton Chiles is the state's government and society in general all wrapped into one.
That is why Floridians are so unhappy, he explained.
"I don't think people have sorted out why it's not working," he said, "but they know it's not working."


Unaccounted For Is Beaten
Serious Spender beat Unaccounted For, the 2-5 favorite, by a head in the Discovery Handicap yesterday at Aqueduct.
Malmo was seven lengths back, and Gifted Son completed the four-horse field.
The winner, owned by John Caputo and trained by Dominick Schettino, ran the mile and a sixteenth under Jorge Chavez in a slow 1:511/5 and returned $12.20 for every $2 bet in the belief that he could upset Unaccounted For, who is trained by Scotty Schulhofer and was ridden by Jose Santos.


Double Duty


Madonna's Return To Innocence
ON THE UPPER FLOOR OF Madonna's New York apartment is a hallway she jokingly calls the "boxing hall of fame." Its walls hold framed black-and-white photographs of fighters: Joe Louis, Sugar Ray Robinson and more than one Muhammad Ali.
Madonna proudly points out that the largest Ali photo is autographed; it reads "Madonna -- We are the greatest!"
"I love boxing," the singer says, surveying the sweaty torsos along the walls.
Is it the skill, the strength, a sense of kinship with fellow arena performers?
She turns and fixes her visitor with a level gaze.
"I love the brutality," she says.


Wall Street; A Bleak Year for Apparel Makers Like Van Heusen
IT'S been a bad year for owners of Phillips-Van Heusen, the maker of shirts and shoes sold under such names as Van Heusen, Bass and Geoffrey Beene.
Last week the pain grew, as the company said it had been forced to cut prices to sell shirts.
It said the strategy was succeeding in moving merchandise but added, "profits will be negatively impacted." The stock plunged 23 percent to $14.50, leaving it 63 percent below the peak of $39 reached in March, when optimism was high.
Phillips-Van Heusen is not the only company to find it difficult to get the desired price for clothing.
The consumer price index for apparel and upkeep is now lower than it was a year earlier -- something that had never happened until 1994.


Air Charter Inspections Need Streamlining, Not Weakening
To the Editor:
I read with surprise your Oct. 16 front-page article on the tragic crash of a South Dakota charter aircraft on a snowy day in North Dakota last February, which took the lives of three Indian Health Service doctors and the pilot.


CRIME
"Intrigue! Threats! Danger!" An old Mafia don sends up that cheer in MENACED ASSASSIN (Mysterious Press/Warner, $19.95).
"These were what kept a man young, made life worth living!" You said it.
And let's hear it for Cheap Thrills!
Nasty Guys!
Filthy Talk!
This is what keeps a reader awake, makes Joe Gores's gutsy novel worth reading.
It takes some nerve to face off a nerdy paleo anthropologist and a maniacal killer in the same story, but Mr.
Gores has the nerve -- and the stylistic verve -- to pull it off.
His inventive narrative, which combines elements of cop drama, mob caper and suspense thriller, takes its theme from a mesmerizing lecture on the innate brutality of men and apes, delivered by a scientist whose wife was murdered and who knows too much about mob business for his own good.
The tension comes from the efforts of Dante Stagnaro, the head of the San Francisco Police Department's Organized Crime Task Force, to protect the scientist from a brilliant hit man who calls himself Raptor.


Greek Tours
To the Editor: As a follow-up to the listing on "Cultural Tours of Greece" in your Q &amp; A column of July 31, your readers may be be interested to know about my company's 19-day tour to Cyprus, Santorini and Crete next May and June.
This tour, to be led by Dr.
Robert Stieglitz, professor of archeology at Rutgers University, will explore the historical and cultural achievements of the maritime civilization that linked ancient Greek and Roman cultures with the East.


Behind U.S. Shield, Aristide Copes With a Stripped Nation
The crowds outside the palace gates have thinned.
Now, the lines inside are long.
Three years after President Jean-Bertrand Aristide became a prisoner of exile and a week after his triumphant homecoming, he is struggling to repair a Government so gutted and abused that on his first night back he took his bath in the National Palace with a bucket and a cup.
By Wednesday, the lack of running water made bathrooms so foul that a Cabinet Minister said he had to roll up his pants to keep from wrecking a good suit.
Carpets are dirty, walls are scuffed and the temperature in some rooms soars past 90 since the air conditioning does not work.


The Dollar Is Low, Despised, And a Good Buy
INTEREST rates are up, and the dollar is down.
That is not the way it is supposed to be, at least in terms of traditional economic analysis.
Indeed, the prescribed method for defending a currency is usually to raise market interest rates in order to draw in capital from abroad.
Yet that is what happened, and the prevailing wisdom is that it will keep happening.
Market sentiment is decidedly bearish on both bonds and the buck.


Dressed to Spin
HIGH fashion is hitting the ice.
When "Angels on Ice," a show benefiting the Gay Men's Health Crisis, takes to the ice tomorrow night at Madison Square Garden, gone will be glitzy neon-colored sequined costumes.
Instead, there will be an American fashion show: a halter of angora, a bustier of black velvet, coordinated outfits for a skating pair featuring ombre shading from vivid blues to greens.


Evolution of Lay Judges: From Kitchens to Courts
For almost six decades Judge Laurence Hancock has been the law in this Dutchess County town, and he has come to demand an upright courtroom style.
He tolerates no shabby clothes, no mumbling and, most of all, no leaning.
"No one leans on the bench except in a cartoon," the judge warned a startled defendant in traffic court recently.
"And this is no cartoon."


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
SONO CENTER STAGE
The attractions of South Norwalk will be on display next weekend beginning with a preview party on Friday evening from 6 to 9 P.M. at the Lockwood-Mathews Mansion, 295 East Avenue.
Reconstructed from a waterfront slum, Washington Street and the adjoining area have become an enclave of art galleries, restaurants and boutiques, enhanced by the Maritime Center around the corner on Water Street, a new railroad station two blocks away, and the restoration of the Lockwood-Mathews Mansion.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Rwandans Again Live in Fear of the Knock at the Door
When the Hutu militias began killing Tutsi in April, Ladislas Benimana, a Hutu, harbored Tutsi in his house, his wife and neighbors recalled.
After several weeks, when the militia started raping women, his wife, Catherine Mujawamariya, a secondary school teacher, fled Kigali with their own daughters and several Tutsi women and children they were protecting.


CBS Clarifies Chinese Spy Report After Protest
After months of protests from Asian-Americans over a CBS News report about Chinese spies in the United States, the network broadcast an unusual "clarification" on its Friday evening newscast.
"It was not our intention," said Connie Chung, co-anchor of the CBS Evening News, "to leave the impression that there were more than a small number of such individuals among the many tens of thousands of legitimate Chinese students, visitors and immigrants who come to the United States every year. If we left an incorrect impression, we regret it."


BENEFITS
Preserving Jewish Music  TODAY -- The American Society for Jewish Music, an organization that seeks to preserve Jewish musical traditions and sponsors performances of new works, will hold a concert featuring four cantors from the United States and Canada, at the Park Avenue Synagogue, 50 East 87th Street.
A reception will follow the 7 P.M. performance.
Tickets, $100, or $12 for the concert alone, from (212) 874-4456, or at the door.
Tully Collection Preview  MONDAY -- A preview of items from the Alice Tully collection to be auctioned by Christie's will benefit the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center.
A 6 P.M. cocktail reception at Christie's, 502 Park Avenue (59th Street), will be followed by dinner and a concert by the chamber music society.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 875-5782.
For the Whitney Museum  MONDAY -- The Whitney Museum of American Art is holding a dinner-dance at the museum.
The evening begins with cocktails at 7 P.M.
Black tie for men and, in the style of the late Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney, evening pants for women.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 570-3672.
Honoring Mrs.
Cuomo  MONDAY -- Matilda Raffa Cuomo is to be honored at a dinner-dance for the Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies.
The black-tie event at the Waldorf-Astoria begins wih cocktails at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 777-4800, extension 305.
For the Royal Academy Trust  MONDAY -- A dinner-dance in the Rainbow Room at Rockefeller Center will honor the architect I. M. Pei.
The evening, which begins with cocktails at 7:30 P.M., will benefit the American associates of the Royal Academy of Arts, in London.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 980-8404.
Meet the News Anchors  MONDAY -- The League for the Hard of Hearing will hold a dinner in 32 Manhattan chefs will prepare special dishes, and local television news personalities -- including Matt Lauer from WNBC, Jack Cafferty of WPIX and Bill Beutel of WABC -- will serve them.
Jim Ryan of WNYW will be the host and Donna Hanover Giuliani is to speak.
From 6:30 to 9:30 P.M. at the Chemical Bank Dining Room, 270 Park Avenue (48th Street).
Tickets, $300, by telephone from (212) 741-3144, or by teletype for the deaf (212) 255-1932.
For the Boys and Girls Clubs  MONDAY -- A dinner-dance at the Waldorf-Astoria will benefit the Boys and Girls Clubs of America.
The evening starts with a cocktail party at 6:30 P.M.
Gary C. Wendt, the president of General Electric Capital Corporation, will be honored.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 351-5480.
University Settlement Dinner  MONDAY -- Charles D. Peebler Jr., the chief executive of Bozell Worldwide, the advertising agency, will be honored at a dinner held at the New York Hilton to benefit the University Settlement Society of New York, the nation's oldest settlment house.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 674-9120, extension 158.  'Angels on Ice'  MONDAY -- Russian Olympic gold medalists Aleksei Urmanov and the pair skaters Oksana Gritschuk and Yevgeny Platov will be among those performing at Madison Square Garden at an ice show organized by Gay Men's Health Crisis.
Tickets to the 7 P.M. performance, from $35 to $100, are available from the Garden box office or from Ticketmaster: (212) 307-7171.
Evening for Songwriters  MONDAY -- The cabaret singer Andrea Marcovicci will be the host at an evening of song with Tovah Feldshuh, Portia Nelson and others in a fund-raiser for the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center's cabaret symposium for developing young songwriters.
The event begins wth a buffet supper at 7 P.M. at the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, followed by the 8:30 P.M. show and a dessert reception.
Tickets, $150, or $75 for the concert and dessert reception alone, from (212) 244-3005.
Honoring Emilie Schindler  MONDAY -- Emilie Schindler, the widow of Oskar Schindler, will be honored at the Plaza in a program with Dr.
Frank Field of WCBS-TV and with Rena and Louis Fagen, who were saved from the Nazis by the famous Schindler list.
The dinner-dance begins with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
The evening will benefit Shenkar College of Fashion and Textile Technology in Ramat Gan, Israel.
Dietary laws observed.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 947-1597.
Foundling Hospital Dinner  TUESDAY -- The New York Founding Hospital, celebrating its 125th year as a social service agency, is having a dinner-dance at the Waldorf-Astoria.
It begins with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Michael Feinstein, the pianist and singer, and Vince Giordano and the Nighthawks are to perform.
Former Governor Hugh L. Carey of New York and William J. Flynn, the chairman of the Mutual of America insurance company, are honorees.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 886-4043 Dance Theater of Harlem  TUESDAY -- Dance Theater of Harlem will honor Edgar Bronfman Jr., the president and chief executive of Joseph E. Seagram and Sons, at a black-tie dinner at the Manhattan Center Ballroom, 311 West 34th Street.
Students at the dance theater will perform, as will a rock band, the Stingers.
Tickets, $250, (212) 690-2800.
For Casita Maria's 60th  TUESDAY -- Casita Maria, a Hispanic settlement house in the Bronx, will celebrate its 60th anniversary with a black-tie dinner-dance at the Plaza.
The entertainer Rita Moreno is among those being honored.
Cocktails at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $500, (212) 807-7535.
Caleb Carr at St.
Luke's School  TUESDAY -- The novelist Caleb Carr will speak at the first of a series of talks by notable people.
The event, from 7:30 to 9 P.M. at St.
Luke's School, 487 Hudson Street (near Grove Street), includes a book signing and reception with the author.
Future evenings will present Tony Kushner, Leslie Stahl and Gloria Steinem.
Tickets, $30, or $85 for the series, from (212) 924-5960.
A Halloween Skating Benefit  TUESDAY -- The Ice Theater of New York is holding its annual Halloween benefit in the American Festival Cafe at Rockefeller Center and, of course, on the skating rink.
Dinner will be served following an open skating session for guests that begins at 6:30 P.M.
The Ice Theater troupe will perform at 8 P.M.
Tickets, $150, (212) 239-4320.
Designers Aiding the Homeless  WEDNESDAY -- The New York chapter of the American Society of Interior Designers will have a buffet dinner and dance to aid the Partnership for the Homeless.
A cocktail party, 7:30 to 9 P.M., will be followed by dinner and dancing, all in the penthouse atop the Takashimaya, department store, 693 Fifth Avenue (54th Street).
Tickets, $250, or $75 for the cocktail party only, from (212) 685-3420, extension 912.
Preserving the Hudson  WEDNESDAY -- Alec Baldwin, the actor, and Robert F. Kennedy Jr., the chief staff lawyer for the Hudson River-Keeper Fund, will be the hosts of an evening to benefit the organization, which is dedicated to protecting the Hudson River.
The 8 P.M. event at the Architects and Designers Building, 150 East 58th Street, will include a buffet assembled by Larry Forgione and other chefs from the New York region.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 825-1900.
For the Downtown Hospital  WEDNESDAY -- A dinner-dance for New York Downtown Hospital begins with cocktails at 6 P.M. in the lobby of the American Express Building, at Three World Financial Center (200 Vesey Street, at West Street).
Dinner and dancing will follow in the Winter Garden.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 444-1936.
A Fresh-Air Frolic  WEDNESDAY -- The Seventh Regiment Armory, on Park Avenue and 67th Street, will be transformed into a Moroccan marketplace for an auction and dinner-dance to benefit the Fresh Air Fund.
The event begins at 6:30 with cocktails and a silent auction that includes jewelry, tickets to sports events and backstage visits to "Saturday Night Live" and "NBC Nightly News." A live auction at 9 P.M. will include vacation trips to Prague and San Francisco and a tour of the set of "20/20" conducted by Barbara Walters.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 221-0900.
Gilda's Club at the Supper Club  WEDNESDAY -- Gilda's Club, a counseling organization (named in honor of the late Gilda Radner) for families and children with cancer, and the American Cancer Society will benefit from a party from 7 to 11 P.M. at the Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street.
Cocktails and a buffet dinner will be followed by a raffle and a performance by the Main Ingredient.
Tickets, $85, from (718) 263-2224, or at the door.
For Children and Families  WEDNESDAY -- The Center for Children and Families will hold its 75th anniversary celebration at the Puck Building, 293 Lafayette Street (at Houston Street).
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail party will be followed by dinner and dancing to the music of Illinois Jaquet and His Big Band.
Dr.
Margaret A. Hamburg, the New York City Commissioner of Health, will be among those honored.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 226-3536. 'Life and Breath' Awards  THURSDAY -- The American Lung Association will hold an awards dinner at the Marriott Marquis, beginning with cocktails at 6 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 889-3370.
Honoring Ireland's President  THURSDAY -- Mary Robinson, the President of Ireland, will be among the honorees at a dinner-dance at the Pierre to mark the 75th anniversary of the Institute of International Education.
The program begins with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 722-6226.
For Movie History  THURSDAY -- The American Museum of the Moving Image is holding a black-tie dinner at the St.
Regis that will honor Frank J. Biondi Jr., the chief executive of Viacom Inc., and Howard Stringer, the president of the CBS Broadcast Group.
A 7 P.M. cocktail party will begin the evening.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 245-6570.
Opening the Indian Museum  THURSDAY -- A celebration of the opening of the National Museum of the American Indian, in lower Manhattan, begins at 5:30 P.M. with cocktails and a museum preview at the United States Custom House, 1 Bowling Green (at Battery Park).
A dinner at which Tom Brokaw of NBC News will be the master of ceremonies will follow at 7:30 P.M. in a tent in Battery Park.
The museum opens to the public on Oct. 30.
Tickets, $600, from (212) 512-5060.
For School Volunteers  THURSDAY -- The New York City School Volunteer Program will benefit from an 8 P.M. performance of "Show Boat" at the Gershwin Theater.
A 6 P.M. buffet at the Equitable Center, 787 Seventh Avenue (51st Street), will precede the show.
Tickets, $375, from (212) 213-3370.
A Costume Party  THURSDAY -- A masquerade party at the Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street, is to raise money for the Audrey Palmer Hawks Memorial Scholarship Fund, which provides college scholarships to students from the West Indies.
There will be a cocktail party at 7 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 682-0435.
Caribbean Evening for CASA  THURSDAY -- A dance party at Nell's, 246 West 14th Street, will raise money for Court Appointed Special Advocates, known as CASA, which intervenes on behalf of children in Manhattan's foster-care system.
There will be hors d'oeuvres and a cash bar.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 334-4010 or at the door.
The Night Kitchen  FRIDAY -- A benefit performance of "It's Alive!" starts at 7:30 P.M. at the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, 199 Chambers Street (Washington Street).
It will benefit the work of Maurice Sendak's Night Kitchen, a theater for children.
A cocktail reception will follow.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 207-7447.
A Brookdale Hospital Ball  SATURDAY -- The Brookdale Hospital Medical Center in Brooklyn will hold its annual ball at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in Manhattan.
A 7 P.M. cocktail party will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $300, from (718) 240-5251.
For Rwanda Relief  SATURDAY -- The New York Metropolitan Committee for Unicef will have a Halloween party for children and adults, from 1 to 3 P.M. at the National Arts Club, 15 Gramercy Park South.
The event will benefit relief efforts in Rwanda.
There will be clowns, jugglers and magicians, and a buffet luncheon will be served.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 759-0760.
Over the Rainbow Ball  NEXT SUNDAY -- The New York Chapter of Hadassah will hold its "Over the Rainbow Ball" at the Rainbow Room in Rockefeller Center.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception will be followed by dinner and dancing to the Lester Lanin Orchestra.
Black tie.
Tickets, $400, from (212) 875-1063.


THE VIETNAM IN ME
Tim O'Brien's story evoked my most intense reaction to any firsthand account of the Vietnam War ("The Vietnam in Me," Oct. 2).
I was spellbound, shamed and saddened by what I read, especially the descriptions of our soldiers shooting babies, young children and adults in anonymous, random groups.
How much can we blame "confusion of orders" for causing horrifying tragedy both to innocent Vietnamese and innocent Americans?
CARLYN PARKER New York


On a Sunny Day, a Portable Rainbow


Producers Sing A Familiar Tune
To the Editor:


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Bikers and Bacon
SUSAN OSTRANDER chose to have roast loin of pork for dinner last Sunday.
Big mistake.
Not the pork. (Although fat-gram watchers may take issue.) The mistake was in waiting until after church to shop at the Community Meat Market on Terry Road in Smithtown.
"What's going on here?" Mrs.
Ostrander said as hundreds of motorcycles encircled her and the market.


City News Briefs; Doctor Gives Birth After Serious Injury
A physician who was nine months pregnant was hospitalized with serious head injuries after she was struck on Friday by an unlicensed van driver, officials said.
Dr.
Jie Zhang, who works in the maternity ward at New York Hospital, gave birth to a boy by Caesarean section shortly after the accident at 1:50 P.M. in front of the hospital at York Avenue and 69th Street, said Sgt.
Joseph Gallagher, a spokesman for the Police Department.


Beth D. Landau, Marc S. Roth
Beth Denise Landau, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Landau of New York, was married last night to Marc Steven Roth, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Roth of Rye Brook, N.Y.
Rabbi Norton Shargel officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Roth is an associate at Bernstein &amp; Wasserman, a New York law firm.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father is a consultant at the Marketlink Group, marketing consultants in New York.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $810,000
317 West 18th Street  2-family, landmarked, 4-story brick town house with garden; 1 bedroom, 2 1/2 baths, finished basement in owner's duplex; 3 bedrooms, 3 baths in upper duplex; eat-in kitchen, 4 fireplaces in each; taxes $12,000, listed at $895,000, 52 weeks on market (Broker: Douglas Elliman)


Corrections
An article last Sunday about New York's opera world misidentified Harvey Milk.
Mr.
Milk, the subject of a new production by the New York City Opera, was a district supervisor in San Francisco; he was slain by another supervisor, Dan White.


City News Briefs; Queens Man Is Held In Cabdriver's Death
A man who police believe fatally shot a livery-cab driver as he tried to prevent a robbery in a Queens bagel store in August was arrested on Friday and charged with second-degree murder.
The man, Joseph Parks, 21, of 35-35 21st Street in Long Island City, Queens, was arrested while walking near his home after detectives in the 107th Precinct received an anonymous tip, said Detective Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


Amy M. Appell, Fredric I. Green
Amy Michelle Appell, the daughter of Corina Brown of Charleston, S.C., and James P. Appell of Columbus, Ohio, was married yesterday at the Hotel Thayer in West Point, N.Y., to Fredric Ian Green, a son of Ruth Green of Whitestone, Queens, and Dr.
Jerome Green of New York.
Rabbi Jerry Heller performed the interfaith ceremony, in which the Rev.
Daniel Winter, a Roman Catholic priest, took part.
Mrs.
Green, 27, is an account coordinator at Harris Publishing, a publisher of alumni directories, in White Plains.
She graduated from the State University at Albany.
Her father is a production manager at the Kroger Company, the grocery chain, in Columbus.
Her mother is a social worker at the Charleston Employee Assistance Consortium in Charleston.


A Universal Thanksgiving for a Poet, 82
A DAY earlier Ann Porter and I had been sitting in her kitchen with her son and granddaughter talking about God.
It was one of those quiet mornings in which time seems to linger.
After the death of Fairfield Porter, Ann had continued to live in "the big house," in a kind of communal arrangement with a painter from Italy and his wife who adopted six children from all over the world, so that the house was full of the noises of working and living.
But when they all went back to Italy she had a back house built, where the smallness could better enclose herself and whomever of her family remained, now a grown daughter, now a son, a granddaughter.


For Troubled Wright, N.B.A. Is a Tall Task
He is 7-2 and weighs more than 300 pounds.
But often, Luther Wright's presence is barely noticed during a basketball game.
Five years ago, Wright was a dominant center at Elizabeth (N.J.) High School, one of the country's most heavily recruited prospects.
Today, he is a struggling, second-year player with the Utah Jazz, a long-term project whose potential has been overshadowed by medical problems and weight problems.


Lost Soul I


No Headline
"I play to defend myself. I mean, I am not -- I cannot be -- free. But I can sit at the piano. And I can hope that everyone learns to feel the love that I feel." IVANA VELICAN, 14, a Sarajevo piano student.  [ 3:1. ]


Corrections
Because of a film producer's schedule change, a picture caption on page 30 of the Arts and Leisure section today about "The Beans of Egypt, Maine" misstates the opening date.
The film will open on Nov. 11, not next Friday.


Bookshelf
LOOKING FOR ATLANTIS.
Written and illustrated by Colin Thompson.
Knopf. $16. (All ages) Grandfather has come home from the sea and tells the narrator, a boy of 10, that he will be well when the boy finds Atlantis.
What follows is a fantasy of exploration in exquisite, complicated illustrations as the youngster searches the house and learns to search in his heart.
Look very carefully -- great richness here.
DDLY ENOUGH: Stories.
By Bruce Coville.
Illustrated by Michael Hussar.
Jane Yolen Books/Harcourt Brace. $15.95. (Ages 12 and up) Fans of the author's perky popular novels will be surprised and rewarded by this collection of nine provocative, and very different, short stories.
Some of them are frequently anthologized.


Banks Shutting Local Branches To Trim Costs
The next time you visit your bank branch, take a good long look to savor the memory, then say good-bye.
By this time next year, it may not be there.
With growth slow, expenses high and competition fierce, big banks around the country, from Chemical Bank in New York to Bank of America in San Francisco, are preparing to close an increasing number of branches.


The Murayama Surprise
Japan's Socialist-conservative coalition Government was laughed off in June as a cynical and unworkable union of opposites.
Many people did the laughing, including this page.
The Government is actually working out surprisingly well.
Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama, a Socialist, and his Liberal Democratic and independent partners have fashioned a stable majority that sharply contrasts with the almost weekly Cabinet crises of last winter and spring.
The new Government has also found enough coherence to reach a limited trade agreement with the U.S.


Bennington Means Business
WHEN I TELL PEOPLE THAT I went to Bennington College, it often happens that, whether they've been there or not, they want to tell me a story about it.
Sometimes they tell me about the article they read in Esquire some 20 years ago on how the faculty ran the young president, Gail Parker, out of town because she and a history teacher named Rush Welter hatched a plan to cut faculty, alter student majors and more or less recreate the school.
Or they recall that Bennington is where Camille Paglia, the woman who later published the brilliant, maddening "Sexual Personae," kicked a student three times for parodying her Uzi lecture style; afterward she claimed that the kicks were parodic, too.
From the legendary days of the 1940's, when Miriam Marx, Groucho's daughter, was said to have quartered her horse in her dorm room -- and afterward was suspended from the college -- Bennington has been American higher education's School for Scandal.
But, I often find myself insisting (sometimes after adding a few tales of my own), it's been a good deal more than that.
Bennington is one of the places where Martha Graham helped invent modern dance.
It's where Kenneth Burke, the great critic and man of letters, taught for many years, along with Stanley Kunitz, Howard Nemerov, Stanley Edgar Hyman, Theodore Roethke, W. H. Auden, Bernard Malamud; the list goes on.
Bennington has been the home of major composers like Henry Brant and Vivian Fine.
A number of consequential American artists have been associated with the college, among them Jules Olitski, David Smith, Kenneth Noland, Helen Frankenthaler.
At Bennington, Buckminster Fuller built one of his first geodesic domes.
The school pioneered workshop approaches to writing and set the arts on par with the academic disciplines before much of anyone else was willing to.
Bennington was originally a women's college, and its feminism has often been well in advance of the rest of the country's.
From its founding in 1932, the School for Scandal has had more than a little to teach its academic betters.


Lisa Joy Shaw, Nigel Wolters
Dr.
Lisa Joy Shaw, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Shaw of Merrick, L.I., is to be married this evening to Dr.
Nigel Christopher William Wolters, the son of Prof. and Mrs.
O.
W.
Wolters of Ithaca, N.Y.
Cantor Sheldon Rokofsky is to officiate at the Woodcrest Club in Syosset, L.I.
The bride, 30, graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and received a master's degree and a Ph.D. in clinical psychology from Emory University.
She is a postdoctoral fellow in clinical psychology at McLean Hospital in Belmont, Mass.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
Her mother, Sydell R. Shaw, is an administrative assistant at her husband's practice.


Why Take a Look at Big Pictures of Terrific Scenery?
COURTNEY MILNE is a Canadian photographer specializing in global landmarks, natural and otherwise.
His mission is to heighten awareness of these special places and, by alerting people to what he calls "the fragility of our mother planet," to persuade them to change their destructive ways.
To this, one might reasonably respond "What else is new?," for Mr.
Milne offers no prescription for reform.
Still, he does provide inspiration that takes the form of large prints so smooth and bright as to seem like photo-mechanical reproductions.
An exhibition featuring about 50 of these, together with a coffee table book of similar images interspersed with descriptive comments and priced at $50, is at the Bruce Museum in Greenwich.
The volume, like the show, is titled "The Sacred Earth" and the two come courtesy of Whirlwind, the design company responsible for transforming the museum's holdings in minerals, stuffed animals and anthropological material into an installation worthy of a world's fair.
It is titled "Changes in Our Land."


'City on a Hill'
To the Editor:
As the director of journalism at La Guardia Community College (part of the City University of New York), I don't understand how A. M. Rosenthal can praise James Traub's "City on a Hill." This book claims that the 1970's open admissions policy (which allowed underprepared students into the university) is today responsible for the undermining of academic standards at City College.


Eduardo Machado
IT WAS 9:30 A.M.
ON AN AMTRAK TRAIN BOUND from New York City to Providence, and the playwright Eduardo Machado, who had gone to bed only three hours earlier, was a very pale shade of green.
He had a lot to worry about: he had abruptly left his apartment of five years and moved to a provisional sublet on the Lower East Side; a whopping back-taxes payment had wiped out all his savings, and the evening before, his first "endless night" in over a year, had concluded in a rancorous, Champagne-fueled argument with a friend in a Hell's Kitchen transvestite bar.
Dwarfing all of these concerns was that in four days he would be leaving for Los Angeles, for rehearsals of "Floating Islands," a series of plays Machado has been writing over the past 14 years.
It was looking as if the two-part, six-hour production, which opens today, would be the most expensive ever mounted at the Mark Taper Forum, the cradle of such comparably scaled projects as "The Kentucky Cycle" and "Angels in America." And it would be sure to guarantee the kind of mainstream theatrical recognition, and scrutiny, that has thus far eluded the 41-year-old playwright.


Lurking Behind All Those Masks Are Managers Waiting to Happen
Their equipment used to be popularly known as the tools of ignorance, but catchers obviously display no ignorance in their quest to become managers.
Recent developments on the managerial employment line reinforced the belief that former catchers make better managers than players who played other positions.
Of the six managers who have been hired since the season ended prematurely, four were catchers in their playing days -- Bob Boone of Kansas City, Kevin Kennedy of Boston, Johnny Oates of Texas and Bruce Bochy of San Diego.
Kennedy and Oates were available because they had been fired, but they were snatched for new jobs almost before the ink on their pinks slips was dry.


Democrats Ponder the Value of an Endorsement
Fittingly, the moment Virginia Democrats had longed for was playing out beneath a huge black-and-white photograph of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert F. Kennedy:
L.
Douglas Wilder, the first black ever elected governor of a state, told a cheering dinner crowd that he was endorsing Charles S. Robb, his long-time political enemy, for the Senate and that he would do whatever possible to help him defeat Oliver L. North on Nov. 8.


MORE MANHOLE COVERS
The Sunday feature "More Manhole Covers" (Sept. 25) brought back memories.
Not only did our third-grade class at the Downtown Community School take a field trip to watch the Third Avenue el being torn down, but we diligently made rubbings of dozens of different manhole covers in the blocks around East 11th Street in Manhattan.
Manhole covers taught us history, art, economics and the story of how the city grew.
With our rubbings, we took possession of a piece of our urban world.


Opera Highlights to Accompany the Dining Experience
AT 10:30 on a recent Wednesday night everybody at Pappagallo's in Glen Head was singing the toreador song from "Carmen." The diners and opera singers who joined together for the finale were participating in Opera Highlights, one of the most enduring food-and-entertainment evenings on the Island.
For eight years, on the third Wednesday of each month, every seat at Pappagallo's is usually taken for a hearty four-course Italian dinner and a musical night of swirling melodies, mainly from Italian operas.


Tori Kunath, Ronald Stricker
Victoria Lind Kunath, a daughter of Robert and Joell Kunath of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to Ronald David Stricker, the son of David and Sue Ellen Stricker of Cincinnati.
The Rev.
Thomas Daniel, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the nondemoninational ceremony at the Brentwood (Tenn.) Country Club.
The bride, who is known as Tori, is an account executive at WTVF-TV in Nashville.
She graduated from American University.
Her father is the senior vice president and general manager of Group W Sports Marketing in New York.
Her mother is the exhibition specialist at the Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


THE VIETNAM IN ME
As a veteran of this "splendid little war," I have read Tim O'Brien's writing with great empathy.
For several years, I fought personal battles with the demons that he combatted.
I conquered them.
His writing helped me.
This article is a much needed booster.
I hope that other men and women who served in Nam will read it and close their personal Pandora's box of guilt and nightmares.
Halfway through O'Brien's musings, I could hardly breathe and began crying.
The warmth of the tears felt good, and cleansing.
THOMAS REILLY Safety Harbor, Fla.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Oct. 16 about a proposal to let Jersey City parents use state vouchers to help pay tuition at private schools misidentified the current State Commissioner of Education.
He is Dr.
Leo Klagholz.
Dr.
Mary Lee Fitzgerald is the previous commissioner; she does not support the plan.


A New Scent In Paris
Rei Kawakubo introduces her first perfume, at the Ritz, Oct. 14.


Castro Runs Against Moynihan, D'Amato and Her Childhood Image on TV
Bernadette Castro always knew she had to get beyond that old Castro sofa-bed commercial from her girlhood to have a shot at a real political identity.
But what can she do when a well-meaning fan like John Zero, a white-haired stalwart at the 58th Street Republican Club in Woodside, Queens, sidles up with a twinkle in his eye when she wants to talk big politics -- her hard-run but equally hard-to-notice United States Senate race -- and he wants to talk sofa beds?
"I want to know, do you still got that cute little nightgown you wore when you were 4 years old and used to open the Castro Convertible on TV?" Mr.
Zero asked the other night.
Thirty Republican senior citizens applauded Ms.
Castro after she proved that she could be a surprisingly bracing clubhouse speaker, for all her inexperience.


Jennifer R. Lamin And Adam Frank
Jennifer Ruth Lamin, the daughter of Alexander Lamin of Haworth, N.J., and Marian Fox Lamin of New York, is to be married today to Adam Frank, a son of Stanley and Lorraine Frank of Howard Beach, Queens.
Rabbi David Fass is to officiate at the Stony Hill Inn in Hackensack, N.J.
The bride, 26, is a medical social worker at the Beth Israel Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from the University of Delaware and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.


SUNDAY, October 23, 1994; Trashy Design
Recycling can be tedious and confusing.
What to do, for instance, with old inner tubes, melted engine blocks and ignored and forgotten Father's Day gifts.
Make them into objets d'art, obviously.
Anyone who ever stuck a candle in a Chianti bottle or turned a seashell into a lamp knows that.


Even Without Rose-Colored Glasses, Jets Think They Are a Playoff Team
After repeated years in which they were usually out of the pennant race before there was a race, the Jets finally find themselves in a contending position as they approach the season's midway point.
A modest 4-3 record looks impressive compared with those starts of previous years.
As the Jets revel in a two-game winning streak during a bye week, though, no one knows about the possible pitfalls better than their president, Steve Gutman.


Insurance Companies Expect Battle Over Health Care to Shift to the States
After fighting off sweeping health care legislation for almost two years, some insurance industry executives fear they may yet lose the war.
The premium caps, taxes and restrictions on excluding hospitals and doctors from their networks that they disliked so much in the major Democratic proposals seem dead.
But they might still end up with regulations they hate, in either a stripped-down bill in Congress next year or in stringent new state insurance laws.


The Elegant and Whimsical in Wood
NAPOLEON'S remark that it is only a short step from the sublime to the ridiculous could be applied to an exhibition at Trenton State College.
Elegant furniture and vessels are arranged side-by-side with whimsical weathervanes and hand-carved caricatures.
Surprisingly, these multifarious works don't clash.
Wood, their common medium, justifies the incongruous juxtapositions.
The show, entitled "Out of the Woodwork," had as its curator John Hein of Hopewell, a furniture maker who has attained national recognition for his handsome cabinet designs and meticulous craftsmanship.


Debra Lynn Karp, Hal A. Skopicki
Dr.
Debra Lynn Karp, a dermatopathologist in Boston, and Dr.
Hal Andrew Skopicki, a cardiologist, also in Boston, were married last evening in New York.
Rabbi Richard Thaler officiated at the Essex House.
The bride, 29, is a daughter of Dr.
Joel Karp and Hilda Karp of New York.
The bride graduated from Brown University, from which she also received her medical degree.
She is a fellow in dermatopathology at Beth Israel Hospital.
Her father is a urologist in New York.
Her mother is a cancer information specialist at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.


Golisano Is Received Warmly In Rochester, His Hometown
As rock music blared out onto a picture-perfect day, B. Thomas Golisano, gubernatorial candidate, went out to meet his public today.
And the crowd at a music festival in his hometown could not have greeted him more warmly.
Mr.
Golisano shook hands and chatted with voters all afternoon at Silver Stadium on the same day that his two opponents, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and State Senator George E. Pataki, made forays into western New York, an area that seems to be Golisano country.


Valerie Artzt, Alan Gwertzman
Valerie Jan Artzt, the daughter of Diane Artzt of Stroudsburg, Pa., and the late Donald E. Artzt, was married last evening to Dr.
Alan Randall Gwertzman, the son of Sheila and Stephen Gwertzman of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnik officiated at the Stanhope Hotel in New York.
Ms.
Artzt, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a senior lawyer at the American Express Travel Related Services Company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received her law degree from Emory University.
Her father was a lawyer in Bensalem, Pa., and owned the Pocmont Resort in Bushkill, Pa.
Her mother retired as a speech pathologist for the Central School in Great Meadows, N.J.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Don't Forget to Add $625 For Shipping and Handling
IMAGINE that ketchup is priced at $1.89 on the supermarket shelf, but the checkout clerk tacks on another 10 cents to cover the cost of shipping the bottle from the plant to the store.
Supermarkets and other retailers don't work that way, of course, but the auto industry does, with its ubiquitous "destination charges." Coming on top of optional equipment, taxes, registration and financing charges, this additional amount -- ranging from about $300 to nearly $1,000 -- is tacked onto the price of every new vehicle, ostensibly to cover the costs of shipping the car from the factory to the dealer.
In reality, the destination charge has only a tenuous connection with a car's actual shipping costs.


K. S. Bartlett, Nicholas Lieder
Katherine Scott Bartlett, an assistant producer of "As the World Turns" for CBS-TV in New York, was married yesterday to Nicholas Lieder, an associate director at Forum Capital Markets, an investment bank in Old Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Geoffrey Skrinar performed the ceremony at Emmanuel Episcopal Church in Weston, Conn.
Mrs.
Lieder, 30, graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is a daughter of Elizabeth E. Bartlett and Peter B. Bartlett, both of New York.
The bride's father is a partner in Brown Brothers Harriman, the private bank in New York.
Her mother is an interior designer in New York.


Patrols Increase After a Killing In Carl Schurz
Carl Schurz Park has long been one of the city's safest and most pleasant.
Perched on the banks of the East River, it offers sweeping vistas, flowerbeds, a dog run, a playground and a chance to meet the neighbors, including the Mayor and his family, who live on the grounds in Gracie Mansion, and Parks Commissioner Henry Stern.
"We raised our boys in that playground," Mr.
Stern said, "and I go often with my dog, Boomer."
But the neighbors' feelings of security have been shaken by the fatal shooting there last Sunday, at about 2 A.M., of Robert J. Kase, an investment banker.
No arrests have been made, and the police have offered no motive for the crime, but they have substantially increased park patrols.


Marya R. Cohn, Fraser Bresnahan
Marya Ruth Cohn, the daughter of Julia Miles and Sam Cohn, both of New York, was married yesterday to Fraser Bresnahan, the son of Anna and Dana Bresnahan of Pasadena, Calif.
The Rev.
Lisa Ward, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's sister in Brookfield, Conn.
Ms.
Cohn, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in film making at New York University.
She and her husband graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is the vice chairman of International Creative Management in New York.
Her mother is the artistic director of the Women's Project and Productions Theater in New York.


Touring Manhattan By Continuous Loop
New York City's cultural institutions and shopping areas are now linked on the "Tour d'Art," a continuous-loop tour of Manhattan recently begun by Gray Line New York and the Association for a Better New York.
Motorized trolleys and double-decker buses transport passengers on one of two routes covering either uptown or downtown Manhattan.
Tickets, good for three days, entitle passengers to get on and off at any of the 31 locations as often as they wish.
Tour guides are on each bus to assist passengers.


David A. Smith, Jennifer L. Wilcha
Jennifer Lynn Wilcha, the daughter of John and Patricia Wilcha of Franklin Lakes, N.J., was married yesterday to David Alan Smith, the son of Janet Wallach of Chevy Chase, Md., and the stepson of John Wallach.
The Rev.
Henry O'Shea, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the James Burden Mansion in New York.
The couple are changing their names and will be known as Jennifer and David Allyn.
The bride, 26, recently received a master's degree in public policy from Harvard University.
She graduated from Brown University, as did her husband.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Amerifoods Inc., a baking conglomerate in Paramus, N.J.


Candidate Uses Ad to Rebut Domestic Violence Rumors
With unsubstantiated rumors of domestic violence swirling around his campaign, John G. Rowland, the Republican candidate for governor of Connecticut, has started running a television commercial in which he blames The Hartford Courant and "political enemies" for attacking him.
The 30-second ad, which was broadcast for the first time on Friday, has him looking directly into the camera, saying that he is "disgusted" by the rumors that "something awful" occurred between him and his former wife, Deborah.


Jack Gasnick's Land Fever
IT probably began in 1955, on the day he hooked a large carp in the hurricane-flooded basement of his East Side hardware store.
"Unbelievable," says Jack Gasnick, who reeled in a pickerel another time.
Anyway, this is how he fell in love with nature and decided on what is surely one of the most offbeat real-estate careers in the city's history: buying up odd, unimproved scraps of land and preserving them as tiny havens where birds could sing, turtles could bask and apples had the freedom to ripen on a single hardy tree.


The Border War Over Country Music
THE Canadian Government, which has never been reluctant to see home-grown country music talent -- from Hank Snow to Anne Murray -- performing in Nashville, now wants to keep Nashville from performing on Canadian TV.
Canadian regulatory authorities have decided to expel an American country music cable television service that has been seen in Canada for 10 years and is now hooked into about two million Canadian homes.


Oct. 16-22; Simon Sends Regards to Broadway
After 33 years of seeing his plays come to Broadway, Neil Simon announced last week that the show was over for the Great White Way, and the villian -- the black-mustachioed economics of Broadway theaters -- had won.
His next play, "London Suite," which is now premiering in Seattle, will open in New York at an Off Broadway theater.
The numbers are simple, Mr.
Simon said: It costs at least $1.5 million to bring one of his plays, which often have one set and a relatively small cast, to Broadway -- three times the cost for an Off Broadway house. (Off Broadway houses may charge less rent, use nonunion stagehands and box-office staff, pay actors less and get cheaper advertising.) The announcement shook producers because it meant that even America's richest and most popular playwright thinks that Broadway is no longer hospitable to his plays.
Mr.
Simon's last few outings on Broadway have not done well.


Justine L. Divett, Grant H. Thacker
Justine Louise Divett, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Julian R. Divett of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to Grant Hilton Thacker, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George H. Thacker of Huntsville, Ala.
The Rev.
Frederick Bender performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Columba's Berkeley Memorial Chapel in Middletown, R.I.
Mrs.
Divett-Thacker, 27, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She is an advertising representative at Pacific Rim Advertising in Seattle.
Her father is the managing director of the Trinity Trading Investment Company in New York.
Her mother, Mary Divett, is a food stylist in New York.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Awkwardly, Rookie Swings Into Lead  Jim Furyk, a rookie with a highly unorthodox swing, had three consecutive birdies in a six-under-par 66 yesterday and took a one-shot lead after four rounds of the 90-hole Las Vegas Invitational.
His total going into the final round today is 21 under 266.
Tied for second were Bruce Lietzke, who birdied four of the last five holes in shooting a 66, and Kirk Triplett (68).
Furyk, a husky 24-year-old, takes the club back far to the outside, then drops it inside.
"It's a natural swing, he said. "I'm not going to change.
I'm stuck with it, whether I like it or not." (AP)


Trusts Can Be a Virtue
To the Editor:  Regarding "A Pension Plan With a Lot of Strings" and "Red Flag on Pensions at Nonprofits" (Your Own Account, Sept. 25 and Oct. 2), there are two important points about how and why employers should meet their obligations under nonqualified, supplemental retirement plans.


The Mingus Scene With Unlikely Players
WITH its Formica-top tables, high ceiling and spare decor of spire-shaped cactuses and a black-and-white desert mural, Time Cafe seems to be the Madison Avenue version of a hip, downtown cafe.
And indeed, for several years the restaurant (at 380 Lafayette Street, a few blocks above Houston Street) was portrayed as the apotheosis of hip and downtown in a television commercial for Perrier.
The club's managing partner, Josh Picard, decided in 1991 to book entertainment into a basement space behind the cafe, called Fez.
In contrast to the sleekness and beauty of his restaurant's patrons, he wanted rough-edged entertainment, like poetry readings and alternative music.
It didn't seem he could get any more alternative than a 14-piece big band dedicated to playing the music of the jazz great Charles Mingus.


The Spy in the Gray Flannel Suit
BLOND GHOST Ted Shackley and the CIA's Crusades.
By David Corn.
Illustrated. 509 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.


A Torch Song Worth Recalling
To the Editor:
I would not quibble with a word of Stephen Holden's tribute to Jule Styne  [ "The Master of Dramatic Truth," Oct. 2 ]  except to offer a brief addendum.


The Executive Life; Scaling New Heights In the Name of Hope
A DEFINING moment for Annette Porter came in a business meeting with a client in 1991.
As a 32-year-old executive with a Seattle corporate-resources consulting firm, Ms.
Porter had been told she had breast cancer, undergone a lumpectomy and was in the midst of chemical and radiation therapy.
Unconsciously brushing her hair from her eyes, she was shocked to see it come away in her hand.
"Nobody else noticed," she recalled, "but I started getting more and more anxious because it was a windy day outside. Finally, when the meeting ended and the client walked me to the lobby, I just started laughing. When he asked what was wrong, I said I was afraid that the moment I stepped outside I'd turn into a dandelion."


Westminster's Ancient Abbey
IN respect of Westminster Abbey, I have for 50 years had a curious perspective.
It dates from the year 1943, at which time it was thought desirable for Westminster Abbey to be patrolled during the hours of darkness by men who in one way or another were associated with art and architecture.
It was expected of us that we would show up at nightfall and stay until sunrise.
We received a small dinner allowance, which most often we spent somewhere on Charlotte Street on anonymous chopped meats and a thimbleful of even more anonymous wine.
On quiet nights, we had the use of iron bedsteads and rudimentary bedclothes in a dormitory that in normal times was part of Westminster School.
When trouble was not expected, we roamed, we talked, we read, and we ruminated.
As month followed month, we even dared to think about "after the war."


The Man Who Hit the Wall and Lived
The headaches are gone, he says.
He doesn't need to take a nap to get through a day anymore.
And he is already driving a car on the streets around his home in Concord, a suburb of Charlotte, N.C.
But the whole Ernie Irvan -- the one who was among the elite stock-car racers -- is not back yet.


More Suggestions For Serving Pears
A PEAR is a complicated fruit.
You can't eat it right off the tree like an apple.
If it is allowed to ripen fully before picked, the flesh will be gritty.
If it is harvested too early, the pear never becomes sweet or juicy.
Pears should be picked just before they are ripe, then left for several days at room temperature.
When they are ready, buy a good piece of Roquefort and a bottle of Sauternes and settle down for a treat.


RETURNS OF THE DAY
I want to send my most grateful thanks to Nancy V. Raine for helping me celebrate my own anniversary -- 15 years ago this September (Hers: "Returns of the Day," Oct. 2).
Some years ago, I began to resurrect the horror and fear of my rape experience -- I thought maybe I could make peace with it and that it would quietly fade into the past.
I know now that this will never happen; the face of my attacker, so briefly glimpsed, will always remain vivid.


SUNDAY, October 23, 1994; The Greening of a Superfund Site
Anaconda, Mont., began smelting copper in 1888.
By 1980 all work had stopped, leaving behind denuded hillsides, vast gouges in the land, water tainted with heavy metals, piles of charred rock and arsenic-laced soil, in short, the perfect place for a golf course.
And not just any course, but one designed by Jack Nicklaus.


Potent Odor of Curry Causes Row Over a Restaurant
A newly emerging restaurant row on 20th Street includes notables like Gramercy Tavern, Patria, Silver Swan, Chutney Mary and Hamachi, drawing diners from all over the city.
But among the residents of that block, between Broadway and Park Avenue, one of the most discussed restaurants -- and surely the most cussed -- is the unheralded Indian restaurant Palki.
Palki has broken just about every city rule book since it opened in the spring at 27 East 20th Street, angry neighbors say.
Councilman Antonio Pagan's office, which has been pursuing complaints against the restaurant, says it has been cited for violations by buildings, fire, landmarks and environmental agencies.


The Caw of the Wild
Among my many shortcomings, which range from a tendency to grind gears when I shift into second to a too-charitable view of the film oeuvre of Curly Howard, none is more embarrassing than my inability to identify a single bird call.
I'm a casual bird watcher, so I should know something.
But even the onomatopoeic birds throw me.
The sound "chick-a-dee-dee-dee" ought to suggest strongly the presence of a chickadee in the vicinity.
To me it suggests only that the bald eagle can probably be eliminated as a suspect.
As far as I can tell, birds say "caw" or birds say "cheep," and it depends entirely on how much they had to drink the night before.


Jerome B. Wiesner, President of M.I.T., Is Dead at 79
Jerome B. Wiesner, the influential science adviser to President John F. Kennedy who went on to be president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, died on Friday night at his home in Watertown, Mass., outside Boston.
He was 79.
Dr.
Wiesner died after an unspecified illness that lasted several months, said an M.I.T. spokesman, Ken Campbell.
He suffered a stroke several years ago, but battled back to recover his ability to speak as well as to walk with relative ease.


Author, Author: Neither Starving Nor Star
RICK MOODY is jouncing stiff-kneed down the street, the street being St.
Marks Place, colorful in the extreme.
On the right, three women and a man are sitting on the sidewalk, appealing for change, the monetary kind.
The women are studies in urban ghoulishness, their faces masks of pancake makeup, their lips defined in mahogany.
On the left are Mr.
Moody's landmarks, the Yaffa restaurant, where he used to be able to get discount meals from "a waitress everyone knew," and the Holiday Cocktail Lounge, where he used to hang out at all hours.
At the end of the street is Tompkins Square Park, the neighborhood symbol of counterculture and class warfare.
This is where Mr.
Moody does some of his most important work.
Raised in the privileged realm of Fairfield and Westchester Counties, he has made his way ever so deliberately to New York, physically (he now lives in Brooklyn Heights) and lately in his fiction, which is laced with new music, after-hours clubs, crack dealers and, in one story, an icon of sorrowful irony, a girl determined to fight her drug addiction, her face scarred with the lesions of AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma.


23 Vie for Assembly in 8 Races
WITH the words "lower property taxes" on nearly all their lips, 23 candidates for the State Assembly are running in eight districts in Westchester and Putnam Counties.
Among the candidates are six Democratic incumbents, including four in their first terms, whose challengers are focusing on taxes and crime.
In two of the districts, the incumbents are not running.
The decision of Cecile D. Singer of Yonkers, the only Republican member of the Westchester Assembly delegation, not to seek re-election in the 87th District has led to a two-way race in which no Democrat is running.


Oct. 16-22: A Bad Week in Detroit; G.M. Trucks Singled Out; Ford Is Recalling Compacts
Transportation Secretary Federico Pena took a highly unusual step Monday: In effect, he accused General Motors of making pickup trucks so defective that 150 people might have died needlessly in fiery crashes.
The vehicles are full-sized Chevrolet and G.M.C. pickups produced by the nation's No. 1 car maker from 1973 to 1987.
The trucks have fuel tanks mounted outside their body frames.
Safety advocates have argued that the tanks leak when struck sideways, spilling gasoline and igniting deadly fires.


Amsterdam's Loungecast
Come November, bored travelers at Schiphol Airport outside Amsterdam will have an alternative to flipping through magazines or staring into the middle distance.
They will be able to watch Schiphol TV, a new English-language commercial station beamed on 28-inch screens throughout waiting rooms.
The basic three-hour broadcast includes news, sports, fashion shows, music videos, an auto show, movie previews and, of course, commercials, and is repeated continuously.
Besides breaking news from the NBC Superchannel, the station will televise live sports events.
Though headphones will not be available initially, the airport will designate privacy areas, so readers need not watch TV, a spokeswoman said.


A Night on 109th St.: The Roadblock as Police Tool
Officer Troy Brown looked in the window of the beat-up '77 Chevy and saw a three-inch stack of $20 bills on the front seat.
"Excuse me," he said to the young man at the wheel. "May I see your license?"


The Playful Side of a Usually Austere Artist
DISCUSSIONS OF SOL LEWITT'S art inevitably involve words like austere and ascetic.
But the retrospective of his works on paper here at the Museum of Fine Arts is at times surprisingly lyrical and amusing.
This is not just because it includes his recent big, festive gouaches of multicolored ribbons, which are more sumptuous and full-blooded than anything he has done before.
It's also because some of his best early works on paper are playful in ways you wouldn't expect from having seen his sculptures and even many of his murals, or wall drawings, as he calls them.
Sculpture and drawing are different mediums, of course.
Drawings tend to be intimate.
And there are intimate sides to Mr.
LeWitt's art, and character, that his drawings reveal and his other works can't.


Adding Spots of Color to Nature's Palette
THE trees' foliage color is truly spectacular.
Leafers from all over the Northeast are talking about it.
Many are saying this year's is the best ever as their eyes capture the golds, reds, maroons and yellows.
Fall colors splash on the hillsides, form canopies on streets and fill yards.
Meanwhile, shrubs and ornamental grasses that provide their own style in the color scheme are not part of the praise.
Now is the time to set things right and give these plants the credit they deserve.


Q and A
Touring the Potteries
Q.  Are there any tours of the Potteries area of England? -- Charles F. Brydon, Seattle


A Hated Landlord in Hot Water
Mention Robert Sigmund along West 22d Street and you'll get an earful about one of the most bitter tenant-landlord battles in the city.
Many of the people who live in Mr.
Sigmund's 10 buildings say he is a brutal landlord, specializing in harassment, inhumane conditions and rent overcharges.
This month they had something to cheer about.


Boy, 11, Is Killed in Hit-and-Run Incident
An 11-year-old boy was killed yesterday near Starrett City in Brooklyn when a man driving a green Plymouth struck him as the boy stood in the street watching a friend change a tire, the police said.
The driver, Thomas Murray, 41, of 760 67th Street in Brooklyn, was driving northbound on Van Siclen Avenue when he struck the boy, Joseph Murray, at the corner of Flatlands Avenue and then sped off.
Witnesses said he then made a U-turn several blocks away and drove by the scene again before driving away.


Vendors' Ouster and Boycott Divide Harlem
On the streets of Harlem, amid the maze of shouting pickets, besieged merchants, confused shoppers and curious residents, the Giuliani administration's move last week to oust street vendors from the area's busiest thoroughfare is generating passions unseen in years.
It has also revealed deep divisions over whether the vendors' removal has left Harlem better off.
It is a question complicated by a number of factors.
Foremost among them has been displaced vendors' continued picketing of stores on 125th Street, urging shoppers to boycott businesses not owned by black merchants.
And with some merchants saying that their already-fragile businesses are beginning to feel the impact of the picketing and vendors saying they have effectively lost their jobs, there is no unanimity of opinion in Harlem.


Whining Toward the Throne
Britons are caught up in another fit of argument over why they should keep the monarchy.
The American answer is simple.
Of course, they should keep it -- for our amusement.
Listen, this is a fine show, not least from a journalistic point of view.
In the United States, the pathological marriage of Prince Charles and Princess Diana is a tabloid television entertainment.
In Britain, it is still largely a print story, and nothing brings out the deep-rooted obedience of establishment journalists more quickly than bad behavior toward or by the royal family.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 23, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
6
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
2
5
THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A revised edition of a 1985 novel about a young girl's mysterious disappearance.
3*
4
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a man and a woman and for her first lover.
4
19
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
5
5
PEARL IN THE MIST, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) The ordeals of a girl beset by a hostile stepmother and a troubled twin sister.
6
5
CHAMPIONS OF THE FORCE, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
7
17
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
8
14
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.
9
4
HIDDEN FIRES, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $5.99.) A 1982 novel about a Texas preacher's daughter who is tricked into marriage.
10
10
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Love and hope -- plus recipes -- on a Mexican ranch.
11
9
GONE, BUT NOT FORGOTTEN, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) The wives of several Portland, Ore., businessmen disappear.
12
8
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
13
18
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's daughter.
14
10
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
15
23
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
5
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
6
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
3
4
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
4
41
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
5
8
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.
6
572
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
7
3
FIVE PATIENTS, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A 1970 book about the practice of medicine and the ways of hospitals.
8
22
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business innovation.
9
4
DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great Plains.
10*
88
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
11*
25
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
12*
41
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
13*
8
YOU BELONG TO ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $6.99.) Six true-crime cases.
14*
23
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their effects.
15
3
LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Fawcett, $6.99.) The country singer's memoirs, with an account of her relations with daughters Wynonna and Ashley.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
3
HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
9
GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.) The witticisms of a fictional slow-witted wanderer through history.
3
188
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
4
5
CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit." Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 8, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Conversations/Noel Perrin; A Man and His Plug-In Car And Their American Odyssey
AS bad trips through the Donner Pass go, Noel Perrin's ended relatively painlessly.
Nobody froze, starved or ate any unusual meals; all that died was his dream of driving an electric car from Los Angeles home to Vermont.
Instead, he rolled back down the mountain, bought a secondhand 1981 Toyota pickup and ignominiously towed the electric across the continent.
Mr.
Perrin, a professor emeritus of English and American literature at Dartmouth, has recently been teaching environmental studies and driving what he preaches -- just now a 1983 Audi, converted to electricity in 1992.
Last year it made the daily run from his home in Thetford, Vt., to his classroom in Hanover, N.H., 13 miles each way, and covered 5,000 miles; this semester he is teaching at Boston University, and the Audi sits at the bus station in White River Junction, where he picks it up every Friday night for the drive home.


Provencal Sun
LA BOHEME (212) 473-6447; 24 Minetta Lane, between West Third and Bleecker; $$; American Express


Lia Pascale, Mark Heath
Lia Pascale, a daughter of Drs.
Ada and Sabatino Pascale of Canton, Ohio, was married yesterday to Dr.
Mark John Sherman Heath, a son of Susan Heath and Dr.
Desmond Heath, both of New York.
The Rev.
Francis J. Stroud performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel of Columbia University in New York.
Ms.
Pascale is keeping her name.
She is a lawyer for the civil division of the New York Legal Aid Society in the Bronx.
She graduated from Smith College and received her law degree from Case Western Reserve University.
Her father is a gynecologist in Canton, and her mother is an internist at the Veteran's Administration Hospital there.


On Selling A House
After reading the article ("Too Much House? Try a Five-Day Sale," Oct. 2) and passing it around my office, I had to respond.
No one can charge a fee for consulting on the sale of any real estate unless they are fully licensed in the state.


POSTINGS: Museum of the American Indian to Open Next Sunday; Changing Roles for a Once-Empty Landmark
When the Smithsonian Institution's new National Museum of the American Indian opens next Sunday in the Alexander Hamilton Custom House at Bowling Green, it will mark a major step in the rebirth of the Custom House, which had stood empty for more than a decade beginning in the mid-1970's.
The renaissance is a result of a $60 million renovation and conservation of the landmark Beaux-Arts building, designed in 1900 by Cass Gilbert.
Ehrenkrantz and Eckstut Architects, working with the Federal General Services Administration, refurbished the entire 520,000 square feet of the building, which also houses the Federal Bankruptcy Court.


Old Smoothie
Voters are swooping like the Furies on anyone who has ever set foot in the Capitol.
Seniority has become a dirty word.
But the Senate's oldest member is not worried.
Strom Thurmond, the 91-year-old Republican Senator from South Carolina, sits calmly at his desk, chatting about his daily regimen of pushups and prunes, his high regard for pretty women, his dream of overtaking the age record of Theodore Green of Rhode Island, who retired in 1961 at 93 years and 3 months, and his future, if Republicans win control of the Senate, as chairman of the powerful Armed Services Committee.


The West Village, The Global Village
CHEZ JACQUELINE


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Where the $3 shoeshine ($4 for boots) comes with a side of slightly retro salve for the city-blistered soul.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Lot by odd-shaped lot, Jack Gasnick accumulated an empire of surplus land.
And then he began to dismantle it.
MOVIE CLOCK 16 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 17 Celebrating the Lomo in SoHo; Woofstock takes Central Park.
GOOD EATING 18 In the West Village, a gastronomic global village: From noodles, Italian style, to noodles, in many Asian styles.
SOAPBOX 19 Is safety a matter of class and caste?
Plus, letters, Photographer's Journal and a report from the political poster wars.


Every Faith Takes Its Own Path to the Sacred
To the Editor:
Re "Why So Many Religions?" (Op-Ed, Oct. 17): John Paul II affirms the significant stride made 30 years ago by the Roman Catholic Church in recognizing that truth can be found in other religions.


Colorado Rushes Past Stubborn Kansas State
Colorado 35, Kansas State 21
Rashaan Salaam ran for 202 yards and 2 touchdowns, while Kordell Stewart had 127 yards and 3 touchdowns, leading Colorado (ranked No. 2 by The Associated Press and No. 3 by The New York Times) to a 35-21 victory over stubborn Kansas State (ranked No. 19 by the A.P., No. 10 by the Times) last night.


The Trouble With Multiculturalism
DICTATORSHIP OF VIRTUE Multiculturalism and the Battle for America's Future.
By Richard Bernstein. 367 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $25.


Where Did All the Issues Go?
NOT since the studio script doctors on "Casablanca" cranked out daily rewrites at breakneck speed has the story line of a major production changed so much so fast.
Consider the unplanned twists in the 1994 campaign.
First, political reform would be the driving theme.
Then it was the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Then came the economy.
Then welfare.
Finally, the politicians had it all settled.
Health care would be the make-or-break issue on Nov. 8.


Together, Giants Plan to Stop a Losing Streak
The Giants spent part of this weekend at what can only be called a togetherness session.
The team met Friday night at a local restaurant, operated in part by tight end Howard Cross, and talked about staying together and how Sunday's game was one of the biggest of the year.
Indeed, the game against the Pittsburgh Steelers at Giants Stadium is one of the biggest, for the players and for Dan Reeves.
The coach faces his first critical test since joining the Giants last year and turning a 6-10 team into an 11-5 club that made it to the second round of the playoffs.
Now, Reeves will have to do one of the best coaching jobs of his career or this season could quickly go down the drain.


A Motion-Detector Clock
For security-minded travelers, Travel Guard is a lightweight device that performs a variety of tasks.
The black plastic column, eight inches tall and three inches wide, weighs 12 ounces and has two detachable halves.
The bottom is a digital alarm clock with a built-in flashlight.
The top, a motion detector, can hang from a doorknob to signal the presence of intruders.
When tested at home, it let out a shrill, and obnoxious, beeping when the door was opened (at least you won't sleep through it).
It also is equipped to detect smoke and is available for $49.95 from the Reliable Home Office catalogue, (800) 869-6000.


Historical Study of Homicide and Cities Surprises the Experts
The numbers are in and even experts who study violence are surprised: Cities have not always been meccas for murder, and this is not the first heyday for homicides.
Historians now say that homicide rates were extraordinarily high in Europe during the Middle Ages -- and high in the United States during the early 19th century -- then declined steadily until the 1960's.
And for centuries, it was villages that were often the scenes of violence.


Music Helps Sarajevo Stay Sane During War
Among the scarred streets and alleys of Sarajevo there is one comforting crossroads, where the sound of a Beethoven sonata or a Chopin waltz may be heard.
The music, sometimes flowing, sometimes betraying a student's faltering hand, cascades from the Sarajevo conservatory.
In its lightness and otherworldliness, it offers solace in a city still raw with suffering.
People linger in the shelter of the sound of half-forgotten times.


Brooke Kroncke, Andrew Meyers
Christine Brooke Kroncke, the daughter of Heather and Noel Kroncke of Wye Mills, Md., was married yesterday to Andrew Christopher Meyers, the son of Mary Ann and John Meyers of Wynnewood, Pa.
The Rev.
Mark Ainsworth performed the Episcopal ceremony at Washington Memorial Chapel in Valley Forge, Pa.
Mrs.
Meyers, 29, is known as Brooke.
She is an assistant vice president in Philadelphia of the First Fidelity Bankcorporation.
She graduated from Gettysburg College.
Her father is an administrator in Baltimore for the Joint Commission on the Accreditation of Hospitals.
Her mother is a retired lawyer.


Unfazed, a Utah Town Prepares to Burn a Toxic Piece of the Past
Half a century ago the Army marched into the Rush Valley here, cleared the brush and then filled 208 concrete bunkers with an arsenal of mortar rounds, rockets and bombs carrying mustard and nerve gas.
Now the officers at the Tooele Army Depot are testing a $450 million incinerator designed to destroy the chemical munitions, as required by treaties signed with the Soviet Union in the 1980's.
It is the first of eight such plants that the Army wants to build in the United States to do away with an estimated 63 million-pound stockpile of chemicals, some so deadly that a barest drop of them on the skin will kill.


Before Paddy Chayefsky Got Mad as Hell
IF SIMON CURTIS HAD HAD HIS WAY, Channel 13 might be broadcasting a remake of "Marty" this week.
Not long ago, Mr.
Curtis, the British producer of made-for-television films like the 1993 production of "Suddenly Last Summer" and the 1992 "Tales From Hollywood" shown here on PBS, discovered what Americans have long called the golden age of television.
He was a little taken aback that it had slightly predated the era of Britain's "angry young men" playwrights, which began with John Osborne's "Look Back in Anger" (1956).
But when Mr.
Curtis learned that no kinescopes existed of many of the 1950's American television plays, he decided to remake them.
"Marty," Paddy Chayefsky's story of a lonely young butcher who falls in love, was his first choice, but he soon learned that getting remake rights for that film would be very complicated.
So Mr.
Curtis started looking at the nine other plays Chayefsky had written for NBC's "Philco TV Playhouse," and he found "The Mother." Tomorrow night at 9, a new production, starring Anne Bancroft and Joan Cusack in roles originated by Cathleen Nesbitt and Maureen Stapleton in 1954, will be shown on PBS's Great Performances series.


How Singles Take Comfort in Their Lives
WHEN Naomi Kaufman, a special education teacher in the Yonkers public schools, became a widow two years ago, her once familiar world became an altered and sometimes awkward landscape.
In the Yonkers community where Mrs.
Kaufman and her husband had lived and raised their two children during a 23-year marriage, Mrs.
Kaufman struggled to regain her equilibrium.
"I felt like I had fallen off the face of the earth," Mrs.
Kaufman recalled.
"With my married friends, I felt like a fifth wheel. I knew no one who had been widowed at my age." Through her involvement with the Widows and Widowers of Westchester, a group that is part of Family Services of Westchester, Mrs.
Kaufman found another community where she felt she belonged.


School Star Runs, Leaving Past Behind
More than seven years after his father's death, the pain is still apparent in Rashidi Brown's soft voice.
"I was staying at my grandmother's one night," Brown recalled the other day.
"We got a call saying that my father was on the way to the hospital. He'd gotten into a fight and he was stabbed. No one knew if he was going to make it.


When Its Tires Go Flat, Europe Veers Right
JUST a few years ago, worry about the rise of the xenophobic far right in Europe focused on Germany, whose reunification stirred uncertainty over whether the giant of Central Europe could avoid a return to its turbulent past.
Today -- surprise -- the focus of concern about the far right as a political movement is almost anywhere but Germany.
In national elections last Sunday, Germany's extreme right-wing Republican Party won only 1.9 percent of the vote, compared with nearly 11 percent in a state election just two years ago.
"They have become a completely insignificant splinter party," pronounced Chancellor Helmut Kohl, whose own coalition emerged with a majority of only 10 seats.


Florence Murphy, Daniel F. O'Brien
Florence Goodwin Murphy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George R. Murphy Sr. of Arlington, Mass., was married there yesterday to Daniel Francis O'Brien, a son of Mrs.
Duncan T. O'Brien of Boston, and the late Mr.
O'Brien.
The Rev.
Paul B. O'Brien, a brother of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at St.
Agnes Roman Catholic Church.


On Sunday; To Queens Pro, A Sound Bite Means Cannoli
WHEN it was time for a newcomer from the Indian subcontinent to move up in the Queens County Republican organization, a community live wire named Bhagwandian was the standout choice -- a party loyalist whom Fran Werner pragmatically dubbed Denny.
"He has another big long first name but no one could pronounce it and I christened him Denny," said Ms.
Werner, long the doyenne of Queens politics and now the Republicans' county leader as their gubernatorial machine starts humming in all its nontechnological clubhouse glory.
There may be no stronger tribute to Ms.
Werner's leadership than Mr.
Bhagwandian's subsequent decision to bring legal action: not to press a political correctness protest suit over his name, the sort of thing Queens Republicans like to imagine happening easily over in Manhattan, but to formally change it to Denny Bhagwandian.


E. S. Freidus, Long a Teacher Of Disabled, 88
Elizabeth S. Freidus, an innovative teacher of children with learning disabilities who included parents and educators in her instruction, died on Oct. 13 in a nursing home in Burlington, Vt.
She was 88 and had lived in New York City.
She died after a long illness, said Joan Saltzman, a niece.


'City on a Hill'
To the Editor:
I was, of course, delighted with A. M. Rosenthal's generous and thoughtful review of my book "City on a Hill" (Oct. 2).
Readers may have been confused, however, by his uncritical citation of a letter to him from Yolanda T. Moses, the president of City College, noting that only 234 students take remedial writing classes, as well as his observation that only 6.6 percent of the college's classes are considered remedial.
If this is so, then why need anyone concern himself with the shortcomings of the remedial project?


Ayelet V. Tauber, Glenn R. Pollner
Ayelet Vita Tauber, a daughter of Abraham and Tamar Tauber of Forest Hills, Queens, is to be married today to Glenn R. Pollner, a son of Morton and Joan Pollner of New York.
Rabbi David Berkman is to officiate at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.


Quincy Houghton, Christopher Bird
Katherine Quincy Houghton, a daughter of Ruth West Houghton of New York and Congressman Amory Houghton Jr. of Corning, N.Y., and Washington, was married yesterday to Christopher Scott Bird, a son of Mrs.
Theodore R. Smith of Alpine, Wyo., and William Lee Bird of Glendora, Calif.
The Rev.
Marcia Lockwood, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Post Ranch Inn in Big Sur, Calif.
The Rev.
Alanson B. Houghton, an Episcopal priest who is the bride's uncle, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Bird, 32, is known as Quincy.
She is the transition manager at the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father, a former chairman and chief executive of Corning Inc., represents the 34th District of New York.
Her mother is a member of the New York State Council on the Arts.


Writer Earns Own Spotlight
THE man whose name is not yet a household word but who collaborates with the brilliant and famous answers the door to the tune of dogs barking.
Selma, Ida, Ruggles, Minnie and Bongo greet visitors with long tails wagging and paws outstretched, all friendliness and gentle curiosity.
Harry, not a border collie like the others but a red-haired miniature poodle, surveys newcomers from the vantage point of his owner's arms.
The writer Arthur Yorinks loves dogs, but when he wants to hold a serious conversation, he retires to his art-festooned studio where dogs, at least for the moment, are not welcome.
Mr.
Yorinks -- whose creative partners include Maurice Sendak, Philip Glass and Peter Schickele -- has published 11 books, which can be found in the children's section of libraries and bookstores.
He is also an opera librettist and theater director, who in 1990 began his own children's theater company with Mr.
Sendak, the author-illustrator of such books as "Where the Wild Things Are" and "In the Night Kitchen."


Adding Spots of Color to Nature's Palette
THE trees' foliage color is truly spectacular.
Leafers from all over the Northeast are talking about it.
Many are saying this year's is the best ever as their eyes capture the golds, reds, maroons and yellows.
Fall colors splash on the hillsides, form canopies on streets and fill yards.
Meanwhile, shrubs and ornamental grasses that provide their own style in the color scheme are not part of the praise.
Now is the time to set things right and give these plants the credit they deserve.


Choose Your Outplacement Wisely
To the Editor:
What a relief to read your article on outplacement.
So it isn't just me.
One of the first things I found on being outplaced was that I may have been the client, but my ex-employer was the customer.
All the outplacement service had to do was show that the package had been delivered and collect the fee.
It turned out to be a low overhead operation using contract labor to deliver a 20-year-old prepackaged program on behalf of a customer who wanted to avoid lawsuits.


Emily Maranjian, Joseph Fernandez
Emily Ann Maranjian, a daughter of George and Rosy Maranjian of River Vale, N.J., was married yesterday at the West Side Presbyterian Church in Ridgewood, N.J., to Joseph Michael Fernandez, a son of Concepcion G. Fernandez of Erie, Pa., and the late Dr.
Oscar V. Fernandez.
The Rev.
Kent Smith, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony, and Robert V. Thomann, a Roman Catholic deacon, took part in it.
The bride and bridegroom, both 30, graduated from Brown University, she magna cum laude.
They received their law degrees from Harvard University.
In November, the bride is to become an associate at Morvillo, Abramowitz, Grand, Iason &amp; Silberberg, a law firm in New York.
The bridegroom is an associate at Stein, Zauderer, Ellenhorn, Frischer &amp; Sharp, a New York law firm.


Honoring an American  A show of fashion illustrations by Antonio opens at the Louvre, Oct. 14.


Every Faith Takes Its Own Path to the Sacred; 'The Sublime Spectacle'
To the Editor:
To T. S. Eliot, April was the cruelest month, but when it comes to the anniversary of natural disasters, I would choose October.


Costume Maker's Prepared for Any Need
THERE are sure to be at least six Elvis sightings in northern New Jersey this Halloween and reports of close encounters with Mighty Morphin Power Rangers will be almost countless, according to the management of a costume maker here called A Costume Factory.
"Power Rangers are the biggest thing for the kids this Halloween," said R. J. Lewis of Rockaway Township, the 39-year-old president and founder of the costume maker.
Industry reports confirm this.
More than five million youngsters watch the adventures of the six teen-age rangers on a daily television program that began a year ago.
Power Rangers are now a $100 million business, and Saban Entertainment of Los Angeles, which owns the property, is reportedly keeping a tight control on merchandise to avoid saturating the market.


Sports of The Times; Facing the Threats to Sports Itself
QUIETLY but visibly, security people accompany Gary Bettman whenever the National Hockey League commissioner travels in public.
And baseball's acting commissioner, Bud Selig, has confided that he has people following him, meaning people hired to protect him.
Ever since Chris Chelios, a Chicago Blackhawk defenseman, suggested that Bettman should be worried about not only his own safety but also that of his wife and children, hockey's commissioner has been concerned that maybe, just maybe, somebody is out there.
Some of Bettman's mail has been threatening.
So has some of the mail arriving at Selig's office in Milwaukee.


Making the Governor's House a Home. Alone?
HARTFORD: Avail Jan, furnished Georgian Col, 19 rms, 6 acres, prof lndscpng, pool, exclu area, security, grt family home, superb bachelor pad.
A 19-ROOM bachelor pad?
Probably so.
The address is 990 Prospect Avenue.
That's the governor's mansion, Connecticut's most prestigious home for nearly half a century.
Since 1945, when Gov.
Raymond E. Baldwin and his family moved in, the graceful three-story structure has housed the sitting governor and his family, or, in the case of Ella Grasso, her family.


The Los Angeles Resale Market Makes a Comeback
ALAN MESCON, a retired teacher in the San Fernando Valley area of this city, felt anxious last month when he considered putting his late mother's house up for sale.
The market for resale houses here had been notoriously weak for nearly four years.
"I had heard all kinds of stories about the market being so terrible that it would take five or six months to sell the house," he said.


Mako Trinidad and Joseph Antonishek
WHEN they were students at the Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park, N.Y., Joseph Antonishek used to invite Mako Trinidad to his dormitory room for an evening of fine, albeit makeshift, dining.
He would cover a cardboard box with a fancy tablecloth, proper silverware, wine glasses and china (all borrowed from the school) and dim the lights in lieu of candles.
Mr.
Antonishek, 21, now a sous chef at Mesa Grill in the Flatiron district, and Ms.
Trinidad, 26, a sous chef nearby at Bolo, are still a picture of young love.
He picks her up after work every night.
And co-workers say that when they leave, they look as though they are off on a romantic date rather than returning to their tiny apartment, where they regularly read cookbooks to each other to fall asleep.


A Cap for Young
To the Sports Editor:
It's obvious the one Giant the salary cap should have cut is George Young, who apparently has enough power to make even the owner weep.
So Phil Simms had to go.


New Haven Has an Attitude, a New One
HELP!
Bang!
Bang!
New Haven's Children Cry." The blast of graffiti, scrawled in brightly colored letters across the Church Street side of the former Malley's building, now boarded up, is an image hard to miss. Painted by graffiti artists in the last two years, it broadcasts the message to anyone visiting New Haven that the city is a precarious place to be.
But if anyone knows New Haven, particularly its urban neighborhoods, it is Sgt.
Richard Randall who says the message conveys only part of the story.
The head of a community policing substation on the corner of Edgewood and Day streets, the sergeant also patrols an area each day that includes both the wealthiest and poorest areas of the city.


Why Nassau Hired Special Lawyers
Although I disagree with his comments concerning the Mitchel Field lawsuit, it appears that Irving Like, one of the lawyers who sued Nassau County and the Town of Hempstead, has finally found and appropriate forum to air his baseless charges, the media.
Given the abrupt dismissal of his lawsuit by the courts of law, the Letters to the Editor column would have been a better place to start instead of causing the county and the town to spend thousands of dollars to end the lawsuit.
In "What Nassau Omitted on Mitchel Field Case"  [ Sept. 25 ] , Mr.
Like repeats the charges rejected by the courts and argues that each defendant should not have had his or her own attorney.


Bucking the System In a Courtroom Drama
CLAUDIA FAITH DRAPER, a prostitute, is indicted for manslaughter in the first degree.
She killed a customer.
Dr.
Herbert Rosenthal, one of two state-appointed psychiatrists, finds on the strength of a 50-minute conversation against the hostile defendant's will, that she lacks the mental capacity to stand trial.


A Child's Killing Puts Focus on Italy's Roads
WHEN highway bandits gunned down a 7-year-old American boy, Nicholas Green, in southern Italy late last month, the killing inspired deep shock among Americans and Italians.
One reason for that was, simply, the rarity of such violent crime against foreigners.
Southern Italy -- Calabria and Sicily in particular -- is no stranger to violence from the organized-crime networks that flourish there, the Ndrangheta in Calabria and the Cosa Nostra in Sicily.
But it is a violence that generally targets those directly involved in pursuing, or fighting, crime.
The death of Nicholas was the exception, rather than the rule, and seemed far less the result of the systematic targeting of foreigners than has been the case, say, in Miami.


Elizabethan Blockbuster, a Rocky Horror Look
RICHARD III" is a hit at Hartford Stage. A shamelessly commercial pronouncement for a regional theater, that. Yet somehow a sellout -- the run has been extended for a week -- is a fitting thing for a history play that theater historians write of as the breakthrough work of a playwright in his early stirrings. With "Richard III" Shakespeare made it big.
And it isn't easy for an actor to find a bigger, fouler character, more singlemindedly consumed by absolute power, more driven to ascend from "bottled spider" to "England's worthy king." And do actors ever find him.
After such recent American peer predecessors as Al Pacino, Stacy Keach, Michael Moriarty, Denzel Washington and Kevin Kline, it's Richard Thomas's turn to catch what's in a role.


RETURNS OF THE DAY
Nancy V. Raine's story touched me as few rape stories have.
Of course, having survived rape myself, I cannot bear to read very many rape stories.
This is the anniversary season -- I can no longer, mercifully, remember the date or even be sure whether it was October or November -- of my own.
I am not sure what Raine wrote that has touched me so much, alone of the hundreds of articles one comes across.
Perhaps her courage.
Perhaps the support of her family and friends.
My own rape was in 1970, the dark ages, when victims were blamed.
I wasn't so lucky to have that support then and, as a result, could never talk about it in any way that has ever helped me, for my feelings of rage at him are all mixed up with fury at those others -- cops, doctors, nurses, family, women and men friends -- whose own need to deny and whose lack of understanding hurt more than anything.
I hope for Raine's sake that her remembering, that her goddaughter's thoughtful remembering, and similar wondeful gestures, will eventually help her heal.


A Maverick in Every Salon
THE RUIN OF KASCH By Roberto Calasso.
Translated by William Weaver and Stephen Sartarelli. 385 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: The Belknap Press/ Harvard University Press.


Oct. 16-22; A House Royal, A House Divided
If 1992 was, as Queen Elizabeth put it, an "annus horribilis," last week was a "hebdomas horrenda." The Queen's visit to Russia, the first by a reigning British monarch, played out back home under headlines that struck at the judgment and manhood of her son, Prince Charles.
A new play, "The Queen and I," opened in London's West End.
It's set in the future, when the royal family has been kicked out of Buckingham Palace and resides in bug-infested public housing.
The Economist came out with a cover to sum up the public mood: a photograph of the bejeweled British crown under the title "An idea whose time has passed." All this was but a fraction of the whirlwind wrought by the latest controversy to strike Britain's regal dysfunctional family.
It came from the first installment of an authorized biography of the Prince of Wales in which he struck out at his mother, his father and his estranged wife. (His mother was distant, his father harsh, his wife neurotic.)


More Suggestions For Serving Pears
A PEAR is a complicated fruit.
You can't eat it right off the tree like an apple.
If it is allowed to ripen fully before picked, the flesh will be gritty.
If it is harvested too early, the pear never becomes sweet or juicy.
Pears should be picked just before they are ripe, then left for several days at room temperature.
When they are ready, buy a good piece of Roquefort and a bottle of Sauternes and settle down for a treat.


Do Clothes Make the Man?


Tainted Truth?
To the Editor:
In his review of Cynthia Crossen's "Tainted Truth: The Manipulation of Fact in America" (July 31), H. W. Lewis contends that the Natural Resources Defense Council, where I am a senior attorney, "makes its living by scaring people." Mr.
Lewis contends that our report finding that the pesticide Alar threatened public health "was scientifically wrong." It is Mr.
Lewis who is scientifically wrong, apparently accepting at face value the "tainted truth" in the book.


SUNDAY, October 23, 1994; Read Dirty to Me
Never underestimate the word.
Just when images were supposed to supplant text, when narrative was dead, when special effects were supposed to take the place of thought, comes "Venus in Furs" the work by Leopold von Sacher-Masoch that added an ism to his name, this time on tape.
Books on audio cassettes have been doing well.
Phone sex is a growth industry.
Why not put the two together, under a patina of class?
Prelude Audio Books, a British company, has done just that, publishing a dozen "erotic literary classics" on tape (abridged), read by prominent actors and actresses.
The cassettes are not yet sold in the United States, but the company hopes to release them here soon.
Titles include Henry Miller's "Tropic of Capricorn" and "Tropic of Cancer," the Marquis de Sade's "Justine," Vatsyayana's "Kama Sutra," Anais Nin's "Henry and June" and that monumental literary achievement "Emmanuelle."


F.Y.I.
More Taxi-Driver Lore Q.  Is it true that you can measure the experience of taxicab drivers by their license numbers?
In other words, can I tell how many times they've been around the block?


Mary R. Langan, David C. Irish
Mary Radclyffe Langan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Langan of Concord, Mass., was married yesterday to David Christopher Irish, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Irish of Basking Ridge, N.J.
The Rev.
Austin H. Fleming performed the ceremony at Our Lady Help of Christians Roman Catholic Church in West Concord, Mass.
The bride, 26, and the bridegroom, 28, graduated from Hartwick College.
She is a sales manager at the J. Crew store in Cambridge, Mass.
Her father retired as the coordinator of the art program in the Concord public schools and at the Concord-Carlisle Regional High School.
Her mother, Caroline W. Langan, teaches English as a second language in the Concord-Carlisle Adult and Continuing Education Program.
The bride is the granddaughter of Mrs.
Henry Lyttleton Savage of Princeton, N.J., and the late Dr.
Savage, who was an archivist at the Firestone Library of Princeton University.


The Deer Hunter


A Born-Again Mom
UNPLANNED PARENTHOOD The Confessions of a Seventysomething Surrogate Mother.
By Liz Carpenter. 231 pp.
New York: Random House.


Oct. 16-22: Closing the Books; Stanford Settles With Navy On Disputed Research Costs
Stanford University last week settled what had become an embarrassing fraud case with the Navy over costs related to Government research.
In repaying the Office of Naval Research $1.2 million for costs that Stanford now concedes the Government should never have been billed for, the university was cleared of fraud by the Navy, which said that most of the charges of $230 million that the university had submitted were, in fact, legal.


It's High Noon for a Big Maker of Toy Guns
DANIEL SHURE returned home a week ago Friday from a routine business trip in Hong Kong expecting to spend a quiet weekend at home with his children, catching up on the mail.
"Instead," he said, "I get to the office to find the phones ringing off the hook, my dad in the showroom with a television camera and microphone in his face, and my executive vice president telling me I'd better sit down."
Like it or not, the 37-year-old Mr.
Shure had landed in the center of perhaps the nation's liveliest debate: whether the world is too dangerous a place to allow children to play with toy guns.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
97.20
98.20
108.05
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5000
1.5200
1.6171
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3512
1.3547
1.3048
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6270
1.5940
1.4725
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$390.80
$387.40
$370.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


A Survivor Returns to His Joyful Family and His Yeshiva
The caterers had laid out the silverware immaculately in the apartment in Crown Heights on Thursday night.
Places were set, huge dishes adorning the tables.
There were glasses for drink, candles and fine cloth.
And there were 60 or so relatives and friends.
"It was like a wedding," said Chanie Sasonkin.


In War Over Euclid Hall, Issue Is Trustworthiness
To the Editor:
The essay about Euclid Hall is asmooth piece of writing.
Unfortunately, it is concerned more with creating a myth than with the facts.
In this new mythology, those opposed to the plans for the hotel are described as having "knee-jerk negative reactions to every initiative to house the homeless and others in our community in need of help," as being afraid of "plummeting property values" and as wanting no part of "lost, confused penniless people." I disagree with these and many characterizations in the article.


Dumbing Down
Last summer, I ran into my neighbor when I dropped by the pool for an evening swim.
She was sitting in the slanting sunshine, a closed paperback on her lap, as she and the other swim-team mothers waited for practice to end.
I asked how her sons were enjoying the summer and she told me how well they were doing on the team.
She even told me their best lap times, in seconds, down to the hundredths.
This was not bragging -- simply the way things are around here.
Yet when she asked about my daughters, I didn't tell her that both had been accepted for the highly selective academic programs in their respective schools.
This was also the way things are around here.


Table fo Two On the Seine


Why Should Your Noise Be My Noise?
To the Editor:
Re "Perfectly Pianissimo" (Topics of the Times, Oct. 16): The silent piano is a step forward toward the goal of providing peace and quiet to people, but only a small one.


Tarred With a Brush Too Broad
Michael Huffington, a Republican member of the House who is running for the Senate in California against Dianne Feinstein, has that he wants "a government that does nothing." That is an odd comment from a man who has already spent $18 million, most of it his own money, to remain part of the national legislature he now derides.
But Mr.
Huffington's curious logic has a sound tactical base.
The voters are in a foul frame of mind, deeply cynical about politicians, about Washington's capacity to improve their lives and indeed about the whole idea of legislation.
This in turn has translated into a sharp contempt for incumbents.
Mr.
Huffington's remark is merely the reductio ad absurdum of the popular wisdom that the best way to get to Washington is to run against it.


Math Below Par
To the Sports Editor:
Larry Dorman may have a decent golf swing, but his multiplication needs some grooving.
Dorman reasons that since the Great Big Bertha driver is 25 percent larger than the Big Bertha, which is 25 percent larger than a conventional driver, the Great Big Bertha is 50 percent larger.
Actually, 1 (conventional) x 1.25 = 1.25 (Big Bertha) x 1.25 = 1.563 (Great Big Bertha).
The Great Big Bertha should be a little over 56 percent larger than the old standby.


Progress Seen In Cleanup Of Oil Spill
As fuel continued to flow from damaged pipelines into the San Jacinto River east of here today, officials expressed cautious optimism about efforts to contain the disaster, predicting that the spill could be cleaned up in a week.
At a news conference this morning, Ron Brinkley, the on-site coordinator for the Texas General Land Office, which participates in the cleanup of environmental disasters in the state, said that the effect on the shoreline until now had been "minimal," although there had been unconfirmed reports of pelicans soiled by oil.


New Culture, New Stresses
In 1983, when St.
Rita's Asian Center opened to serve the Bronx's growing number of Cambodian and Vietnamese refugees, the new arrivals needed help learning basic tasks like locking doors and using toilet paper.
Now, the center is holding workshops on problems more familiar to Americans: battered wives, alcoholism and conflicts between parents and teen-agers.
The reorientation is a measure of the new difficulties facing thousands of Southeast Asian refugees who were resettled in the Bronx, particularly around University Heights, under the Refugee Act of 1980.
To some extent, the Cambodians and Vietnamese in University Heights are experiencing any immigrant's challenges in adjusting to a new culture.
But, often, their transition is made harder because they are refugees of war and genocide.


Newfoundland
To the Editor: My husband and I were happily reminded of 10 fine days in Newfoundland by Clyde H. Farnsworth's article ("Where Newfoundland's Vikings Walked," Sept. 4).
We would like to add three notes:


Sometimes, Dance and Art Don't Mix
In some ways, it's a familiar story: sexually explicit artwork provokes outcry and removal, followed by accusations of censorship.
But in this case, the accused censor is one of the city's most progressive arts institutions: Dance Theater Workshop.
The furor began two weeks ago, when an art show called "Legs," consisting of 31 paintings, was being installed in the public gallery space at the theater, at 219 West 19th Street.
A dance instructor preparing to teach a class of 6- and 7-year-olds became concerned when she saw "Double Fantasy," an explicit, eight-foot-high oil painting of two men engaged in sex.


World Markets; Beyond German Elections, Pessimism
LEADING up to Germany's presidential elections last Sunday, some investors thought the time had come for the 1994 German bull market.
The polls indicated that Chancellor Helmut Kohl would win an unprecedented fourth term in office, and stocks on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange in anticipation of that victory were soaring.
Five trading days after Mr.
Kohl's narrow election victory, however, many are wondering where all their joy has gone.
On Monday, the market started heading downward, and by the end of the week, the DAX 30 stock index had lost more than 4 percent of its value, closing at 2,016.60.


The New Fit And Flare
Two major fashion trends were seen in the audience at the spring fashion collections in Paris last week: the knee-length hemline and the revival of the feminine princess line.
Elizabeth Tilberis, left, the editor in chief of Harper's Bazaar, and Anna Wintour, right, the editor in chief of Vogue, appeared in similar Chanel coats cut from the same salt-and-pepper wool.
The seaming emphasizing the torso gives both coats their fit and flare.
The feminine silhouette is achieved with small rounded shoulders and narrowed sleeves, signaling a return to a softer, romantic look.


Where's the Money?
A PIECE OF THE ACTION How the Middle Class Joined the Money Class.
By Joseph Nocera. 464 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.


Sad Loss, Sweet Memories: Bidding Adieu to Brigitte of Chez Brigitte
Chez Brigitte has become something of a Greenwich Village legend: a tiny French bistro with a short-order twist where dishes like stuffed Cornish hen cost less than $8 and are served across a faded yellow countertop to customers seated on red swivel stools.
Until she retired to Florida about a decade ago, Brigitte Catapano, a native of Marseilles who founded the restaurant in 1961, was just as well known.
"Everybody in the neighborhood knew her," said Rosa Santos, who worked for Mrs.
Catapano for 22 years and now owns Chez Brigitte.
"She was a very special person. She was like family to me."


He Got the Poop on America
WINCHELL Gossip, Power and the Culture of Celebrity.
By Neal Gabler.
Illustrated. 681 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $30.


The Life of a Romanticist and Rebel in "The Pride of Miss Jean Brodie"
IT'S been more than 25 years since theatergoers were introduced to the eccentricities of "Miss Jean Brodie." Thoroughly deserving of top billing in the gallery of unforgettable stage characters, the iconoclastic schoolteacher has been claimed by theatrical legend in the performances of Vanessa Redgrave (London) and Zoe Caldwell (Broadway).
Then came Maggie Smith bearing for Jean Brodie the assurance of cinematic immortality -- and an Oscar.
Given antecedents of such intimidating luster, one wondered how a small theater like Centenary Stage Company could render an outsized star turn.
For "The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie," adapted by Jay Presson Allen from the novel by Muriel Spark, is less a play than a display piece, and if it has anything to say, it's that the magnificently odd can be done in by the hopelessly mediocre and the haplessly vindictive.


Seeta Chaganti, James M. Guiry
Seeta Chaganti, a daughter of Drs.
Raju and Seeta Chaganti of New York, was married yesterday to James Matthew Guiry, a son of Peter and Veronica Guiry of Nesconset, L.I.
The Rev.
Vernon C. Nichols performed the Unitarian Universalist ceremony at the Museum House of the National Society of Colonial Dames in New York.
Ms.
Chaganti is keeping her name.
She teaches English at the Sidwell Friends School in Washington and is studying for a master's degree in English literature at Georgetown University.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is a professor of cell biology and genetics at Cornell University's Graduate School of Medical Sciences.
He is also the chief of the cytogenetics service at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, where the bride's mother is a molecular geneticist.


Nixon's Last Taunts
It's become perfectly clear that the mostly worshipful obituaries of Richard Nixon in April failed to give the man his due.
The politician we so enjoyed kicking around for half a century kicked back in the most resourceful ways.
A new study of his talent reveals perhaps his greatest achievement and finds him hurling yet another challenge at the media he despised, and played so well.
If those who daily bemoan the media's cynicism and banality would reflect on Nixon's mastery of the information environment, they'd realize that in the eternal contest between politicians and journalists it is the current crop of politicians who don't measure up.
Which of them can boast of manipulations and retaliations comparable to these: *
Nixon became a media star by catching Alger Hiss at perjury, thus impelling the media to chronicle a melodramatic career fueled and finally destroyed by lying.


Smoking Section
To the Editor:
The Oct. 18 full-page ad for Philip Morris displays the cigarette's new strategic ad campaign, "choice" being the operative buzzword.
Your front page shows a photo of King Hussein of Jordan lighting up a cigarette for Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel after a ceremony in which the two leaders initiated a peace agreement.
The Philip Morris public relations campaign couldn't have prayed or paid for a better juxtaposition.
SUSAN KRAUS  New York, Oct. 19, 1994


Lois V. Vierk and Bruce Ide
Lois V. Vierk, a New York-based composer of avant-garde music who has written for the Kronos Quartet and others, was married yesterday to Bruce Ide, the founder and president of Capital Consulting in West New York, N.J.
The Rev.
Lynell Carter, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony at the T Salon, a restaurant in New York.
The bride, 43, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles and received a master's degree in music composition from the California Institute of the Arts.
She is the daughter of Nora and Ernest Vierk of Doylestown, Pa.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


3-Way Contest in the 19th After All
WHEN Joseph J. DioGuardi says that the 19th Congressional District race "is not just a matter of Sue Kelly vs. Ham Fish," many political observers see beyond the campaign rhetoric and agree.
They say that Mr.
DioGuardi -- a former two-term Republican Representative now running on the Conservative and Right-to-Life lines in the 19th -- is posing a serious challenge to the Democratic and Republican candidates and has become a viable player in the three-way contest.
"Don't look to conventional wisdom when judging this race," said the 53-year-old Mr.
DioGuardi, who represented the former 18th District from 1985 to 1989.
Mr.
DioGuardi, a former New Rochelle resident, now lives in Thornwood.


Period Pieces by Homer, Modern River Views
MAGAZINE illustrations by Winslow Homer and contemporary photographs of the Hudson River Valley are two of the current attractions at the Hudson River Museum here.
The Homers hang in the Glenview Mansion, a marvelous jumble of mansards and turrets with an Eastlake-style interior, which was the last word in modernity when erected in 1876-1877.
Though long since elbowed into the background by the concrete modernism of the museum, the house nonetheless makes a perfect setting for an artist who was hitting his stride in the same decade but whose best paintings and watercolors do not date.


Oct. 16-22: Flood and Fire; Deluges in Southeast Texas Are Prelude to Pipeline Woes And Higher Fuel-Prices
In southeast Texas by the end of the week, there was hell on high water.
A gigantic fireball erupted from a broken gasoline pipeline Thursday on the flood-swollen San Jacinto River near Houston, sending plumes of flame and smoke hundreds of feet into the air, and sending something else upward as well: the nation's gasoline prices.


Hi, Sports Fans! Tonight's Bargaining. . .
BASEBALL'S been dead since Aug. 12 and the World Series was canceled.
Hockey will not start until sometime in November, if it ever does.
Basketball has labor woes that could result in a work stoppage.
Football players are on the job but moaning about the effects of the salary cap.
For jollies, we've been forced to watch and listen to the labor blues, as whined by the likes of Donald Fehr, the head of the baseball players' union, and Gary Bettman, the National Hockey League Commissioner.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
CAN YOU TRUST A TOMATO IN JANUARY?
The Hidden Life of Groceries and Other Secrets of the Supermarket Revealed at Last By Vince Staten.
Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $10.
The forgotten history of Worcestershire sauce, the origin of the name of Green Goddess salad dressing and the evolution of Coca-Cola are just a few of the subjects the author examines.
He "gives us details and lots of hearty laughs," Laurie Graham said here last year.
In the same review, she also praised THE ROAD TO MY FARM, by Nora Janssen Seton (Penguin, $10.95), an investigation of the principles and practices of agriculture by a young woman whose agrarian ambitions at first seemed incompatible with her classical Harvard education.
Ms.
Graham called her book "wide-ranging, sensible and wryly self-aware."


Beach Crowds Were Stuck on the Parkways
"A Burgeoning Tourist Turnout Overshadows Decline at Beaches"  [ Sept. 18 ]  cannot seem to fathom the reason for the decline in numbers of attendance at Jones Beach for the past summer.
The reporter apparently never even attempted to visit the beach on any given day.
If he had he would have been like countless thousands of others forced to sit on the feeding parkways, hour after hour, day after day, week after week all summer long.


How a Chef Makes All the Difference
STEVEN WILKINSON is something of a legend among Connecticut River area chefs for his pioneer work in nouvelle cuisine but his celebrated French restaurant, Fine Bouche, is no more.
Weep not though, for Chef Wilkinson has regrouped on the same premises in Centerbrook with a new name, Steve's Centerbrook Cafe, and a French-Mediterranean menu with Asian accents that reflects changing food habits and a more natural, casual style of eating.
At first glance, the sedately pretty dining rooms, in off white and pale peach with lace curtains, white-painted rattan chairs and Impressionist-style paintings, look much as before, though not quite as casual as the new restaurant name suggests.
The short menu quickly tells the new story though: less ambitious, featuring pastas and many grilled entrees, with threads of Asian, especially Thai, ingredients woven into the Mediterranean tapestry.


Habitats/520 East 72d Street; Owner Despite Herself
CATHY GRAHAME, who was born in Ireland and lived in Greece for three years and Holland for two, is a peripatetic leader of vacationers.
When she came to New York City in the summer of 1980 she never thought she would come to own any real estate, especially a co-op in Manhattan.


Robbery Conviction Upset on Police Evidence-Tampering Appeal
In the latest fallout from an evidence-tampering scandal involving the New York State Police, a state appeals court has ruled that a man convicted of robbery and burglary should have been allowed greater latitude to pursue a defense that state police investigators fabricated evidence against him.
In a decision issued Thursday, a five-judge panel ruled unanimously that a trial court judge violated the defendant's constitutional rights when the judge refused to allow a former state police investigator to be questioned about assertions that his supervisor had suggested that he fake evidence in the case and that other troopers were aware of the evidence tampering.


A House Awash In Indian Detailing
To the Editor:
It was good to learn that the Lockwood de Forest house at 7 East 10th Street with its wonderful Indian carved wood facade and interiors  [ "A Greenwich Village House Awash in Indian Detailing," Sept. 11 ]  will now be protected as the new home of the Bronfman Center for Jewish Student Life.


Comedy Without Words for Children of All Ages
WHEN MAURICE SENDAK, THE award-winning designer and children's-book illustrator, and Arthur Yorinks, the children's author, created the Night Kitchen Theater Company in 1990, they hoped to "reinvigorate and revolutionize" theater for children and adults.
The results will be on view for the first time in New York when two plays without dialogue, written and directed by Mr.
Yorinks, open in repertory for 10 days at the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center.
"It's Alive!," about trick-or-treating at the house of a mad scientist, with sound effects to match, opens on Friday; "So, Sue Me," a comedy about six hapless construction workers, opens on Saturday.
Mr.
Sendak's backdrop for "It's Alive!" and his costume designs for the play are timely: Halloween hovers.


At Work; Sex Differences, or Something Else?
CERTAIN notions just seem right.
They settle heavily into the collective unconscious and become impossible to dislodge, objective reality to the contrary.
The belief that the Beatles were a better band than the Rolling Stones, for example.
Or the idea that men and women are so empathically different from each other that their mutual dealings require, in effect, cross-cultural communication.
This last dubious and fashionable proposition gets its most sophisticated -- and thus most dangerous -- support yet in Deborah Tannen's new book, "Talking From 9 to 5" (William Morrow), in which she applies familiar ideas from her earlier books, "That's Not What I Meant!: How Conversational Style Makes or Breaks Your Relations With Others," and "You Just Don't Understand: Women and Men In Conversation."


Lisa A. Turiel, Jonathan L. Israel
Lisa Ann Turiel, a daughter of Bernard and Lynn Turiel of Westfield, N.J., was married there last evening to Jonathan Lee Israel, a son of Dr.
Robert Israel of Glendale, Calif., and Frances Israel of Palos Verdes Estates, Calif.
Rabbi Charles A. Kroloff performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El.
The bride, 28, is an associate at the New York law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University and received her law degree from Boston University.
Her father is a lawyer in Iselin, N.J., and her mother manages his office.


Trouble On the Terrace
A TERRACE or a balcony in a New York City co-op provides a personal oasis in a concrete desert.
But they can prove troublesome.
One problem is that owners' proprietary feelings about these treasured spaces are increasingly running afoul of co-op corporations' needs to make sure that the entire structure, of which a terrace or balcony is an integral part, remains safe and habitable.


Mistrust Is Said to Flaw Investigation of Transit Officer's Shooting
The investigation into the subway shooting of an undercover transit policeman by an off-duty New York City police officer has been plagued by tension and mistrust between the two departments and damaged by a major mistake in handling physical evidence, law-enforcement officials involved in the case say.
The mistake involved the handling of the transit officer's clothing by the city Police Department's crime lab, the officials say.
The clothing, handled as if it were part of a routine investigation, was tested in a special solution less than 48 hours after the August shooting to determine whether the holes in the officer's shirt and jacket were caused by bullets.
No one knows why this test was performed, since it was already common knowledge that the holes were caused by bullets.


Tradition's Tug Returns Episcopal Parish to Rome
For the Episcopalians at the Church of St.
Mary the Virgin, the first step on the road to Rome came at an angry parish meeting one hot Friday night in July 1991.
Their denomination, the 2.4 million-member Episcopal Church, had just concluded its triennial convention.
And the church's traditionalists, who had already been defeated in the battle over ordaining women, seemed to have lost again, with their objections to the consecration of a female bishop having come to naught.


For Congressional Candidates, Washington Is a Four-Letter Word
In this year of the anti-incumbent, almost any Washington connection beyond a trip with the kids to the Lincoln Memorial is being considered a potential weapon to be used against Congressional candidates.
The evidence is all around the New York region.
Gary L. Ackerman of New York, after 11 years in Congress, says he isn't really an incumbent because redistricting has made him a new face for many of his constituents.
A spokesman for Carolyn B. Maloney, a first-term Congresswoman from New York, defends his boss's honor by pointing out that she has been in Washington for barely 18 months.
And amid charges and countercharges of experience inside the Beltway, Philip M. Schiliro, a Congressional hopeful from Long Island, is defending himself against attempts to make an issue of the fact that he recently lived in nearby Virginia.


A Fondness For the Famous
When it comes to human beings, Louis Schlamowitz has no favorites.
On the wall of his apartment in the Bay View housing projects in Canarsie hangs a signed photo of Richard M. Nixon, right next to one of John F. Kennedy.
An autographed photo of David N. Dinkins rests next to one of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
He owns hundreds of photos of President Clinton, but he also has a signed mug shot of the entire Whitewater investigation team.


Outrage and Frustration Fueling a Vendor's Protest
With a degree in business administration, another job as a merchandiser for a department store and a studied cadence in virtually each sentence, Bruce L. Tabbs has an air more like a thirty-something investment banker than an illegal peddler.
Nonetheless, Mr.
Tabbs and two partners operated three stands selling shirts, books and artwork on 125th Street, just below the Adam Clayton Powell State Office Building.
And what he shares with the more than 1,000 street peddlers who have been forced off 125th Street is outrage and frustration.


Todd R. Watkins and Julia B. White
Julia Brett White, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert G. White of Milton, Mass., was married yesterday to Todd Ray Watkins, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas Watkins Sr. of Elkins Park, Pa.
The Rev.
George Salzmann performed the ceremony at the St.
Paul Roman Catholic Church in Cambridge, Mass.
The bride, 29, will be known as Julia Watkins White.
She graduated from Harvard University, as did her husband.
She is a consultant with Shared Medical Systems, a health care information systems company based in Malvern, Pa.
Her father is the president of New England Frozen Foods, a distributor in Southborough, Mass.


More Gun Violence, and Better Care for Victims
"Multiple gunshot wounds. Coming in by chopper. Four minutes."
The announcement rustled the calm of the Medstar unit, the trauma center at the Washington Hospital Center.
Doctors, nurses and paramedics left the remains of a Chinese take-out dinner, noted the score of the football game on a lounge television and grabbed a chance to visit the bathroom.


Tivoli Plans Its First Winter Season
Tivoli Gardens has been a summertime tradition in Copenhagen for 151 years, but this year the park's 110,000 colored lights will also serve as Christmas decorations for the first time.
Tivoli, which ended its regular season on Sept. 18, will open for the holidays Nov. 18 to New Year's Eve, but not on Dec. 24, 25 and 26.
The park will close after a fireworks display ushers in 1995 and will begin its regular season April 19.
During its holiday session Tivoli will not operate its rides.
But several of its restaurants will be open, serving traditional Danish holiday fare like pork roast, duck and goose served with red cabbage and glazed potatoes, sweet dumplings and glogg.
Visitors will also be able to shop at booths selling Christmas gifts and decorations.
One of them will be operated by Royal Copenhagen-Georg Jensen, which will sell its line of Christmas ornaments among other gifts.
Productions of Dickens's "Great Expectations" will be performed (in Danish) in the Glass House Theater; tickets are $17 to $25.
There are plans to open Tivoli for subsequent Christmas seasons with expanded activities, according to Danish tourist officials.
For 1995, for example, the park's artificial lake will be frozen for skating.


Barbara Shaffer, Francis Fortunato
Barbara Ann Shaffer, the daughter of Roy and Betty Shaffer of Bel Air, Md., was married yesterday to Francis X. Fortunato, a son of Samuel F. and Mary Ann Fortunato of Little Silver, N.J.
The Rev.
Kenneth Farabaugh performed the ceremony at St.
Ignatius Roman Catholic Church in Hickory, Md.
The bride, 32, is keeping her name.
She is a lawyer in the Government programs department at U.S.
Healthcare, the health maintenance organization in Blue Bell, Pa.
She graduated from Jacksonville University and she and her husband received law degrees from Catholic University of America.


To What Lengths One Goes For the Scent of a Rose
WHEN my father died about three years ago, he left a rather vast collection of old hybrid tea roses that had been regularly sprayed with fungicides and pesticides to keep the leaves free of black spot, powdery mildew and insects.
The roses were beautiful, of course, though the leaves sometimes had a chemical smell, and in June, the house in Maryland was always full of them.
My favorites were the deep velvety reds and a few of the yellows -- because these, despite their oft-crossed genes, still smelled like roses.


McNair, With Record Distance, Seeks Degree
Steve McNair arrived at college nearly four years ago much like most freshmen.
Sure, he was different in that he had gained a full scholarship as a football player, as a quarterback, and his dreams on the field were big ones.
But off it, in the classroom, he was like all the rest.
There was a quiet fear.
He wondered if he would make the grade.
On both counts at Alcorn State -- on the field and in the classroom -- McNair has passed the test.


We Think, Therefore We Must Rethink
PITY the poor social scientist.
On Monday he is criticized for lack of scientific rigor.
On Tuesday the problem is too much science -- a "scientism" based on crude imitation of the real thing.
Some of the social sciences -- economics, for example, and demography -- have adapted the quantitative methods of the natural sciences with much-admired results.
Others struggle with the nature of their inquiry.
Is political science a science?
An art?
Or just politics?
Enter the social scientist Charles Murray and the psychologist Richard J. Herrnstein and their scramble through the thickets of psychometrics, the century-old science of human intelligence.
Their new book, "The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life" (The Free Press), with its argument that intelligence is inherited, largely immutable and distributed unequally among ethnic groups, has loosed the predictably furious debate: Are I.Q. tests, upon which the authors rely heavily, accurate measures of brain power?
Is the nature-nurture problem really largely irrelevant?
Has science shown that black Americans, with a few exceptions, have little choice but to accept permanent second-class status (ameliorated, the authors suggest in a separate essay in The New Republic, by a pride of "clan")?


Jacqueline S. Wasser, Joel Tractenberg
Jacqueline Sue Wasser, the managing director of Nancy Behrman Communications, a public relations company, was married last evening to Joel Simon Tractenberg, a freelance advertising copywriter.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Leonid Feldman officiated at the Breakers Hotel in Palm Beach, Fla.
Mrs.
Tractenberg, 28, graduated from Brown University.
She is a daughter of Judith Messing of Palm Beach and a stepdaughter of Gilbert Messing.
Mr.
Messing is an associate vice president of Dean Witter Reynolds in Palm Beach.


Just 1 Fight Stands Out Among 4 State Senate Races
WHEN voters in the county head to the polls on Election Day, only about a fourth of them will have a choice between major party candidates for the State Senate.
Three of four candidates -- all incumbents -- are running virtually unopposed.
The only real race is in the 37th District, where the Democratic candidate, Alfred B. DelBello, is vying with the Republican nominee, Vincent L. Leibell 3d, for the seat abandoned by George E. Pataki in his pursuit of the statehouse.
The lack of choice offered the vast majority of voters this year is seen by some as a reflection of a campaign finance system that gives an overwhelming advantage to incumbent legislators and discourages challengers.
Incumbents enjoy perquisites like legislative mailings, large staffs wanting to keep their jobs and statewide political committees that provide financial support.


In War Over Euclid Hall, Issue Is Trustworthiness
To the Editor:
The Oct. 9 Soapbox essay, "Euclid Hall: The Wrong War," argued the wrong issue.
No one I know disputes that residents with supportive services are better off than those without.
Nobody disputes that Euclid Hall is in better shape than it was before 1989.
These are red herrings, designed to obfuscate the heart of the issue -- promises made and then broken.
When the West Side Federation for Senior Housing, the nonprofit that manages Euclid Hall, met with several neighborhood groups in '89, federation officials described the proposed program as one for homeless people over 50 or 55 years of age without special needs -- that is, people with no histories of mental illness, criminal records or substance abuse.
These neighborhood groups were in favor of the plan.
Community Board 7 passed a resolution in support of those specifics, and Mayor Koch publicly supported the plan as a senior citizen program.


The Inquiring Interloper
BECAUSE he has visited just about every unusual landmark and landscape Long Island has to offer, Bob Cammann has been dubbed the Arthur Frommer of the Island.
Perhaps one should add the Forrest Gump, as well.
"Always go to the end of the alley," Mr.
Cammann advises those who would follow in his traveling footsteps.
Like the fictional Mr.
Gump, Mr.
Cammann has a propensity for folksy sayings and finding himself in the middle of historical happenings.


Charles Norlander Katherine L. Schupf, Albert C. Kim
Katherine Louise Schupf, a daughter of Harriet L. Warm of Cleveland and Axel Schupf of New York, was married last evening to Albert Choong Kim, the son of Dr.
Ouk Lee Kim of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Dr.
Kyung Kim.
Rabbi Martin Zion performed the ceremony at the Pierre Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Kim, 29, graduated from Amherst College and is a managing editor at HarperCollins, the publishing company in New York.
Her mother, who is retired, was a first vice president of Bank Leumi in New York.
Her father is the president of H. A. Schupf &amp; Company, investment advisers in New York.
He was until recently the chairman of the Jewish Museum in New York.


A Box That's Well Rounded
SO I get into the 960, right?
It's the new Volvo, a 1995 four-door station wagon dressed in a green so dark that it looks black -- except when the sun is on it, and then there are speckles of gold in that lovely forest paint.
But I'm confused.
Where are the side-impact air bags we've heard so much about?
I've read that they are in the seats, and they pop out to protect the occupants if the car is T-boned.
But where are they?
Well hidden, is my first guess.


Lighting Up, But Only In Public
INSIDE the French Roast Cafe in Greenwich Village on a recent night, Dawn Randall sat blowing fat clouds of smoke.
They drifted over the tables of the people squeezed all around her, some of them sipping lattes, others mowing down undersize sandwiches and one of them simply knitting.
In that self-contained world of small food, drinks without danger and a natural-fiber baby blanket in the making, Ms.
Randall was doing something decidedly bad.


Fear Always, Death Often
GREEN RIVER RISING By Tim Willocks. 359 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $23.


Karen Anne Post, Jonathon Nevett
Karen Anne Post and Jonathon Lance Nevett, both associates at Washington law firms, were married last evening at Temple Emanuel of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Gilbert Rosenthal performed the ceremony.
The bride, 27, works at Dow, Lohnes &amp; Albertson.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her law degree from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Paula Post and Dr.
Arthur Post of Merrick, L.I.
The bride's father is a dentist in Briarwood, Queens.
Her mother is a vice president at Chemical Bank in New York.


MANHATTAN MINUTE
FARE THEE WELL, FERRIS?: Columbia University is studying whether to replace Ferris Booth Hall, a modernist sore thumb among the campus's stately, turn-of-the-century buildings.
Over the next six months, Bernard Tschumi Architects, in association with Gruzen Samton Architects, Planners &amp; Interior Designers, will create plans for a new student center to replace the four-story, red-brick and limestone structure.
"I think in all candor this is one building that has not become a beloved landmark," says Emily Lloyd, Columbia's executive vice president for administration. . . .
TELEVISION CITY, IT IS: Developers of a planned theme restaurant in Rockefeller Center win a Federal court ruling Wednesday for rights to the name Television City.
CBS, whose Los Angeles studio bears the same name, is appealing. . . .
TROLLEY FEVER: Community Board 2 briefly considers, and then rejects, asking the city to see if rebuilding an Eighth Street trolley line makes sense.
Proponents, inspired by a proposal in the May issue of Streetcar News, a newsletter started to help the push for a 42d Street trolley, say they haven't given up.
"Once the powers that be feel this is important to the city's economy, to its cultural life and its environmental situation," said George Haikalis, a transportation consultant, "we will get not only the Eighth Street trolley but a whole network across the city."


Bad Stereotype
To the Sports Editor:
After reading "Schools to Decide on S.A.T. Standards," (The Times, Sept. 29) and as a future physical education teacher, I am a little disturbed with the example the new proposal for college entrance will set for the youth in our high schools.
Once again we are setting a bad precedent that athletes can slide by without complying to the normal academic standards used for other students.
We are promoting the dumb jock stereotype.
The message the youth will receive will be that if you are a good athlete, it doesn't matter what kind of grades you get.
CHRIS BEAGAN  Parlin, N.J.


Journal; The Sell Curve
What if you yell "Fire!" in a crowded theater when the sprinkler system is already on?
This may be the only real philosophical question raised by "The Bell Curve," the book by Charles Murray and the late Richard Herrnstein that has monopolized magazine covers and inflamed pundits for two weeks.


Corrections
A front-page article last Sunday about the planning behind a new Hollywood studio misstated the involvement of John Napier, the designer of "Cats" and other Broadway productions, with the film maker Steven Spielberg.
Mr.
Napier was the visual consultant for Mr.
Spielberg's film "Hook"; he was not involved with the "Indiana Jones" films.


EXTRAVAGANT GESTURES
In exotic silks and satins, the designers of fall's haute couture realizes their evening fantasies.


Adding Spots of Color to Nature's Palette
THE trees' foliage color is truly spectacular.
Leafers from all over the Northeast are talking about it.
Many are saying this year's is the best ever as their eyes capture the golds, reds, maroons and yellows.
Fall colors splash on the hillsides, form canopies on streets and fill yards.
Meanwhile, shrubs and ornamental grasses that provide their own style in the color scheme are not part of the praise.
Now is the time to set things right and give these plants the credit they deserve.


Owners To Remove $1 Billion Guarantee
The salary-cap proposal that triggered the strike that killed the World Series is about to become even less appealing to the players.
According to a memo sent to the clubs last week, the owners plan to withdraw the $1 billion guarantee they offered players in their original proposal.
The guarantee was a significant element of the plan in which the owners would give the players 50 percent of their revenue for salaries and other player costs.
The $1 billion figure was based on the projected players' share of the owners' estimated $1.78 billion revenue this year.


New Airline Planned For the Caribbean
British Airways, five Caribbean governments and a group of private investors have agreed to start a new airline to provide competition to Leeward Islands Air Transport, or LIAT, on its routes among Caribbean islands.


Robin L. Goldman and Marc E. Miller
Robin Lynn Goldman, a daughter of Richard and Barbara Goldman of Merrick, L.I., was married on Oct. 8 to Marc Evan Miller, a son of Sidney and Rona Miller of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Jerome Davidson officiated at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Mrs.
Miller graduated from Emory University and received a master's degree in physical therapy from Columbia University.
She is a physical therapist at Profitness Physical Therapy in New York.
Her father is a certified public accountant in Merrick.


Congressional Races to Watch


RETURNS OF THE DAY
While I do not remember the exact date I graduated from medical school, I do remember the date I was raped.


Clarion Call


How Veddy
MRS.
THATCHER'S MINISTER The Private Diaries of Alan Clark.
By Alan Clark.
Illustrated. 421 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $30.


Eve E. Cohen, Keith A. Porter
Eve Elizabeth Cohen, the daughter of Drs.
Richard and Sandra Cohen of San Francisco, is to be married today to Keith Alan Porter, a son of Jerome and Dorothy Porter of Larkspur, Calif.
Rabbi Robert Daum is to officiate at the Kohl Mansion in Burlingame, Calif.
The bride, 29, is the director for the International Nonproliferation Media Project at New York University's Center for War, Peace and the News Media.
She graduated from Columbia University and received a master's degree in international policy studies from the Monterey Institute for International Studies.


SUNDAY, October 23, 1994; Virtual Rodeo
When movies and television slam images at viewers constantly and video games provide realistic blood and gore, what is poor rodeo to do?
There's only one event at a time and some of the competitors don't even get hurt.
One answer: rodeo not as it is but as it could be.
The photo above is a computer-manipulated composite of 12 photographs shot on one day at a rodeo in Evergreen, Colo.
Calf-roping, bull-riding and bronco-busting are all happening at once, instead of sequentially, as in old-fashioned linear reality.


Once-Leftist Ghana Bets on a Free-Market Future
At this country's fledgling stock exchange, a single computer flickers unattended at the edge of the marbled trading floor.
For long moments, the only sound is that of chalk being used on a small blackboard to record the sales of the 17 listed issues.
But for all of its quiet and simplicity, Ghana's tiny but booming stock market -- up nearly 300 percent in its four years of existence -- is the latest symbol of this country's economic rebirth.


Protection vs. Preservation: Wetlands and Art of the Deal
The trouble started three years ago.
The State Department of Environmental Conservation opened a new enforcement office in Long Island City, and its enthusiastic agents began enforcing a 1974 law protecting tidal wetlands.
The act forbade the alteration of property on wetlands without permission.
Broad Channel -- the only inhabited island in Jamaica Bay -- suffered particularly, since it is surrounded by marshland, and illegal structures like decks, floats and bulkheads can help protect homes vulnerable to tides and storms.
The agents ordered Broad Channel's longtime residents to these structures from their homes, sometimes fining them thousands of dollars.
Horror stories began to fly.
There was the dying man who was not allowed to add a ramp to his home, a house built on stilts, and had to be transported in and out by canoe at high tide.
There was the widow so overcome by stress that she had to be taken away in a straitjacket.
"It was the kind of thing that makes people hate governments," said Representative Charles E. Schumer.


Comeback Cornell Outdoes Itself
The current members of the Cornell football team remember him as Joe Coffey, the popular cop on the prime-time television series "Hill Street Blues." If, of course, they remember Ed Marinaro at all.
The biggest hero in Cornell football history, Marinaro was an All-America running back who still holds a handful of National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I-AA rushing records and who finished second in the Heisman Trophy voting in 1971.
He is revered here in Ithaca, where his name became a household word long before the inaugural episode of "Hill Street Blues."


A Punk Patriarch Comes of Age
EVEN FOR DEVOTED FANS, the band leader and guitarist Bob Mould was a sound before he was a sensibility.
That sound, embodied in his 1980's band Husker Du, was the culmination of the raucous power-trio format invented by bands like Cream in the late 60's.
Husker Du was a nuclear-power trio.
The smothering drones and relentless shrieks that poured from Mr.
Mould's guitar became an inspiration for the grunge groups to come.
After Husker Du disbanded in 1987, he entered an erratic, introspective period of solo recordings.
Four years later, Mr.
Mould returned with new strength and a new trio, Sugar, whose debut album, "Cooper Blue," sold nearly a half million copies.


Oct. 16-22: How to Lose Money; G.E. Is Latest to Feel The Bumps in Wall Street
Owning a brokerage house can be a painful experience for a company from another industry.
Eventually, even the biggest and smartest outsiders have a way of fleeing the business.
Last week the General Electric Company dumped the parts of Kidder, Peabody that it could sell and indicated it will phase out the rest.
PaineWebber was the buyer, paying $670 million in stock.
G.E. will take a loss of about $500 million.


Ellen M. Serluco, Alan G. Posta Jr.
Ellen Marie Serluco, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
David J. Serluco of Tolland, Conn., was married yesterday to Dr.
Alan George Posta Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Posta of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Paul Ray performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church of Yarmouth in Yarmouth Port, Mass.
Mrs.
Posta, 27, was until recently an illustrators' representative in New York.
She graduated from the University of Massachusetts.
Her father is a dentist in Tolland.


Benefit Gala in Guilford, Organ Works in Recital
THE Shoreline Alliance for the Arts opens its season on Nov. 5 with an 8 P.M. concert by the Serenata Ensemble at the Greene Community Center in Guilford, but at 3:30 this afternoon the alliance is the beneficiary of a gala benefit at the center with performers including the violinists Syoko Aki and Alexander Mandl; the pianists Donald Currier and Elizabeth Sawyer Parisot; the singers Tahme Adinolfi, Howard Foster, Richard Lalli, Martha Oneppe and Jerold Siena, and the Guilford High School Jazz Ensemble.
Tickets for the benefit ($15, $5 for students) will be available at the door; for concert series subscriptions and more information, call 453-3890.
Donations will be accepted at the door for a 3 P.M. concert this afternoon by the Litchfield Chamber Orchestra at First Congregational Church.
Alexander Nagy conducts, with Thirzah Bendokas the featured cello soloist (485-1320).


Clinton's Issue in California: It's Crime, Not the Economy
It used to be that President Clinton came to California to talk about the economy.
But as the President and his fellow Democrats have learned to their alarm, that is not what matters most to the state's voters in this uneasy autumn.
So when Mr.
Clinton and his entourage arrived here this afternoon, they carried a very different message.
With Senator Dianne Feinstein and Kathleen Brown, the Democratic candidate for Governor, looking on, the President seized a pen and signed with election-year flourish a directive calling for "strict enforcement" of a new Federal law requiring states to get tough on kids who carry guns to school.


Fall, and the Smell of Frying Fat Is in the Air
THE caravan of grease, bad music and funky fibers winds through all the boroughs, like the Marathon, but sometimes I feel as though it is following me, clogging my streets with vans from Connecticut, choking my air with the stink of last week's sausages.
There are people who love street fairs, although I'm sure I've never hugged one, people who think that street fairs are a small price to pay for easy access to 20-pound sweaters, Barbie stickers, natural fruit shakes, tube sox, contact lens supplies, Farberware and the sounds of groups with names like Native Intelligence and the Andes Mountain Boys.
It's street-fair season, and you hear the music even before you smell the frying fat or see the banner for the Avenue E Educational Charities Recycling Alliance's Harvest Festival.
The music may sound unmelodic, but it is also arrhythmic, performed by five chunky, jolly men who are mostly blowing into wooden pipes carved by the gnarled hands of rain-forest craftsmen whose wives and daughters knitted the bulky sweaters being sold one block north.
The musicians obviously have an agent, a producer and a contract, because another gnarled hand is waving a CD of their greatest hits, not including the one I imagine, "Dreamers of the Corn," a love song in which a Long Island couple at a West Side street fair are spattered by rancid boiling butter from a $2 roasted ear and in the process of cleaning their weekend black motorcycle jackets find out who they really are, suburbanites who should just stay home.


On the Upper West Side, a New Use for an Old Strategy


Wendy L. Grabel, Barry J. Bellovin
Wendy Lynn Grabel, an associate general counsel of the Loral Corporation, the military contractor, in New York, and Dr.
Barry Jon Bellovin, a cardiologist in Bayside, Queens, are to be be married today at the Brooklyn Heights Synagogue.
Rabbi Sue Ann Wasserman is to perform the ceremony.
The bride, 39, graduated from Princeton University and received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the daughter of Miriam and Jack Grabel of Brooklyn.


Orangemen Score Higher on Career Day
For all of their coach's public caution, the Syracuse players fully expected a rout against Temple this evening.
"This is one of those games you just go to get it over with, get a win and leave," said linebacker Dan Conley earlier this week.
"I think we have the capability of blowing out teams that aren't the Miamis and the Oklahomas."


Bearing Gifts, White House Hits Hot Spots For Election
Hazel R. O'Leary, the Energy Secretary, said on Friday that the Clinton Administration will construct the most powerful laser on the planet near San Francisco, expanding the frontiers of science, injecting a huge wad of cash into the local economy and creating a raft of jobs.
Officially, this has nothing to do with the national election taking place in 17 days.
Unofficially, this is a season in which Democrats need all the billion-dollar lasers they can lay their hands on.
So when Ms.
O'Leary announced the project at a ceremony in Livermore, Calif., her party's candidate for the area's Republican-held House seat, a businesswoman named Ellen Schwartz, was basking in the television lights at her side.


What It Costs To Phone Home
A TRACTOR-TRAILER driver outside a diner in upstate New York was observed by Martin R. Schemer of New York shouting into a pay phone that if the operator did not connect him to his regular long-distance company, a repair crew would have to be sent out.
Clearly rebuffed, he backed over the booth, crushing it.
Few phone-users are equipped to do this, but many wish they could.
The angriest are people who cannot get through to their long-distance company, and end up being billed by a company they do not know at rates they consider outlandish.


New York Should Set Pace for Public TV
To the Editor:
New York, not Boston, is the nation's cultural capital.
You'd never know it from watching the Public Broadcasting Service.
William F. Baker, president of WNET-Channel 13, New York's public television affiliate, wants to put the station's financial house in order (arts pages, Oct. 18).
But what is being saved?


Dea P. Connick, Dominique Perez
Dea Patricia Connick, the director of acquisitions at Nickelodeon, the cable-television network in New York, was married yesterday to Dominique Jovencio Perez, an acquisitions coordinator for the network.
The Rev.
Eric Raaser performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of Christ the King in Yonkers.
Mrs.
Perez, 32, graduated from the College of Mount Saint Vincent.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Brendan J. Connick of Yonkers.
The bride's father retired as a chemist for Con Edison in New York.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Kmart Opening in the Bronx, And Brooklyn May Be Next
Kmart, the national discount retailer best known for its blue-light specials, plans to open its first store in the Bronx and is considering two locations in Brooklyn.


It's So Bad It's Good: Russia's Lomo Camera
THIS week, at a gallery in SoHo, the Lomographic Society of Vienna is sponsoring the Third Lomographic Happening.
The show features 10,000 lomographs taken by Russian lomographers.
And lomos, smuggled out of Russia in backpacks and knapsacks, will be on display at the gallery.
Wait a minute. What is a Lomo? Or a lomograph, for that matter? Why smuggle them?
Before you call the C.I.A., let us explain.
The Lomo is a cheap camera manufactured in Russia, where laws forbid its export, the people who use it are lomographers and their odd snapshots are called lomographs.
The Lomographic Society is an international group of photographers who love the images created by the Lomo, which distorts color and clarity. .


The View From: Deep River; Sinus-Clearing Horseradish Still Attracts a Loyal Following
THE 17th-century English herbalist John Parkinson deemed horseradish suitable "for country people and strong laboring men," but "too strong for tender and delicate stomachs."
It's not too strong, however, for Connecticut folks -- including city dwellers and working women -- who love its biting taste and penetrating aroma.
Some people grow their own; others process and sell it, and many just appreciate what it does for their sandwiches, not to mention their sinuses.
"People breathe easier after they eat it," said Stanley Wozniak, who makes Wozniak's Prepared Horseradish at his market in New Haven.


Residents Fight Plan For a Driving Range
THE county's proposed plan to include a new driving range in its renovation plans for the Saxon Woods Park swimming pool complex and golf course met with strong opposition last week at two preliminary meetings attended by nearly 500 people at the County Center here.
Residents of Scarsdale, in whose quiet village the two-tiered, 72-stall driving range would be built and operated by the privately owned Global Golf of Levittown, L.I., vowed to take whatever legal action is necessary to stop the project, which they called "a horrible monstrosity" that no one needed, from proceeding.
Residents of neighboring White Plains also spoke against the driving range, which would be open daily year round, from 7 A.M. to 11 P.M.


The Operation Was a Success: 'E.R.' Lives
IN HINDSIGHT, IT HAD TO HAPPEN.
In a year that has seen ambitious plans for health-care reform dissolve in the chaos of cutthroat politics and multimillion-dollar lobbying, viewers have wasted no time rushing to a new drama series all about hospitals and doctors.
Posting hefty ratings Thursdays at 10 on NBC, "E.R." has vaulted into the top five with stunning ease.
It is by far the biggest hit of the young season.
Why?
Some answers can easily be traced to production talent and network shrewdness.
Set in the emergency room of a bustling public hospital in Chicago, "E.R." was created by the best-selling author Michael Crichton, who once studied medicine at Harvard.
The executive producer, John Wells, held a similar post at "China Beach," the acclaimed series about nurses and doctors during the Vietnam War.
Further, NBC has given the series a strong time slot following a hit lineup that includes "Seinfeld." Success on television is seldom happenstance.


Ideas &amp; Trends; The Jabberwocky of Art Criticism
THE last time Thomas Sokolowski, director of New York University's Grey Art Gallery, remembers tingling over an article in an art magazine was when Thomas McEvilley panned an exhibition of primitivist art at the Museum of Modern Art, triggering an impassioned, eloquent response from William Rubin, the museum's director of painting and sculpture, that crackled in the pages of Artforum.
That was 10 years ago.
"It was very engaged, opinionated criticism," said Mr.
Sokolowski.
"And since then, I can't think of a single interchange that's been as interesting or as riveting."


Ensembles Open New Season
THE season openers of seven chamber series -- three of them in Rye -- brighten today's concert calendar.
At 3 P.M. under the auspices of the Arts Center, the violinist Maria Radicheva, the cellist Paige Riggs and the pianist Darrell Rosenbluth begin the Sundays at 3 series in Wainwright House in Rye, playing Mendelssohn, Stravinsky and the late Westchester composer Nicholas Flagello.
The number to call for more details is 967-6080.


Everyone Followed the Rules, but a Man Died; Across Street From Hospital, Billy Black's Friends Could Not Get Him Help
This was one of those city stories where all involved -- the ambulance crew and the hospital and the Emergency Medical Service authorities -- said the same thing, that it was unfortunate but that they had done everything they were supposed to do.
They went by the book, they said, and what else could you ask?
But when it was over in the morning haze, the stark fact was that a man had died on the sidewalk in the shadow of a hospital.


What's With With?
I asked for a seat in non so I could enjoy my coffee with.
A generation ago, that sentence would have been gibberish.
Today it readily communicates meaning: non is instantly recognized as that ever-expanding section of the world given over to the anti-tobacco lobby.
The hostess, who never seems to obey her own sign ("Please Wait for Hostess to Be Seated"), asks, "Smoking or non?" (Because this solicits information about a preference, it is an improvement over the accusatory "One?")


HAROLD BLOOM: COLOSSUS AMONG CRITICS
I am sorry that Adam Begley failed to quote from my several expressions of enormous admiration and deep affection for Harold Bloom and chose instead a rather mindless and casual remark about the personal life.
Bloom, in my view, is the most powerful and original literary critic in this country since the late Kenneth Burke.
His theory of literary influence would alone establish him as a major figure; but he has also led the way in a large re-evaluation of the Anglo-American Romantic tradition and of certain aspects of the Bible.


Jennifer Juengst And Todd Gordon
Jennifer Anne Juengst, a daughter of Joyce and Robert Juengst of Lake Ronkonkoma, L.I., is to be married today to Todd Andrew Gordon, the son of Sandra and Robert Gordon of Oceanside, L.I.
Justice Seymour Schwartz, a retired Acting State Supreme Court justice for New York County, is to officiate at the Country House in Old Stony Brook, L.I.


SUNDAY, October 23, 1994; Enemies Lists
'This group of American taxpayers and voters despise anything and everything to do with Bill and Hillary Clinton," proclaims the blurb. These folks are so far right, "they make Rush Limbaugh look liberal!"
And they make up the 29,888-name Hillary Haters mailing list, marketed by the Affinity Marketing Group of Fairfax, Va.
The list, compiled from contributors to conservative causes, has already been snapped up by the Republican National Committee, the American Life League and other groups, Affinity reports.


In 4 Years, Disabilities Act Hasn't Improved Jobs Rate
More than four years after Congress passed the Americans with Disabilities Act, a sweeping civil rights law covering people with physical and mental impairments, the number of disabled people entering the work force has not significantly increased, say experts in the field and advocates for the disabled.
Though the law, commonly known as the A.D.A., was intended to bring people with disabilities into the cultural, social and economic mainstreams, the number of disabled people who have entered the work force has hardly changed, even as the number of disabled high school and college graduates has continued to increase.


Q. &amp; A.
Incorrect Figures On Income Q I recently tried to buy a co-op apartment.
The apartment broker recommended a mortgage broker to whom I paid $713 and never heard from again.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  GULF WAR'S LOOSE ENDS  The rapid ending to the Persian Gulf war left Saddam Hussein in power and major military units still functioning, leading to a new threat more than three years later.  1  IN HAITI, HARSH REALITY SETS IN  President Jean-Bertrand Aristide is back in Haiti, presiding over a Government that can barely function, and he is taking his time with decisions as Haitians watch.  1


Oct. 16-22; Super-Human Help


Life With Father


Books From The Times
In the summer of 1993, The New York Times Book Review published a series of essays on the Seven Deadly Sins (plus one), commissioned from distinguished contemporary writers whose work had shown superior penetration into the cloudy wellsprings of human cussedness.
All eight are now available in a single handy volume as DEADLY SINS, by Thomas Pynchon, Mary Gordon, John Updike, William Trevor, Gore Vidal, Richard Howard, A. S. Byatt and Joyce Carol Oates (Morrow, $17), illustrated by Etienne Delessert.
The sins are the traditional transgressions -- pride, envy, anger, lust, sloth, gluttony, avarice (plus despair) -- but the insights are contemporary, more's the pity.


Business Diary: October 16-21
COMPANIES General Motors Doesn't Have the Bugs Out Quite Yet  It's said that car buyers have a lot of brand loyalty, but you can hardly say that for car investors.
On Thursday, in the midst of Detroit's ongoing victory parade, General Motors took a tumble, reporting that although it made more than half a billion dollars for the quarter, it lost big money -- $328 million -- in North America.
That's where productivity is supposed to be rising and costs falling.
On the news, the stock plunged $3.75, and $1.875 more on Friday, to a yearly low of $41.25.
Both days, volume was huge, making G.M. far and away the Big Board's most active stock.
Don't look now, but shares in G.M. -- the giant of an again-mighty industry -- have been falling steadily all year.
What's the problem?
It isn't market share -- it inched up to 31.5 percent.
The trouble is that while Chrysler, say, makes $1,000 a car, G.M. loses nearly $300.
That doesn't compute.


Sao Paulo
Sao Paulo, South America's most important business center and the world's third most populous city, has quietly displaced Rio de Janeiro as Brazil's main port of entry.
While Rio lost its last direct flights to New York this past summer, Sao Paulo has seen its schedule of direct flights to New York expand to 23 a week.
This energetic, if gray, metropolis is now the air hub for business and vacation travel throughout Brazil.
The capital of a state with an economy the size of Argentina's, Sao Paulo is home to 17 million people and headquarters for most of Brazil's banks and leading corporations.
In a change from Rio, visitors to Sao Paulo typically have more cause to don a business suit than a bathing suit, but as in Rio they should be cautious when walking the streets.
With Brazil's economy rapidly opening to foreign investment and trade, more and more of the visitors filling hotels here are Americans.


Sports of The Times; No Mookie, No Maz, No Fisk, No Nothing
THE rage kicks in when you least expect it.
You think you're fine.
You can do without baseball.
You have a life.
Then with absolutely no warning, reality kicks you right in the backside.
The dirty so-and-sos have killed the World Series.
No Country Slaughter steaming from first with the winning run.
No Babe Ruth taunting the Cubs and hitting one over the wall.
No Bob Gibson glowering in the shadows.
No Bill Mazeroski heading for home with all of Pittsburgh about to climb on his back.
No World Series.
Just twitchy Bud and rigid Don.
Just rage.


Every Faith Takes Its Own Path to the Sacred; Earth Day's Answer
To the Editor:
Re "Why So Many Religions?" (Op-Ed, Oct. 17): The next question should be, "How can people with differing creeds best affirm and demonstrate values they share?" The answer would provide a great future for our planet.
We have an indication of the answer each year on Earth Day, when people of every major religion join in silent prayer, meditation or reflection as we ring the Peace Bell.
JOHN MCCONNELL  Ridgewood, Queens, Oct. 17, 1994 The writer is founder of Earth Day.


Despotism Revisited
To the Editor:
It is most enlightening to learn from Mr.
Soave that applying the word "despots" to the military clique that rules Myanmar reflects a "culturally biased view" and a "purely Western moral approach."


Adding Spots of Color to Nature's Palette
THE trees' foliage color is truly spectacular.
Leafers from all over the Northeast are talking about it.
Many are saying this year's is the best ever as their eyes capture the golds, reds, maroons and yellows.
Fall colors splash on the hillsides, form canopies on streets and fill yards.
Meanwhile, shrubs and ornamental grasses that provide their own style in the color scheme are not part of the praise.
Now is the time to set things right and give these plants the credit they deserve.


Choose Your Outplacement Wisely
To the Editor:
"Disguising the Signs of Being Outplaced" (The Executive Life, Sept. 25) trivializes the entire job loss-job search process as though somehow all it entails is putting on a cheerful face and writing a resume that looks different from everyone else's.


Polly Carter and Daniel M. Weissman
Margaret Belknap Carter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David G. Carter, was married yesterday at her parents' home in New Haven to Daniel Mark Weissman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Weissman of Rye, N.Y.
Rabbi Charles J. Davidson performed the ceremony.
The bride, who is 36 and is known as Polly, graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in film from Columbia University.
She is a writer in New York.
Her father retired as a former director of the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts.


Burton's Magical 5-Iron Helps Tie Solheim Cup
A light rain was beginning to fall as Brandie Burton peered down into the hollow today, a 5-iron in her hand and a chance to turn the Solheim Cup matches around on the line.
Match play golf often can be boiled to its essence at such moments, and this would be the one where Burton and her United States teammates began their climb back into a tie with the surprising and dogged Europeans.
It was at the seventh hole at The Greenbrier, a 197-yard par 3, a downhill hole framed by the oranges and reds of autumn with the Allegheny Mountains as a backdrop.
When Burton and her partner, Dottie Mochrie, arrived there, they were 1 down to the European team of Laura Davies and Alison Nicholas, and both Nicholas and Davies had hit their shots on to the green.
Mochrie hit first for the U.S., and her 3-iron shot was long.


Interactive Business
A new program on the Internet means personal-computer users will soon have an alternative to phone calls and brochures when planning a stay at hotels run by companies like Hyatt, Hilton and Forte.
Travelweb, advertised as the hotel industry's first interactive electronic travel catalogue, provides PC users with detailed color photographs and information on rates, restaurants, local attractions and other amenities at participating hotels.
By the year's end, PC users should be able to book reservations directly on their computers as well.
At present, reservations can be made by calling (800) 233-1234.


The Man Behind Ewing Is at Ease
Herb Williams has probably heard the question more times than he cares to remember.
How much longer, the 13-year veteran was asked, can he play in the N.B.A.?


Dressed Up and Somewhere to Go
At the Paris showings, the parties were as fashion-filled as the runways.


Technology; Back From the Brink, RCA Is Forging a Digital Future
THE reincarnation cost almost $2 billion and took seven years, but RCA, under the wings of Thomson S.A., is once again alive and well and still living in Indiana.
In fact, the company that invented color television in 1954 has this year pioneered a digital satellite television receiver that has become one of the best-selling new consumer electronics products ever.


Streetscapes/The Charles Scribner House; A Quintessential Flagg Building Is Being Restored
NEW YORK'S blocks are full of hidden networks, families of buildings related by appearance, type or design.
One of these is now in mid-restoration as the Polish Mission cleans and repairs the facade of the 1912 Charles Scribner house at 9 East 66th Street, one of six buildings in Manhattan designed by Ernest Flagg for the publishing family.
In 1879 Charles Scribner took over the family publishing company, founded in 1846.
For the next half century he groomed its list until it stood for the most cultured taste, "a kind of blue ribbon" for authors, according to the Dictionary of American Biography.


SUNDAY, October 23, 1994; Bombs Into Compost
The Army has a problem: what to do with hundreds of thousands of tons of sludge contaminated with TNT.
One answer -- compost it.
William Brinton at the Woods End Research Laboratory in Mount Vernon, Me., is working with the Army Environmental Center to come up with the proper formula.
Brinton has already completed a pilot project.


'Sleazy' Image Held Against British Tories
Public opinion surveys have held bad news for the Government of Prime Minister John Major for two years.
But few have been more worrying to his advisers than a poll this month that asked voters if his Conservative Party gave "the impression of being very sleazy and disreputable."
Sixty-one percent of those surveyed agreed that it did.
When the same question was asked about the opposition Labor Party, only 18 percent agreed.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
Long Island  FREEPORT IS REAL DEAL: For the first time in the school's history, FREEPORT (5-0) defeated FARMINGDALE, the perennial Nassau County Conference I power, 40-12.
Mike Leccesse (12 of 17 for 153 yards) rushed for one touchdown and threw for three others, including two to Antwan Wooden, to help Freeport upset the Dalers (2-1-2) and in the process established the Red Devils as a power to be reckoned with.
In 10 meetings, dating back to the late 1970's, Freeport had never before beaten Farmingdale.


Special Fan
To the Sports Editor:
Your coverage of Fred Lebow neglected this years' other New York marathon, the one on the last day of the Gay Games.
The New York Road Runners assisted the organizers and, sure enough, there was Fred Lebow being steadied by a friend and waving to the 750 runners on 72d Street before they entered Central Park.
That was the last time I saw him, cheering us on, showing up so physically weakened, yet so visibly proud of us and waving us on.
The Rev.
EARL E. JOHNSON  New York


No More Whining
To the Editor:
Concerning Robert Pinsky's essay "A Man Goes Into a Bar, See, and Recites: 'The Quality of Mercy Is Not Strained' " (Sept. 25), which perceptively discusses the committing to memory of poems:


School District on Redrawing Board, and Tempers Flare
For a decade, residents of Canarsie have enjoyed a sweet deal on their school board.
Though theirs is the only predominantly white neighborhood in District 18, which is comprised mostly of East Flatbush, the board members have always been almost exclusively from Canarsie.
But this deal has been threatened by a proposal to redraw the district's boundaries by folding in schools from neighboring District 22, greatly increasing the black electorate and splitting off a large part of Canarsie into District 22.
This has outraged white members of District 18's board, who control seven of the nine seats.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Keith Elias; From the Ivy League to Giants Stadium
FOR Keith Elias, the Princeton all-America running back and scholar who was passed over in the National Football League draft but who was signed by the New York Giants as a free agent, there is no place like the New Jersey pinelands.
"Pure enjoyment and happiness," he said, is returning to this sprawling 84.6-square-mile, middle-class Ocean County municipality with its 22,000 residents.


Ms. Glassco, Mr. Hudson
Elizabeth Buell Glassco, the assistant curator of birds at the Fort Worth Zoo, was married yesterday to Richard Dunkley Hudson Jr., the assistant curator of reptiles at the zoo.
The Rev.
William Myers performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in McLean, Va.
Mrs.
Hudson, 38, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Glassco of McLean.
She graduated from American University.
Her father, now retired, was the treasurer of the United States Postal Service in Washington.
Her mother, Elizabeth B. Glassco, retired as a veterinary technician at Seneca Hill Veterinary Hospital in Great Falls, Va.


Obscure Company Gains Unwelcome Prominence
The carved wooden sign hanging in the lobby of Schwan's Sales Enterprises Inc. here says, "The Uncommon Company."
These days "Uncomfortable" might be more like it, given a coast-to-coast outbreak of food poisoning linked to the company's ice cream.


Caroline Sheehy, Charles C. Bentz
Caroline Kernan Sheehy, a daughter of Mrs.
William R. Sherwood 3d of Riverside, Conn., and John T. Sheehy of Seabeck, Wash., was married yesterday to Charles Casey Bentz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles J. Bentz of Morrisville, Pa.
The Rev.
Susan M. Craig performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church of Greenwich in Old Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Bentz, 26, graduated magna cum laude from Georgetown University.
She was until recently a corporate paralegal at Prudential Mutual Fund Management in New York.
Her father is a general partner in Greater Pacific Food Holdings, an investment company in San Francisco.
Her mother is a reference librarian at the Greenwich Library.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
COMMENTARY  THE BURNING LIBRARY  Essays.
By Edmund White.
Edited by David Bergman.
Knopf, $25.


In America; What's Missing?
Most children learn at a very early age that some occasions are more serious than others, and that one is expected to act accordingly.
Last Sunday, in a solemn waterfront ceremony at the tip of lower Manhattan, across from Ellis Island and the Statue of Liberty, ground was broken for the city's Holocaust memorial.
Hundreds of Holocaust survivors and their relatives attended the event.
Many wept.
Some carried the yellow stars that the Nazis had forced them to wear on their clothing.
All prayed for those who did not survive.


Sally D. Mills, Robert O. Bork
Sally Diann Mills, a daughter of Bonnie J. Mills of Woodland Hills, Calif., and the late Estle M. Mills Jr., was married yesterday to Robert Odell Bork, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kennard B. Bork of Granville, Ohio.
The Rev.
Daniel E. Sack, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel.
The bride, 38, is keeping her name.
She and her husband, 27, are doctoral candidates in the history of art at Princeton.
She graduated from the University of California at Berkeley and received a master's degree in art history from Williams College.
She was formerly a curator at the Vassar College Art Gallery in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., and at the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
WOMEN'S CONFERENCE
A third yearly Women's Community Education Conference is being held Wednesday from 9 A.M to 2:15 P.M. at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in White Plains.
Under the umbrella title of "For Women by Women," the program will examine family dynamics in the 90's through seminars on modern marriage, mothers and daughters, mothers and sons, gay and lesbian issues, divorce and women who are alone.


Israel Rides a Seesaw Of Hope and Horror
"NEVER a dull moment," Israelis like to say about themselves, however grim the moment sometimes is.
They say it with pride and pugnacity, as though defying you to come up with another country of 5 million that packs such a wallop.
But in 10 days Israel outdid even itself, riding an emotional roller-coaster that left its people drained.
Oct. 9: Death comes calling.
Gunmen from Hamas shoot up a pedestrian street in downtown Jerusalem, killing two people.


Huffy Corp.(HUF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ben Weberman, 71, Financial Journalist
Ben Weberman, a financial journalist who helped strip away the mystery of interest rates and bond markets for the general public, died on Saturday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 71 and lived in New York City.
The cause was complications from cancer, said his son-in-law, Kenneth Rilander.


In Second Such Case, Robbery At a Teller Machine Is Foiled
For the second time in a week, a robbery at an automated-teller-machine has been thwarted, the police said yesterday.
The latest incident occurred in a bank lobby in downtown Brooklyn on Saturday night when a customer, Elizabeth Cooper, a 27-year-old archivist, refused to give up her cash to a robber and fought back.
Three friends helped her grapple with the man, and two anonymous New Yorkers came to their aid.


Dr. Pepper/Seven-Up Cos.  (DPS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The comebacks of General Motors and I.B.M. have been strongpoints of the nation's industrial revival.
Yet while I.B.M. reported surprisingly strong profit for the third quarter last week, General Motors showed a worrying loss in its crucial North American auto business.
Yet what appeared a divergence of fates may serve as a cautionary lesson for I.B.M.
It also reflects the travails of reshaping a corporate giant after years of mismanagement in an economy where the direction has been hard to predict.  [ Page D1. ]


Putts Keep Dropping, And Cup Comes Home
As she stood on the 18th green at the Greenbrier today, Meg Mallon knew that closing out her match was important.
But she didn't know how important.
She didn't know she had two putts for the Solheim Cup, two putts from 25 feet to erase two years of questions about the stunning defeat she and her United States teammates suffered in 1992 at Dalmahoy in Scotland.
Two putts later, it was over.
The United States team, heavily favored but not thoroughly convincing in the first two days of competition, poured in putts and poured it on the Europeans today.
Mallon's 1-up victory over Pam Wright was one of eight singles triumphs by the American team, which easily won the third edition of the biennial matches, 13-7, and brought the Solheim Cup back to the United States.


The Gag Rule, Revisited
Last month more than 300 Republican candidates for Congress signed a policy pledge -- a "Contract With America" -- that constitutes a backward glance at the Reagan era.
Many of the signers' promises have to do with money.
Given a majority in the House of Representatives, they will cut taxes and increase military spending.
But buried in the document is a pledge to reinstate one of the cruelest relics of the Reagan years: the gag rule, which drew a brutal class distinction between women who could be given information about their legal rights to abortion and those who could not.
The gag rule, which prohibited physicians in federally funded clinics from telling women that abortion was a legal option and where it could be obtained, was formulated by the Department of Health and Human Services in 1988.
Women who inquired about the procedure were to be told that the clinic did not "consider abortion to be an appropriate part of family planning."


Media-Wise Governor Runs A Smooth Race in California
If he had stumbled, it could have been an awkward moment for Gov.
Pete Wilson's re-election campaign, but you would never have guessed it.
California cool, sound-stage smooth, he gives nothing away; you can no more read his emotions in his face than see through a mirror.
His big issue is illegal immigration.
He has dramatized his promises to do something about it by endorsing Proposition 187, a ballot initiative that would require the state's schools, hospitals and other institutions to deny services to illegal immigrants, who come mainly from Mexico.
As the proposition has gained strength, so has he, and together they have pulled well ahead in the polls.


Fixing Pentagon Peacekeeping Practices
The Pentagon is learning from painful experience in Somalia and now in Haiti that it needs to improve its peacekeeping practices.
In Somalia U.S. troops faced deadly fire after siding against one of the feuding warlords.
In Haiti the Pentagon is rethinking its reliance on Haitian military and police to keep order.
Some of the problems are purely tactical, like training troops in the proper techniques for disarming potentially hostile groups in volatile environments.
That is very different from drilling them for full-scale combat, when the use of deadly force is the rule, not the exception.


No Legends This Fall: Giants Lose 4th in a Row
As the afternoon wore on and the Giants' offense, like the team's season, continued to move backward, Greg Lloyd wasn't surprised.
That's a problem because Lloyd is a linebacker for the Pittsburgh Steelers, who beat the Giants today, 10-6, in the rain before 71,819 at Giants Stadium.
And he may have put a finger on one of the many reasons the Giants have lost four straight games and are on a spiral toward the bottom of the division.
"We knew when they were going to throw, we knew when they were going to run," said Lloyd.
"All you have to do is look in the backfield. When the running back was 6 or 7 yards deep, you knew it was a run. When he was 4 or 5 yards deep, you knew it was a pass. Some teams don't change. They're going to do what they do, regardless. They just stick with it.


A New Rice Could Raise Yields 20%
After five years of work, plant scientists from the International Rice Research Institute in the Philippines said yesterday that they had developed a new type of rice that would increase harvests 20 to 25 percent.
After the new variety is commercially available, probably in five years, it will eventually yield enough to feed 500 million more people than current rice yields, said Dr.
Ken S. Fischer, the institute's director of research.


FPL Group Inc.(FPL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Treasury Plans to Auction Bills and Notes
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to the bill and note markets, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
The Government will auction two-year notes on Tuesday and five-year notes on Wednesday.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.98 percent and the six-month bill was at 5.42 percent.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note was being offered at a rate to yield 6.81 percent and a five-year note was offered at a rate to yield 7.45 percent.


Cresta Awards Go To Pytka Again
For the second consecutive year, Pytka, the commercial production company in Venice, Calif., led by the director Joe Pytka, took top honors in the Cresta International Advertising Awards sponsored by the International Advertising Association and Creative Standards International.
The winners will be honored at a ceremony on Nov. 9 in Budapest.
Pytka won seven Crestas for television commercials for advertisers like Apple Computer, Nike Inc. and Pepsi-Cola; the spots were produced for BDDO's Los Angeles and New York offices and for Wieden &amp; Kennedy in Portland, Ore.


Nucor Corp.(NUE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Pacific Gas &amp; Electric (PCG,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


Pad to Replace Computer Mouse Is Set for Debut
A company founded eight years ago by two semiconductor industry pioneers will introduce a device Monday that it says offers a more accurate and reliable way to control personal computers and other electronic appliances.
Synaptics Inc., was created in 1986 by Federico Faggin, one of the designers of the first microprocessor chip at the Intel Corporation, and Carver Mead, a professor at the California Institute of Technology, who during the 1970's developed the basic principles for modern very large scale integrated, or VLSI, semiconductor design.


Leon Spinks's Comeback Lasts One Round
It was the first punch of the fight, thrown while people were still settling into their seats, that sent 41-year-old LEON SPINKS to the canvas at the Convention Center in Washington on Saturday night.
Spinks managed to get up, but from the glossy look in his eyes and the wobble in his knees after the left hook to the chin from JOHN CARLO, no one would have been surprised if Referee SYLVESTER STEVENS had stopped the fight right there.


When Do We Stop Aiding Haiti's Thugs?
To the Editor:
You reported on Oct. 19 that Haiti's human rights picture is complicated by the fact that the United States is using existing police in an interim police force, but are "forced to rely on recruits whose own human rights records are questionable."


OPERA
A Butterfly Creates A Forceful Final Mood  New York State Theater
It took a while, but the cast changes in the New York City Opera production of Puccini's "Madama Butterfly" on Tuesday evening produced some excitement in the final scene, when Geraldine McMillian took real vocal and dramatic hold of the title role.


TV News Magazine Shows Are Crowding One Another
News magazine programs, once in such favor that a network news president predicted one could succeed during each hour of the prime-time schedule, have suddenly become the most depressed genre in television.
With ratings for nearly all the news magazines slumping (only NBC is holding its own with the format), network executives now quietly predict that two or more of the programs will be dropped before the season is over.


Giuliani Takes Political Roles In Other States
After rarely venturing out of New York City for the first nine months of his mayoralty, Rudolph W. Giuliani stood last week in the grand white living room of a home in the Detroit suburbs flashing grin after grin as local Republicans posed for pictures beside him, Michigan's Governor and the Republican candidate for state attorney general.
Mr.
Giuliani was just moving into his fund-raising pitch for the long shot in the attorney-general race, John A. Smietanka, when a man murmured a number -- the size of New York City's budget gap.
"What?" Mr.
Giuliani asked.
"Our deficit? We're going to overcome it." He mentioned cost-cutting and privatization before turning his focus back to the out-of-town politics.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF An Ex-Pitcher Racks Up a 'W'  Jack Kiefer, who traded in his baseball glove for a driver and wedge, shot a final-round 63 and a three-round 197 yesterday to win the Ralph's Senior Classic by one stroke over a record-setting Dale Douglass in Los Angeles.
In his first triumph as a Tour professional, Kiefer rolled in a string of long putts to edge Douglass, whose tied the all-time Senior PGA Tour mark, held jointly by Lee Elder (1985) and Jim Colbert (1991).
Drafted by the Detroit Tigers, Kiefer, a pitcher, quit baseball in 1961 and took up golf.
He joined the senior circuit in 1990. (AP) TENNIS  Agassi Beats Stich Again  In a replay of last month's United States Open final, Andre Agassi defeated Michael Stich, 7-6 (7-4), 4-6, 6-2, 6-3, yesterday in the final of the CA Trophy in Vienna.
The third-seeded Agassi was competing in his first tournament since winning the Open. (AP) Courier Loses Final to Rosset: Marc Rosset defeated Jim Courier, 6-4, 7-6 (7-2), to win in Lyons, France.
In the tie breaker, Rosset took a 3-1 lead with a passing shot.
Courier closed to 3-2, but didn't win another point.(AP) Chang Repeats in Beijing: Top-seeded Michael Chang won the Salem Open for the second straight time, beating Anders Jarryd by 7-5, 7-5 in Beijing.
It was Chang's career-best sixth title this year, and the 19th singles title of his career. (AP) BASEBALL  Japan Series Tied at 1-1  Hiromi Makihara pitched a four-hitter and Tatsunori Hara singled home the only run in the first inning yesterday as the Yomiuri Giants defeated the Seibu Lions, 1-0, tying the four-of-seven-game Japan Series at one game apiece. (AP) ROWING  U.S.
Champions Win  The United States national eight-oared crew, racing for the first time since winning the world championships last month in Indianapolis, won the featured champion eights event yesterday at the 30th annual Head of the Charles Regatta in Cambridge, Mass.
In an event in which crews are timed over a three-mile distance, rather than racing side by side, the United States eight was at a disadvantage, being in 26th position at the start.
However, The United States team won in the time of 14 minutes 11.08 seconds to beat the other 39 crews, 7.85 seconds ahead of last year's United States collegiate champions, Brown University.The American women's national eight, silver medalists in the 1994 world championships, turned in a gold medal performance.
Stroked by Betsy McCagg, with her twin sister, Mary, in the seven seat, the United States won by a 28.73 seconds, or seven boat lengths.
BASKETBALL  Marbury and Gauchos Win Tournament  Behind the shooting of Stephon Marbury, the Gauchos of East Harlem won the third annual Larry Lehman Memorial Basketball Tournament yesterday by defeating the New Jersey Central Demons, 72-62, in front of 500 at the Rutgers Athletic Center in Piscataway, N.J.
Marbury, a 6-foot-2-inch senior guard at Lincoln High School in Brooklyn considered the top high school player in the country, scored 21 points in the final game of the tournament and chipped in 22 points in the Gauchos' 88-73 semifinal victory over the Jersey City Boys' Club.


Universal Health ServicesInc.(UHS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Trinova Corp.(TNV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U S West Selects Rubin Postaer
The U S West Marketing Resources Group in Aurora, Colo., has selected Rubin Postaer &amp; Associates in Santa Monica, Calif., to handle Your Value Card, an electronic coupon card for consumers to use at local stores and restaurants.
U S West plans to introduce the card in selected markets next year.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.


Ball Corp.(BLL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Legg Mason Inc.(LM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


World Economies


Solaris to Handle Ortho Products
The Solaris Group division of the Monsanto Company in San Ramon, Calif., has named BBDO West in San Francisco to handle advertising for its Ortho lawn and garden products, which had been handled by J. Walter Thompson San Francisco for the last three years.
Billings were estimated at $8 million to $10 million.
BBDO was awarded the account on Friday after a five-week review that also included Cole &amp; Weber in Seattle, the Glennon Companies in St.
Louis and Ogilvy &amp; Mather Los Angeles.
A campaign is expected to begin early next year.


Hughes Profits Saints With Record Returns
Saints 37, Rams 34
Tyrone Hughes returned kickoffs of 92 and 98 yards for touchdowns as he set two National Football League records and tied another yesterday in the New Orleans Saints' wild 37-34 victory over the Los Angles Rams, who provided some return magic of their own.
Hughes, who led the league in punt returns and was second in kickoff returns as a rookie last season, had combined punt and kickoff runbacks for 347 yards, breaking the old mark of 294 yards held by two others.


Dividend Meetings


American Maize-Products Co. (AZEA.A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kaman Corp.(KAMNA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pro-Israel Donations Fade With Middle East Tensions
With growing optimism over the peace process in the Middle East this year, donations to the pro-Israel lobby, once a formidable money machine, have shown the sharpest decline among those to political action groups that contribute to Congressional campaigns.
Through June 30, all American-Israeli political action committees raised $1.2 million, a decline of 50 percent from the comparable period in 1992, according to the Center for Responsive Politics, a nonpartisan research organization that examines money and politics.


Ailing Anderson Forced to Bench Again
Kenny Anderson wants desperately to be dribbling a basketball on the court.
Tonight, he settled for an ice pack on the training-room table.
The Nets fell to 1-4 in the preseason, playing without the services of their All-Star point guard for the third time in five games.
They were beaten, 98-79, by the Indiana Pacers before a crowd of 7,053.


Fighting, Laughing And Jiving
The title just about sums up David Parsons's new "Mood Swing," presented by the Pennsylvania Ballet on Thursday night at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.
"Mood Swing" a Kennedy Center commission, places nine dancers in a faintly urban setting and gets them jiving, laughing, fighting and drooping listlessly to swing jazz by Morton Gould.
Like the program as a whole, the new work displays the remarkable range of a first-rate company of vividly expressive, unmistakably American classicists with an endearing lack of assumption.
The moods start cool, with the kind of disaffected amble favored by Jerome Robbins in "West Side Story" and his jazz ballets.
Jeffrey Gribler separates from the crowd, walking against it, shaking his head as if in disbelief and eventually leading the others off the stage like a Pied Piper.
This, Mr.
Parsons seems to be saying, will be a prankish ballet.


Crompton &amp; Knowles Corp.(CNK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


William Leonard, 78, Former Head of CBS News
William A. Leonard 2d, a former president of CBS News who helped oversee the creation of "60 Minutes" and was a pioneer of magazine-style television journalism, died yesterday of a stroke at Laurel Regional Hospital in Laurel, Md.
He was 78 and lived in Washington, said Tom Goodman, a CBS News spokesman.


Central Maine Power Co.  (CTP,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


Market Place; A Bleak Time for Bank Stocks, but Citicorp Remains a Top Pick
IT has been a bleak time for bank stocks.
The banks are mostly doing fine, but investors worry that their revenue growth is slowing and margins are shrinking.
The one exception was, not too long ago, banking's biggest pariah: Citicorp.


Pataki's Lottery Plan Raids School Funds
To the Editor:
Why doesn't Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo want to debate State Senator George E. Pataki one on one?
The explanation given by Mr.
Cuomo to the effect that it would not be fair to the other candidates in the New York governor's race does not hold water.


The N.H.L. Is Making Overtures To Agents
With the first month of the season already lost to their lockout of the players, National Hockey League officials have moved into Phase II of their effort to generate support for their bargaining position from people on the other side.
Three weeks after Commissioner Gary Bettman wrote directly to the league's 650 players, the league has taken its case directly to the players' agents, sending them information on the N.H.L. proposals and the history of the negotiations.


At the U.N., a Drive for Diversity
In this parliament of 184 nations, there are few who disagree that it is time to make the Security Council, the Western-dominated power center of the United Nations system, look more like the diverse world it serves.
"It is ironic that in the midst of the rapid spread of democracy in recent years and the expanding membership of the United Nations, the Security Council remains unrepresentative in its size and the geographic distribution of its membership, and undemocratic in its decision-making and working methods," Roberto R. Romulo, Foreign Secretary of the Philippines, told the General Assembly recently.


Lessons in Rebounds From G.M. and I.B.M.
It seemed like two of the world's most troubled companies had finally gotten it right.
In hard-won turnarounds, General Motors and I.B.M. were bouncing back from disastrous losses and just about everybody, from customers to investors, was cheering.
But last week, the cheering turned to frightened silence at G.M., when it reported a worrisome loss in its crucial auto business in North America despite soaring sales.
Though the company reported an overall profit, the disappointing loss in North America, G.M.'s first in nine months, prompted a panicky stock selloff on Wall Street and doubts throughout corporate America and in dozens of G.M. factory towns whether the renaissance of the world's largest industrial company was in fact on track.


Diagnostek Inc.(DXK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Patents; Hand-held ZIP Code Imprinters for the Public Could Help Send Letters Speeding on Their Way
MILLIONS of letters surge every day through the Postal Service's automated sorting machines, which scan ZIP codes to direct the mail around the country.
James Kinstrey and Reynaldo Mustafa work with those sorters, watching some letters scoot through easily while others are spit out and rerouted for costly manual processing.
The culprit is handwriting.
About 30 percent of letters have scribbled ZIP codes that the machines cannot read.
So the two men have patented a hand-held stamp that will let people imprint ZIP codes on envelopes in bar code.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  HAITI SECURITY A PROBLEM
The American plan to purge Haiti's security forces and quickly retrain them is in jeopardy, with many of them abandoning their posts in the face of fierce anger among Haitians over years of abuse.
A1


A Nonunion Contractor Hits Labor Wall on New York Job
Dave Allan wants to build a bridge.
He has the men, the machines and the money -- a $6.7 million state contract to reconstruct the Island Creek Bridge, a 117-foot-long structure on the Wantagh State Parkway north of Jones Beach.
The problem is, he cannot get the construction materials.
No company on Long Island, he says, will sell him the tons of asphalt and concrete he needs.
It is not that his credit is bad or that there is not enough concrete to go around.


THEATER
Yo-Ho-Ho and a Bottle of Rum And Other Seaworthy Ideas  Promenade Theater
Once again, the Admiral Benbow Inn is open for business.
The good ship Hispaniola is plying the high seas.
And Skeleton Island, with its perils and glittering rewards, is the destination.


Owens &amp; Minor (OMI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Turmoil and Indecision At Sony's Film Studios
Three weeks after the departure of Peter Guber as chairman of Sony Pictures Entertainment, the Japanese-owned studio appears stricken by indecision, high-level bickering and turmoil, defections and a weak slate of new movies.
The same problems, in other words, that it has been grappling with in recent years.
Sony bought Columbia Pictures and Tristar Pictures in 1989 for $3.4 billion and few people in Hollywood expected immediate major changes.
But talent agents, producers and several executives at rival studios say that the problems at Sony Pictures seem so entrenched that the Japanese company, which has spent perhaps as much as $8 billion in Hollywood, will now have to spend hundreds of millions of dollars more to lift the studios out of their morass.


OPERA
A Degree of Decrepitude Suitable for 'La Boheme'  New York State Theater
On Saturday night, the City Opera brought back its venerable Cynthia Auerbach production of "La Boheme," first seen in 1966.
Lloyd Evans's sets are a modestly poetic incarnation of 19th-century Paris, decrepit in exactly the right sense.
Puccini's lush score blossoms handsomely in its cracks.
Laura Alley's direction, however, was sometimes a bit too broadly comic for the setting and, at the same time, failed to fill the stage effectively.


Dogs Walk Their Humans to the Park


Theafilm Names Its First Agency
Theafilm Distribution Network Inc., a new film distribution company in Los Angeles, has named Eisaman, Johns &amp; Laws in Los Angeles as the first agency to handle its account.
Theafilm, which plans to distribute films beginning in February, said on Friday that its annual advertising spending aimed at moviegoers was expected to total $60 million.
Eisaman, Johns was awarded the account without a review after handling promotional work for Theafilm, which is seeking to link film producers and movie theaters in an alternative to the major film studios' distribution systems.
The agency will manage the account through its EJL Entertainment division.


Owens-Illinois Inc.(OI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Ustinov Eye on Church History
When Sir Peter meets St.
Peter's, we're in for an up-market experience, and it happens this week on "Inside the Vatican." The first episode of this four-part history of the Roman Catholic Church finds Peter Ustinov, looking somewhat like a monument himself, upstaging the glowingly photographed papal church.
To the accompaniment of ascending music, he delivers an ornate narration in orotund tones.
As Pope John Paul II celebrates Mass, Sir Peter reflects on the distance the church has traveled since its difficult early centuries: "Two thousand years later, when Christianity has long since emerged from the subterranean shadows and faces the elements and mankind without fear. . . ." and so on.


The 'Bell Curve' Agenda
"The Bell Curve," a flame-throwing treatise on race, class and intelligence by the late Richard Herrnstein and Charles Murray advances a grisly thesis: I.Q., largely inherited and intractable, dictates an individual's success -- an economic death knell for much of America's black population.
The story has America increasingly divided by race and sliding inexorably into castes based on I.Q.
The book has already ignited bitter controversy, and that is no surprise.
It declares settled what many regard as an unresolved argument over whether I.Q.'s have scientific merit.
Moreover, Mr.
Murray's record as a political ideologue who uses social science data to support his policy preferences touches a tender spot in American intellectual history on the issue of race and intelligence.


No MCI Pacts With Bells On Wireless
MCI Communications, the second-largest long-distance carrier, has decided to go its own way in building a nationwide wireless-telephone network, rejecting any immediate alliance with the regional Bell companies, executives of MCI said today.
And on Tuesday, the Sprint Corporation, the third-biggest long-distance company, will announce details of an alliance with four of the biggest cable television operators to build a new wireless system from the ground up, executives said this weekend.


Giddings &amp; Lewis (GIDL,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Domco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Whittle Communications' Fall Is Dissected
The financial difficulties that prompted the collapse of the Whittle Communications Corporation, the once high-flying alternative media company led by the entrepreneur Christopher Whittle, were significantly more severe than previously believed and were masked in part by accounting misrepresentations, according to an article in the new issue of The New Yorker magazine.
The article also reported that Benno C. Schmidt Jr., the chief executive of the Edison Project, Mr.
Whittle's expensive effort to found a chain of privatized schools, recommended to the Edison board that Mr.
Whittle be removed as chairman.


Yet Another Reason to Arrest the Homeless
To the Editor:
If I were a police officer, I would be enraged and demoralized by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's latest move to criminalize poverty.
The Mayor has thrown his support behind a measure before the New York City Council to make it illegal to solicit money near automated teller machines (news article, Oct. 19).
If the measure passes, there will be one more in a long list of reasons to arrest homeless New Yorkers.


How Literacy Reshapes Everything
A IS FOR OX Violence, Electronic Media and the Silencing of the Written Word  By Barry Sanders  269 pages.
Pantheon Books. $23.
Curiously, the title of Barry Sanders's far-seeing if tendentious new book, "A Is for Ox," is not meant to be an example of the condition summed up by its subtitle, "Violence, Electronic Media and the Silencing of the Written Word."


Israel Arrests Militants In Reaction To Bus Bomb
Israel said today that it had arrested dozens of members of the Hamas Islamic group in a crackdown begun after the attack last week on a Tel Aviv bus, which is now said to have killed 23 people, including the bomber.
No details were given about how many of the Hamas members, who were arrested on the West Bank, had been picked up or in which towns.


Boy Shot In Rap Dispute
A 14-year-old Brooklyn boy was shot twice yesterday by a friend as the two argued about the performer of a rap recording, the police said.
Officers arrived at the scene of the shooting to find the boy, whose name was not released, sitting in a chair in his mother's apartment on the 12th floor of the Walt Whitman Houses in Fort Greene.
He had been shot once in the chest and once in the arm.
He was in critical but stable condition this morning at St.
Vincent's Hospital.


IBP Inc.(IBP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


TRAINING OF POLICE IN HAITI HAMPERED BY PERSONNEL GAP
The Clinton Administration's plan for maintaining order in Haiti has been thrown into jeopardy by the disappearance of most of the 7,000 Haitian soldiers and police officers who were to be candidates for a temporary force, senior American military and civilian officials say.
But with no good alternative, the United States is plunging ahead with a patchwork system in the hope of allowing American troops to hand off policing duties, which they accepted only reluctantly.


Rejecting Republican Assertions, Clinton Says Fiscal Memo Is Not Policy Plan
President Clinton struggled today to distance himself from a memorandum, sent to him by his own budget director and leaked to the press, in which a bevy of new taxes and cuts in Medicare and Social Security were listed as "illustrative options" for future economic policy.
The disclosure -- barely two weeks before midterm elections -- stirred glee among Republicans, who immediately asserted that Mr.
Clinton was plotting to skirt promises to leave Social Security and Medicare benefits alone.


Culbro Corp.(CUC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


Rwandans to Receive Loan
To help ease a financial crisis at Rwanda's diplomatic missions in the United States, the relief group AmeriCares is planning to announce on Monday that it will lend the Rwandans $200,000 free of interest for six months.
The loan will be given "to the people of Rwanda" to be used in any way the Government chooses, said Stephen M. Johnson, the president of AmeriCares, based in New Canaan, Conn.


Is Pataki's Career That of Maverick or a Mere Politician?
In 1993, State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, did what no other Republican Senator dared: he voted against the state budget because it increased taxes and spending.
The budget passed easily anyway, but Mr.
Pataki's vote annoyed his Republican peers, angered Senate leaders and became the distinguishing act of his 10 years in a Legislature where lock-step voting is the norm.
Whether Mr.
Pataki cast his vote with one eye on his political future is open for speculation.
But his defiant vote aside, Mr.
Pataki's role in the 1993 budget process was actually quite typical of Albany politics.
Several weeks before the vote, he convinced Senate leaders to sprinkle more than $500,000 for museums, road repairs and other aid to his district into the $62 billion spending plan -- money he later touted, as most lawmakers do, as evidence of his hard work for constituents.


Chemed Corp.(CHE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Social Health Is Improving, A Study Says
After three consecutive years of decline, the nation's social health is improving again, social scientists at Fordham University are announcing today in an annual report.
But the researchers report that the social well-being of the nation is still at one of its lowest points in 23 years.


A Cross Drop, and Brown's Knees Go Unseen
In looking back at the dreadful offense that produced the Giants' 10-6 loss to the Pittsburgh Steelers today, where does one start?
*With the Giants' two wasted touchdown opportunities in the first 17 minutes?


BEER
Despite the recent proliferation of microbreweries and brew-pubs, beer consumption -- and the excise tax collections that go with it -- continues to decline, both nationally and in the region.
Industry experts say the trend toward microbrewed beers indicates an expansion of the palate, not the market, which has been shrinking for years as people consume less and less alcohol.
Seventeen microbreweries and brew-pubs have opened in New York State since 1989.
During the same period, beer production in the state has fallen almost 20 percent.


METRO DIGEST
EDGING GINGERLY INTO NATIONAL POLITICS
While New Yorkers wonder will-he-or-won't-he support Republican contender George E. Pataki for governor, Mayor Giuliani has stepped gingerly onto the national political trail, endorsing Republicans in his own image: those who favored the Federal crime bill, or support abortion rights, or once served, as he did, as a Federal prosecutor.
A1.


CHRONICLE
Her new book is called "Moving Beyond Words," but the feminist author GLORIA STEINEM still values them.
Speaking to the New York Library Association in Syracuse on Saturday, Ms.
Steinem urged stronger public support of libraries.
She called them the only toll-free entrance to the information highway, saying they help level the playing field for people who can't afford to buy computers or other resources.


DANCE
Prayer as Dance and Music In Echo of 13th-Century Japan  Japan Society
A program of Yamabushi Kagura music and dance from Mount Hayachine in Japan presented on Tuesday night was as interesting in its history as its practice.
Based primarily on Shinto worship and traceable to the turn of the 13th century, the kagura is dance and music of prayer, developed by ascetic monks of the area (the Yamabushi).
It is performed today by their descendants, with much of the original symbolism of costumes, masks, stage setting and movement left intact.


Computervision Corp.(CVN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; Reeves Will Likely Turn to Kent Graham
DAN REEVES sounded as if he planned to change quarterbacks but didn't want to announce it until today or tomorrow.
"Dave Brown and everybody on our football team will be evaluated," the Giants' coach was saying after yesterday's tedious 10-6 loss to the Steelers.
"We will assess our situation and try to get us to a position where we can play as well as we can. We're not doing that now. Instead of getting better, we're getting worse."


Nelle Fisher, 79, Dancer and Teacher
Nelle Fisher, a versatile dancer and choreographer whose performing experience ranged from Martha Graham to Broadway to television musicals, died on Wednesday at Aldercrest, a nursing home in Edmonds, Wash.
She was 79.
She died of complications of Parkinson's disease, said her sister Clare, also of Edmonds.


American National Insurance Co. (ANAT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ipsco Inc.(IPSCF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ametek Inc.(AME,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Levitz Furniture (LFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Autissier French Gem Of the Ocean
It was a bright, clear night in Cape Town when the French solo sailor, Isabelle Autissier, sailed across the finish line in her record-setting first stage of the BOC round-the-world yacht race early yesterday.
The next closest competitor was still 1,200 miles away, reason enough for Autissier to become France's newest sports heroine.
"Barring a gear failure, she has such a commanding lead now that it seems impossible for anyone to catch her in the remaining 16,000 miles of the race," said Mark Schrader, the BOC race director, from Cape Town.


Circulation Losses Go On at New York Papers
The daily circulation of New York City newspapers is continuing a slide that began more than a year ago, according to new data supplied by the publishers of the four big metropolitan area papers.
In the six-month period that ended Sept. 30, Newsday, The New York Times and The Daily News all saw their average weekday circulations decline from the corresponding period last year.
Newsday saw particularly sharp declines in Long Island as well as New York City, with the daily circulation of its New York City edition shrinking by 37,425, or 13 percent, to 230,150.


Storage Technology Corp.(STK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Accounts
*
Kettle Moraine Beverage Co., Milwaukee, a new unit of the Miller Brewing Co., to Noble &amp; Associates, Chicago, to introduce Qube, a clear malt beverage, in test markets in Sacramento, Calif., and Providence, R.I.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Valvoline Co., Lexington, Ky., to Bozell New York, to handle its recently acquired Zerex antifreeze brand, previously at Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor, New York.
Bozell already handles advertising for other Valvoline products.
Billings were not disclosed.


Paul Echols Memorial
A memorial service for the early-music expert Paul C. Echols is to be held tomorrow at 1 P.M. at the Mannes College of Music, 150 West 85th Street, Manhattan.
Among those taking part will be Charles Kaufman, the dean of Mannes College; Olga Makarina, a soprano, and an instrumental ensemble.
Mr.
Echols, who founded and directed the Mannes Camerata and the college's early-music program, died on Sept. 24 at 50.


UST Inc.(UST,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Houston Suburb's Week of Calamity
If there was an epicenter to the sundry miseries visited upon the Houston area in its four days of disaster last week, it was this unassuming industrial suburb of single-family houses 15 miles from the city's downtown skyscrapers.
To the torments inflicted by the floods that struck a half-dozen outlying areas of Houston was added one that seemed almost a devilish joke to the people living along White's Lake here: two miles upstream, pipelines from refineries began spewing gasoline and diesel into the lake.


In Their Own Words: Women in Politics


Honor for Robin Williams
A tribute to Robin Williams, the comedian and actor, is to be held on Feb. 23 at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel by the American Museum of the Moving Image.
Mr.
Williams is the 10th film or television performer in as many years to be honored by the museum, which is in Astoria, Queens.
Tributes have also been held for Sidney Lumet, Elia Kazan, James Stewart, Sidney Poitier, Mike Nichols, Robert De Niro, Al Pacino and Steven Spielberg.
Some tickets may be available to the public in early November.
Information: (212) 245-6570.


Dr. Rollo May Is Dead at 85; Was Innovator in Psychology
Dr.
Rollo May, an innovative American psychologist and psychotherapist who was widely known through his writings, died on Saturday at his home in Tiburon, Calif.
He was 85.
The cause was congestive heart failure, and he had been in declining health for two years, said Nancy Ramsey, a friend of his family.


Clinton Blames G.O.P. for Voters' Discontent
President Clinton blamed Republicans today for riling up American voters and told Democrats that their task was to calm that fire between now and Election Day.
But the depth of the party's plight was underscored by the absence here of House Speaker Thomas S. Foley, who ducked a rally where Mr.
Clinton appeared to focus on a go-it-alone effort to hang on to his Congressional seat from the more conservative eastern part of the state.


Steeler Rookie Fumbles, But Recovers to Rumble
From the deep gashes across the shins of Steelers running back Byron (Bam) Morris, it looked as if he had spent most of this afternoon hurdling barbed wire.
Not quite.
But it might have been the only thing the Giants could have used to stop the rookie, who was filling in for the injured starter, Barry Foster.
In his first professional start, Morris shredded the Giants' defense for 146 yards on 29 carries and scored the only touchdown of the game on a 6-yard run in the fourth quarter that helped give the Steelers a 10-6 victory.


Coca-Cola Beverages reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Chris-Craft Industries (CCN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Differences on Ulster and Bosnia Take the Bloom Off U.S.-British Relations
During a radio interview the other day, Kenneth Clarke, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, was asked about the new opposition leader, Tony Blair.
He replied by calling him "Clintonesque," then went on to define the term.
"You know -- here we are, aren't we fun, we're new beautiful people, we're not saying very much, let's just have a change," he said.


Sure, Penn State and Nebraska Are Powerhouses. But Don't Forget About Utah.
Depending on next week's games, the road to No. 1 travels through State College, Pa., or Lincoln, Neb., next weekend.
According to The New York Times computer, however, Salt Lake City may have something to do with it by season's end.


Legal Abortion Saves Women's Lives
To the Editor:
James Miller (letter, Oct. 19) asserts that the falsity of the estimate of the annual number of illegal abortions before Roe v.
Wade, which you used in "Abortions: Where Are the Doctors?" (editorial, Oct. 13) is "evident from statistics compiled by Planned Parenthood's Alan Guttmacher Institute."


Bearings Inc.(BER,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


LSI Logic Corp.(LSI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Player's Man In the Owner's Boardroom
The minority owner and vice president of the Toronto Raptors wears a gold wristwatch on his left hand that was given to him by the players' union.
"A present for retirement," said Isiah Thomas, rolling up the sleeves of his suit jacket and shirt.


AIDS Curriculum: Fighting Words; Shapers of Teachers' Guidelines Are Hostile and Exhausted
Drafting the latest guide to teaching about AIDS in the New York City schools has been a bit like trench warfare, with Louise Phillips and Erica Zurer as the opposing field commanders, clawing their way through the curriculum line by line.
Mrs.
Phillips and her allies on the school system's AIDS advisory council disagree so profoundly with Ms.
Zurer's faction that during one discussion of the curriculum this year, a debate over a footnote encouraging explicit classroom explanations of sexual intercourse devolved into a shouting match over where to place the asterisk.


Chambliss Knocking on a Shut Door
Frank Robinson, baseball's first black manager, has always said he never had anything against old-boy networks.
The networks -- friends hiring friends, former roommates hiring former roommates, former teammates hiring former teammates -- advanced many men to the ranks of manager and into the ranks of greatness.


As Vibrant Campaigner, Cuomo Has No Equal
Is there any politician but Mario M. Cuomo who would devote an entire campaign appearance to an impassioned, detailed history of the labor movement in America?
Is there any other politician who could?


Wabash National Corp.(WNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Alleghany Corp.(Y,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Interstate Power Co.  (IPW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Varian Associates Inc.(VAR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Southwest Airlines (LUV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Canadian Occidental Petroleum (CXY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nacco Industries(NC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Santa Fe Pacific Corp.(SFX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Enquirer: Required Reading in Simpson Case
On the first day of jury selection, Marcia Clark, the Assistant District Attorney handling the O. J. Simpson case and cover girl of the Aug. 2 issue of The National Enquirer ("Marcia Clark's Tragic Secret Life: O. J. prosecutor's first husband shot in head after gambling scandal") approached potential juror No. 1118.
"Now, you indicated that you occasionally read The National Enquirer?" Ms.
Clark asked the woman, a cashier in the Los Angeles tax collector's office.


Lending a Hand to the Party in Washington State


Time Inc. Raises Its Multimedia Profile With an Internet Test
With much of the magazine industry still wary of interactive media, Time Inc. is intent on staking out a front-line position.
On Monday, at the annual American Magazine Conference, it will announce the start of a test to offer Internet users an interactive version of some of its magazines.
Earlier this month Time reached an agreement with ABC News and NBC News to provide interactive "news on demand" along with CNN on the long-awaited and much-delayed Time Warner Full Service Network in Orlando, Fla.
And a few weeks ago the company acquired a studio in Rockefeller Center to produce interactive television projects.
It has also been dabbling in CD-ROM production.


New York Champion Has Choice to Make
The New York City Marathon is in danger of losing its defending men's champion, ANDRES ESPINOSA of Mexico.
Race officials said yesterday that Espinosa, 31, had made commitments to the New York race, which will be run on Nov. 6, and to the Fukuoka Marathon, which will be run in Japan in December.
Given the training and recovery time required, no elite athlete could run two quality marathons in a month.
"We still hope he'll end up here," DAVE HERSCHER, a spokesman for the New York City Marathon, said yesterday.


Newell Co.(NWL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Welfare Mothers Find Jobs Are Easier to Get Than Hold
Poor women leave the welfare rolls for jobs much more often than was previously thought, but the low-paying and sometimes unattractive work rarely provides a long-term solution to dependence, according to several recent studies.
Most of the women soon quit or lose the jobs and return to the welfare rolls.
The reasons for leaving work can be as varied as economic problems, like low wages or the loss of insurance, and personal difficulties, like drug abuse or fights with bosses.


Praxair Inc.(PX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lincoln Tunnel Going Cellular
Cellular phone service has begun in the Lincoln Tunnel, the Port Authority and Cellular One announced yesterday.
Technicians have installed more than 26,000 feet of cable through the tunnel's three tubes, said Terry Benczik, a spokeswoman for the Port Authority, which operates the tunnel.
She added that the cost of $1.2 million would be paid by the cellular company.


Hornets Hear Good News About Johnson
LARRY JOHNSON, who was expected to miss up to eight weeks with yet another injury, doesn't have a stress fracture in his foot after all and may be ready for the Charlotte Hornets' season opener Nov. 4 in Chicago.
The All-Star forward was re-examined yesterday by the Hornets' team physician after suffering an injury in last Tuesday's National Basketball Association game against Golden State on the team's weeklong European tour.


Excel Industries Inc.(EXC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Yes, Let's Rename That Historic Island
To the Editor:
Re your Oct. 20 article on Donald Trump's proposal to buy Davids Island, an undeveloped island in Long Island Sound owned by the city of New Rochelle: Since the island is named after a former owner, the name itself provides sufficient precedent for Mr.
Trump to rename the island Trump Island.


Where Intense Desires Have Become a Leitmotif
Mazzy Star, from California, and the Jesus and Mary Chain, from Scotland, are two bands on fire.
The groups, which performed on Saturday night at the Academy in the second of two sold-out shows, burn with the intensity of desire, which has fueled some of the best rock-and-roll.
Hope Sandoval of Mazzy Star sings on "Fade Into You," "I want to hold the hand inside you." And William Reid of the Jesus and Mary Chain sings on "Wish I Could," "We were searching for a fire."
Both singers, however, never attain their desire.
"I looked at you and I see nothing," Ms.
Sandoval sings with an air of resignation, and Mr.
Reid confesses, "We settled for a spark."


Ziar Nad Hronom Journal; Tarnished Aluminum Plant (but a Shiny Future?)
Rudolf Camaj doesn't quite know whether to trust the stories that one day the aluminum plant here will be so clean there might be an outdoor swimming pool for the workers.
"It is almost unbelievable to us that the old factory will be replaced by a new factory that won't be harming the environment," said Mr.
Camaj, a 39-year-old fire-safety worker who has toiled inside the smelters among the noxious fumes since he was 16.
He remembers that when he was a small boy an entire village nearby had to be emptied when people became sick and buildings ruined.
That was just six years after the plant opened in the late 1950's.
He has seen the grass shrivel up, the animals die and the trees wither.
Even so, Mr.
Camaj said, people were grateful for the plant because it provided jobs.


The Broncos Snap a Streak and Maybe Save a Job
Stan Humphries stood cockeyed on the sideline and Joe Montana was not eligible, so the Denver Broncos finally found a quarterback they could smother today.
Gale Gilbert, San Diego's substitute signal-caller, needed to travel only 31 yards in the final 79 seconds to keep the Chargers unbeaten this afternoon, but his ensuing four passes were either too high or wide.
The Broncos not only saved Coach Wade Phillips's fingernails; they may have preserved his job.


Essay; Clinton's Concessions
The problem with Bill Clinton's trip to Syria to seek an agreement about the Golan Heights is that he has persuaded himself that his cave-in last week to North Korea was "a very good deal indeed."
Examine that deal.
Mr.
Clinton's opening position was that untrustworthy North Korea must not be allowed to become a nuclear power; he soon trimmed that to say it must not possess nuclear bombs, and stoutly threatened sanctions if North Korea did not permit inspections of nuclear facilities at Yongbyon, where the C.I.A. and K.G.B. agree nuclear devices have been developed.


A Hasidic Tip of the Hat To Pataki Isn't Unanimous
They may dress alike, but the Orthodox Jews of Crown Heights are as divided as the rest of New York State over the race for governor.
Yesterday, even as State Senator George E. Pataki clipped on his personalized yarmulke to pick up an endorsement from one neighborhood political group, a second group of Lubavitchers was praising Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and denouncing the first group.
The transcendent issue in the central Brooklyn Jewish community is still the 1991 racial unrest along Eastern Parkway, referred to almost invariably by the Lubavitcher Hasidim as "the pogrom." Any incumbent who seeks Lubavitch votes is required to explain his or her actions during that period, and any prospective office seeker must say what he or she would have done if in office.


Fleet Mortgage Group Inc.(FLG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


What Those Figures on New Jobs Really Mean; Misleading Numbers
To the Editor:
"Statistics Reveal Bulk of New Jobs Pay Over Average" (front page, Oct. 17) focuses deceptively on average income changes.
You quote the economist Paul R. Krugman as saying that "there's something funny about numbers that suggest that the average real wage is declining." (Mr. Krugman also asserts that "workers as a group are fully sharing in economic gains.")


Corrections
Because of a transcription error, a front-page article yesterday about the New York governor's race referred incorrectly to a rock group at an event on Saturday attended by B. Thomas Golisano.
It is Widespread Panic, not Whitebread Panic.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Alliance All-Market Advantage Fund, New York, an initial public offering of 3 million shares.
Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.


Berlioz at 20: A Mass He Withdrew
Will the real Messe Solennelle please stand up?
From two radically different performances, I have gained two irreconcilable impressions of Berlioz's early Mass, a thick and problematic score that resurfaced two years ago after lying undisturbed in a church trunk for a century and a half.
A recording by John Eliot Gardiner, made shortly after the 20th-century premiere last year, reveals an intriguing although hardly successful experiment, laced with hints of Berlioz's mature genius.
A performance by the Boston Symphony on Friday night at Avery Fisher Hall revealed an amateur score devoid of craft or inspiration.
It is the difference between a good performance and a bad performance, but also between a live performance and a recording.
The Messe Solennelle, written when Berlioz was a 20-year-old neophyte composer, is just the sort of work that one can investigate comfortably in one's living room, learning from both its strengths and weaknesses.
It does not, however, withstand the uninterrupted scrutiny of the concert hall.
One can readily understand why Berlioz chose to withdraw it after two performances in the mid-1820's.


Case of the Disappearing Running Mate
Poor Stan Lundine.
Even after eight years as Lieutenant Governor, sometimes it seems that nobody remembers who Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's running mate is.
A brochure promoting Mr.
Cuomo's record on women's issues urges New Yorkers to "vote Cuomo/ Burstein," a reference to the Democratic candidate for Attorney General, Karen S. Burstein, who, unlike Mr.
Lundine, is a woman.
The signs waved at the rally where Mr.
Cuomo was endorsed by the Rev.
Jesse L. Jackson on Thursday read: "Cuomo/McCall," a reference to the Democratic candidate for State Comptroller, H. Carl McCall, who, unlike Mr.
Lundine, is black.


ServiceMaster L.P.(SVM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Briggs &amp; Stratton (BGG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New England Electric System (NES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


VF Corp.(VFC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


TRANSACTIONS
Hockey  East Coast Hockey League
WHEELING THUNDERBIRDS -- Signed Darren McAusland, left wing.


Bridge
If you are dummy and peek into a defender's hand, you lose rights: You may not point out an irregularity, or warn partner against leading from the wrong hand.
Nevertheless, there is a strong temptation to peek at both defenders' hands and in one circumstance it is easy.
If you are playing bridge on the Imagination computer network, the three other players are miles away and the program shows dummy all 52 cards.
That lets dummy have some fun instead of sitting in ignorant idleness.


The Enquirer: Required Reading in Simpson Case
On the first day of jury selection, Marcia Clark, the Assistant District Attorney handling the O. J. Simpson case and cover girl of the Aug. 2 issue of The National Enquirer ("Marcia Clark's Tragic Secret Life: O. J. prosecutor's first husband shot in head after gambling scandal") approached potential juror No. 1118.
"Now, you indicated that you occasionally read The National Enquirer?" Ms.
Clark asked the woman, a cashier in the Los Angeles tax collector's office.


Allergan Inc.(AGN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Intergraph Corp.(INGR,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co.  (BGE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


McKesson Corp.(MCK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Leg Injury Ends Colonial Affair's Career
Horse racing lost a star yesterday when Colonial Affair, the favorite in the $3 million Breeders' Cup Classic, broke a bone in his right hind leg by kicking the wall of his stall at Churchill Downs.
The injury, which ends the horse's racing career but isn't life-threatening, was announced by the trainer of the 4-year-old colt, Scotty Schulhofer, who said simply but sadly: "The big horse is out."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; To find out what's on Generation X's mind, hire an X'er as youth marketing director.
WHEN Houston Effler &amp; Partners, a Boston-based advertising agency with $213 million in billings, wants to know what's on the mind of Generation X, it turns to Jane Rinzler, its youth marketing director who, at 26, is a living, breathing data base on the likes and dislikes of the 20-something crowd.
Most agencies think they need a similar pulse-taker for this particular generation.
Many use outside marketing consultants, but in Ms.
Rinzler, Houston Effler thinks it has found the liaison it needs.


Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric Co.  (CIN,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


Fears Fade in Macedonia With First Round of Vote
Grumbling about voting fraud and forecasts of war in Macedonia have faded after a strong showing by the former Communists in the first round of elections last Sunday.
President Kiro Gligorov, the one-time Communist boss who peacefully led this country to independence from Yugoslavia in 1991, won re-election in the first round, receiving 52.4 percent of the votes to about 14 percent for the nationalist candidate, Ljubsha Georgiyevski.


Pataki's Lottery Plan Raids School Funds
To the Editor:
George E. Pataki, Republican candidate for governor of New York, says one of the ways he will lower our taxes is by using funds from the state lottery.


An American Artist Displeases the English Cousins
This should have been a joyful year for R. B. Kitaj.
The 61-year-old American painter had achieved a tribute most artists only dream of: a one-man retrospective at the Tate.
It seemed as if he had only to sit back and bask in the acclaim.
It didn't work out that way.
The Tate show, which closed last month, was savagely attacked by the London critics.
Their reviews struck a tone of hostility and aggression that many people here found appalling.
The invective was so personal and hurtful that it caused Mr.
Kitaj to consider withholding his future work from public view and leaving England, where he has lived for 35 years.


As It Seeks Loans, Russia Faces Political Fight Over Budget
The Great Game was what Kipling called the long struggle between the Russian and British empires over Central Asia.
The great game these days is the struggle of the Russian Government to get loans out of the International Monetary Fund to bail out its budget.


Okinawa Seeks Return Of Statue
A 200-pound, century-old bronze statue of a revered 19th-century Japanese moral philosopher is caught in a cultural tug-of-war between a group of Okinawan Japanese and a small, liberal arts college here.
Both sides agree that the statue of Kinjiro Ninomiya -- a sort of Japanese Horatio Alger who preached the virtues of hard work and self reliance -- was taken from Okinawa by victorious marines in the final weeks of World War II.


Fighting, Laughing And Jiving
The title just about sums up David Parsons's new "Mood Swing," presented by the Pennsylvania Ballet on Thursday night at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.
"Mood Swing" a Kennedy Center commission, places nine dancers in a faintly urban setting and gets them jiving, laughing, fighting and drooping listlessly to swing jazz by Morton Gould.
Like the program as a whole, the new work displays the remarkable range of a first-rate company of vividly expressive, unmistakably American classicists with an endearing lack of assumption.
The moods start cool, with the kind of disaffected amble favored by Jerome Robbins in "West Side Story" and his jazz ballets.
Jeffrey Gribler separates from the crowd, walking against it, shaking his head as if in disbelief and eventually leading the others off the stage like a Pied Piper.
This, Mr.
Parsons seems to be saying, will be a prankish ballet.


Cipsco Inc.(CIP,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
When JUDITH R. SHAPIRO is inaugurated as the sixth president of Barnard College on Thursday before 2,000 people in Riverside Church, in her mind it will be an event with anthropological overtones.
"The inauguration is like a wedding between a new president and an institution," Dr.
Shapiro, who taught anthropology at the University of Chicago and Bryn Mawr College, said the other day.
Noting that she had actually taken office in July, she said: "The inauguration is not what makes the relationship legal, but it is the public ceremony with the entire community there as witness. It is an emotional heightening that comes when all the sacred symbols of community are mobilized. The faculties wear their ritual gowns, I get the official Barnard medal put around my neck."


U.S. Diplomatic Mission on 5-Nation Africa Tour
With concern growing over possible violence in neighboring Mozambique, a senior American delegation visited this newly democratic country today as part of a five-nation African tour intended to improve peacekeeping on a continent scarred by civil wars and refugee crises.
Officials said the mission, led by Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott, was a departure for American diplomacy in Africa, where Washington has decided to increase military cooperation with the growing number of countries that have switched to multiparty democracy after decades of dictatorships.


Drug Suspect Who Fled U.S. With New Heart Is Captured
In the summer of 1993, Bartolome Moya, the purported leader of a brutal New York City drug ring, was arrested and charged with murders, kidnappings and other racketeering crimes.
But doctors said he was suffering from a terminal heart disease and a Federal judge dropped the charges and sent him home to die.
Last February, however, Mr.
Moya received a taxpayer-financed $400,000 heart transplant at Temple University in Philadelphia.
Learning about it, prosecutors indicted and jailed him again.


Nostalgia For Drama Of TV Past
Once a sturdy staple of public television, drama productions are being steadily eliminated from the schedule.
Some are deemed a drag on ratings.
Others, even if successful, like "Tales of the City," raise the kind of political hackles that set timid broadcasters atremble.
Music and dance specials are generally safer.
And so public television goes right on being appallingly diminished.
A sense of what is being lost surfaces tonight with a short play called "The Mother," a "Great Performances" presentation.
This is a rare instance of television dipping into its own past for outstanding dramatic material.
Written by Paddy Chayefsky in his early I-am-a-snapshot days of Bronx social realism, "The Mother" was originally broadcast live in 1954 on the "Philco-Goodyear Television Playhouse."


No Headline
"You have to like where you're working at. And like the money. And have the benefits. And get a baby sitter. Then there's no reason for you to go on welfare." -- ALESIA WAITS, a welfare mother.  [ A14:6. ]


In a Big-Top Atmosphere, the Lions Outperform Bears
It was like a circus out there at the start of the Chicago Bears-Detroit Lions game, and both teams took turns at playing the clown.
An opening kickoff fumbled by the Lions.
A blown 46-yard field-goal attempt by the Bears.
A fourth-and-3 run of minus-3 yards by the Lions.
A Lions interception and then recovery of their own fumble, all on the same play.
Dropped passes, plenty of punts and too many penalites.


Agency's Use Of Overtime Is Questioned
The New York City Department of Investigation has begun an inquiry into unusually high overtime bills in the Chief Medical Examiner's office, whose 12 physician's assistants have doubled or tripled their salaries by billing the city for as many as 55 extra hours a week, high-ranking Giuliani administration officials said.
Six of the assistants, whose annual base salary is $47,918, were the top overtime earners on the city payroll in the last fiscal year, according to a list compiled from personnel records by the City Council Finance Committee.
The others were in the top 50.


Legal Abortion Saves Women's Lives; Remember Them
To the Editor:
"Myth of Back-Alley Abortions Refuses to Die" (letter, Oct. 19) trivializes the lives and deaths of women who were casualties of unsafe and illegal abortions before Roe v.
Wade.


INSIDE
Sri Lanka Candidate Killed
A bomb in Sri Lanka killed 50 people, including the opposition presidential candidate, just as peace talks with rebels were to begin.
Page A3.
Data Highway, Privatized
Having nurtured the Internet computer web, the Government has begun to transfer the job of maintaining it to the private sector.
Page D1.
One Soars, Another Doesn't
Divergent earnings reports by General Motors and I.B.M. reflect the travails of reshaping a mismanaged corporate giant.
Page D1.
Rollo May Is Dead at 85
Dr.
Rollo May, who was a founder of the humanistic psychology movement and was widely followed in the 1960's, is dead.
Page B12.
A2 Arts


Abroad at Home; Wrong From The Start
The United Nations has had peacekeeping forces in Bosnia for years now.
But there is no peace.
Bosnians are still being picked off by Serbian snipers.
The Serbs are blocking relief convoys to besieged areas.
They are still carrying out "ethnic cleansing."
What has gone wrong?
The answer is that the U.N. operation was misconceived from the start.
That is made compellingly clear by Prof.
Richard K. Betts of Columbia University in the new issue of the magazine Foreign Affairs.
His article is must reading for everyone concerned about the unending tragedy in Bosnia.


Richard Goode Offers A Beethoven Biography
Strung out in order, Beethoven's 32 piano sonatas tell a story, perhaps several.
This explains, I think, why performers like Richard Goode have the periodic need to put other music aside and devote whole concerts to them, as he did at Avery Fisher Hall yesterday.
One story is of a man.
Beethoven didn't just happen; he came to be over time.
The sonatas are like chapters in a biography.
Another story is about the people around him, who at the start of a new century stopped thinking about order and optimism as the Enlightenment had dictated and dived into the Romantic maelstrom.


In Legislative Elections, Choices Are Hard to Find
POLITICIANS worry about survival (their own), and ruminate obsessively about the public mood (sour).
They blame the economy, or the media, or immigration, or whatever else they can come up with to explain away why so many voters seem to be fed up.
It is not all that complicated.
As Cassius might have advised had Shakespeare illumined the 20th century instead of the 16th, try a little introspection.


Foremost Corp. of America (FCOA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dynatech Corp.(DYTC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Old Gunslinger Outdraws the Young Gun
The word had gotten around.
Throw the ball deep at Rod Woodson and more than likely you'll hit on a big play.
The only active cornerback in the league to be named to the 75th anniversary National Football League all-time team is a marked man.
He's the gunslinger who is shaky on the draw.
All the young guns want to test him.
It was Dave Brown's turn this afternoon.
He made Woodson feel naked in front of 71,819 people at Giants Stadium on 3 occasions in the first quarter -- a 31-yarder to Arthur Marshall, a 44-yarder to Chris Calloway and a 21-yarder to Mike Sherrard.


DANCE
A Little Modesty Goes a Long Way  Dia Center for the Arts
Choreographic modesty is not always a virtue.
The solos and duets that Chivas Sandage and Laura Staton presented on Thursday night in SoHo began by looking emotionally low-keyed.
Then, all too often, they turned merely bland.


Giuliani Prepares to Reveal Spending Cuts
After weeks of quietly drafting ways to keep New York City's $31.6 billion budget balanced, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani plans to unveil a menu of spending cuts this week that officials say will affect programs and services for thousands, if not millions, of New Yorkers.
As he and his aides continued to make adjustments last night, the Mayor's revision of the budget that took effect four months ago was expected to include more than $850 million in spending cuts, sparing virtually no city agency, officials said.


Portland General Corp.(PGN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Farewell to a Man of Music


Bucks' Murdock Sidelined by Eye Injury
Point guard ERIC MURDOCK of the Milwaukee Bucks will be sidelined up to six weeks with an eye injury he sustained in a preseason game.


U.S. Begins Privatizing Internet's Operations
Having succeeded beyond its wildest dreams in nurturing the Internet computer web into a vital national communications system, the Federal Government has begun turning over to the private sector the job of operating and maintaining the network's major arteries.
Some experts say the Government's planned withdrawal from Internet management -- ending nearly a decade of oversight and an estimated $12 million in annual subsidies -- is the best way to bring marketplace efficiencies to the increasingly commercial global network.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page on Wednesday about editorial appointments at Hearst Magazines misstated the percentage change in advertising pages for three magazines.
For the first nine months of the year, Good Housekeeping was down 1.6 percent in ad pages, McCall's was up 2.3 percent and Redbook was up 1.3 percent.


Noranda Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In a Cynical Election Season, The Ads Tell an Angry Tale
The life of a media consultant has its challenges at the height of a competitive campaign.
Like finding the right hog to serve as a pork metaphor, or the perfect photo of your opponent jogging with President Clinton, or the most sincere testimonials that your candidate "shares your values" (be they the "highest Hoosier standards" or "Wisconsin common sense.")
These are rough, angry, cynical times, the pollsters are endlessly finding, and there is no room for subtlety in political advertisements.
Even in the best of times, it is not an art form known for nuance.


Beyond the P.T.A.: Parents Seek More Power
When educators talk about the virtues of parental involvement in schools, this is not exactly what they have in mind: a secession movement that threatens to break apart the local district.
The Downingtown Area School District, about 30 miles west of Philadelphia, wants to double the capacity of the district's only high school -- to 3,600 students.
Parents here see a monster in the making.
So they asked the state Education Department for permission to secede.


Rogers Cantel Mobile Communications Inc.(RCMIF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


AES Corp.(AESC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


What Those Figures on New Jobs Really Mean
To the Editor:
"Statistics Reveal Bulk of New Jobs Pay Over Average" (front page, Oct. 17) leaves a misleading impression that the economy has recently been creating large numbers of very high-paying managerial and professional jobs.


Chavis Settles With N.A.A.C.P. for Far Less Than He Sought
The Rev.
Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., who was dismissed in August from his job as executive director of the N.A.A.C.P., has agreed to withdraw his suit against the civil rights organization for wrongful termination without receiving the substantial sum he had been seeking, according to a settlement made public today.
The settlement falls far short of fulfilling Mr.
Chavis's original demand of payment of the remainder of his three-year contract.
At the time of his dismissal in August, Mr.
Chavis, who received $200,000 a year, had served as the group's executive director for 15 months.


Not the First to Cross a Party Line
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's endorsement of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo was not the first of a Democratic candidate by a Republican mayor of New York City.
Mayor Fiorello H. LaGuardia
Mr.
LaGuardia, who had twice won on a fusion ticket that included the Republican nomination, endorsed the Democrat, Gov.
Herbert H. Lehman, over the Republican challenger, Thomas E. Dewey, in 1940.
LaGuardia praised Lehman as "our great Governor" after demanding that Lehman announce his unequivocal support of the New Deal.


Q&amp;A
Backyard Mushrooms
Q.
Is it safe to eat giant white mushrooms that sprout near a tree trunk in the backyard?
If a squirrel eats one, does that mean it's safe?


Aristide Picks a Prime Minister With Free-Market Ideas
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide selected an American-educated commodities trader as Prime Minister today, political figures said.
They saw the move as placing a strong supporter of the free market in a position to oversee the overhaul of the country's staggering economy.
President Aristide is expected to make the formal appointment of the new Prime Minister, Smarck Michel, on Tuesday.
Today's action clears the way for the appointment of a new Cabinet and serves as a compromise between left-leaning figures in the Aristide Government and the business community.
Business leaders have been clamoring for a Prime Minister able to oversee a new economic plan acceptable to the World Bank, International Monetary Fund and the business community here.


Temple Loses Davis
Temple halfback DANNY DAVIS will miss the rest of the season after breaking his right ankle in last weekend's 49-42 loss to Syracuse.
Davis, a sophomore, started in four of seven games this season and was the Owls' leading rusher with 239 yards on a team-high 74 carries.
He was also the team leader in touchdowns, scoring three rushing and two receiving.


Bailey Has Fine Game But a Rough Finale
On the second-to-last play in the Steelers game Sunday, Giants linebacker Carlton Bailey was hit in the head so hard that he momentarily wasn't sure where he was.
He suffered a concussion, but as quickly as the haze appeared, fortunately for him, it cleared seconds afterward.
He was later checked out by the Giants' medical staff and was found to be fine.


TNP Enterprises (TNP,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


ARCO (ARC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


USX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ashland Oil Corp.(ASH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Airborne Freight Corp.(ABF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rwanda Refugee Crisis Is Threatening Gorillas In Neighboring Areas
RESEARCHERS who have just finished a survey of populations of large mammals in Central Africa say the numbers are encouraging.
But they also report that Rwandan refugee camps threaten the longterm health of the region.
Eight months of field research in eastern Zaire revealed that surprisingly large numbers of gorillas, as well as elephants, leopards, buffaloes and chimpanzees, still live in the remoter regions of the country.


Laclede Steel Co.  (LCLD,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cedras's New Palace: 2 Bedrooms, Personal Computer
For nearly three years, he ruled Haiti with an iron fist, terrorizing anyone who would defy his military rule.
But today, officials say, Raoul Cedras sits in a rundown hotel room here writing his memoirs and worrying whether his children will be harassed at school because of who their father is.
Since arriving in Panama on Oct. 13, Haiti's exiled military leaders and their families have remained secluded in the Riande Continental Hotel near the airport.
People who have visited General Cedras, formerly Haiti's military commander, said he had set up a personal computer and spent most of the day working on the memoirs.


CHRONICLE
KEVIN COSTNER and his wife, CINDY, announced that they will divorce after 16 years of marriage, Reuters reported yesterday.
The couple issued a statement that read, "We did not come to this decision easily and on behalf of our entire family we ask to be allowed the dignity of sorting through this most painful part of our lives in private."


McCall Accuses London of Roiling Racial Tensions in Campaign
H.
Carl McCall, the Democratic candidate for comptroller, and some of his Jewish supporters today accused his Republican opponent, Herbert London, of stoking tensions between blacks and Jews in order to win votes.
Today Mr.
London, who is Jewish, called on Mr.
McCall, who is black, to divest himself of his shares in WLIB, the radio station that Mr.
London characterizes as "the official voice of hate." And Mr.
London's campaign manager, Jim Dillon, compared Mr.
McCall's campaign tactics, particularly one television ad, to actions of Joseph Goebbels, the Nazi propaganda minister.


Atkins and Bogguss, Country Classicists
You're never too old to rock-and-roll.
So joked Chet Atkins, the legendary Nashville guitarist, arranger and record producer, at his Carnegie Hall appearance with the country singer Suzy Bogguss on Friday evening.
"I'm only 70. I don't think it's too late," he declared while introducing a parody of "There'll Be Some Changes Made" in which the lyric warns, "I'll start wearing makeup like Michael and Prince." Mr.
Atkins is in fact a sedate country classicist whose closest brush with rock came several years ago on a duet album with Mark Knopfler of Dire Straits.


CHRONICLE
RICHARD C. WADE, distinguished professor of urban history at the Graduate School and University Center of the City University of New York, is stepping down at the end of the semester, so the school is giving him a retirement party.
In fact, it is giving him a conference.
On Thursday morning, a panel of scholars will talk about "Urban History: Past and Present." In the afternoon, the panel members will discuss "The Duty of the Scholar to His Times," a pet topic of Dr.
Wade, 73.


New York's Top Judge Plans Overhaul of the Juror System
In a major overhaul of New York's jury system, the state's top judge announced a package of revisions yesterday aimed at making jury service more bearable -- tours of duty would be shorter, deliberation rooms cleaner, clerks less snappish.
"We cannot ask jurors to perform their civic responsibility in dilapidated surroundings using outmoded procedures," said Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye in unveiling the state courts' first major changes in the jury system since 1977.


Fire Seen as Vital for Nature, Igniting Ecological Debate
AT first glance, the scene might have seemed like a wildfire out of control.
Orange flames, driven by a gusting wind, crackled across the prairie and charged into a stand of pine trees, sending a swirling cloud-castle of smoke billowing into the air.
Black desolation remained where the fire had passed.
But the people wearing fire-resistant jumpsuits and helmets, with tanks full of water on their backs, were not trying to put out the fire.
They were tending it, like shepherds.
They had, in fact, set the blaze on purpose, following a precise, written prescription, in an effort to use fire in its historic role as a shaper, cleanser and revitalizer of nature -- in this case, the biologically diverse sand plains of Martha's Vineyard.


Lyondell Petrochemical Co.  (LYO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.69
4.68
3.17
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.07
4.98
3.08
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.51
5.42
3.19
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.84
7.78
5.42
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.04
7.97
6.00
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.86
8.80
7.04
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.74
6.71
5.43
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Morrison Knudsen Corp.(MRN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Scott Paper Is Selling Power Plant in Alabama
Accelerating a drive to pare down operations outside its consumer-products business, the Scott Paper Company announced plans yesterday to sell a power plant in Mobile, Ala., to a unit of the Southern Company for $350 million.
Albert J. Dunlap, Scott's chairman and chief executive, also said he hoped to sell other assets soon, including another power plant, as well as timber and food businesses and real estate.
And he announced the possibility of stock buybacks within the next quarter.


U.S. Weighs Sending Ambassador to Zaire, a Dictator's Fief
In a sign of support for a new Prime Minister's reform efforts in a country led by one of Africa's most corrupt and repressive governments, Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott made a brief visit here today and said Washington was considering sending an ambassador to Zaire.
Mr.
Talbott, who is on a tour of several African countries, met with Prime Minister Kengo Wa Dondo during a stopover between visits to Malawi and Ghana.


Chemicals Units Lift Oil Concerns
Exxon, Amoco and ARCO said yesterday that their earnings from operations rose in the third quarter because of a resurgence of their chemical businesses and higher prices for their crude oil.
All three companies, however, had a decline in refining operations because of lower gasoline prices as the industry, preparing to begin refining reformulated gasolines that must be shipped in December, flooded the market with old fuel to reduce inventories.


Strains in Belgrade: Army vs. Serbian President
President Slobodan Milosevic's decision to end his support for the Bosnian Serbs has created misgivings and splits in the Serbian-dominated Yugoslav Army, an institution already embittered by low pay and repeated changes of leadership.
The disgruntlement of the army does not pose a direct threat to Serbia's President, because it is weakened and divided, said Western diplomats and people close to the military.
But with Serbia's political opposition in disarray, the army appears to have become the single strongest source of dissent to President Milosevic's policies.


By Design; Here's Looking at You, Coat
In leather, in organza, in taffeta and in gabardine, trench coats marched down the runways of Paris and Milan, Italy.
Humphrey Bogart's favorite raincoat has been updated in new fabrics and pale colors, with a tightly belted waist and a short full skirt.
These versions will be in American stores come spring, but there are plenty of stylish trenches for fall right now.
Bergdorf Goodman has Prada's black nylon above-the-knee trench for $780 and Drizzle's short black shiny vinyl trench for $450.
Bergdorf's also has two long trenches by Drizzle: one in black, olive or slate-gray microfiber with a zip-out wool lining for $400 and one in tan wool covert with leather buttons for $500.


Plastic Pipe Makers Plan to Settle Lawsuit
Three companies that manufactured plastic plumbing used in about six million homes throughout the United States have agreed to pay at least $750 million to replace those pipes that have leaked since installations began in 1978.
The gray polybutelene pipe, sold under brand names that include Safeguard, was manufactured by the Shell Oil Company, E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, and Hoechst Celanese.


Patterns
A Model and a Bottle
A skinny little model named Kate Moss could be about to shake up the recently established practice of corporate sponsorship of runway shows.


Turmoil Grows Worse At Time Warner Music
The turmoil at Time Warner's music group grew worse today when the president of Warner Brothers Records, Lenny Waronker, said he would not succeed the group's highly regarded chairman, Mo Ostin, who will step down in January after 25 years.
The announcement led to industry speculation that both executives could join the new label being formed by David Geffen, the recording industry billionaire.


Kirby Corp.(KEX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
Duke
With the women taking the forefront, the Blue Devils have been the talk of college soccer for the last few days as a result of two monumental accomplishments.


Student Slain At School In Mt. Vernon
A 17-year-old baseball star was stabbed to death in a crowded hallway at Mount Vernon High School this morning in the aftermath of a dispute that apparently involved two other students, the police said.
County officials said it was the first time a student had died under violent circumstances in a Westchester County school.


Higher Rates Worldwide Seen by Fed
Federal Reserve officials, struggling to hold down long-term interest rates in the United States, are increasingly convinced that an unusual convergence of global trends may keep rates high around the world for the next several years.
They and officials at the Treasury Department note that Western Europe and Japan have begun moving simultaneously out of recessions while output in many developing countries expands briskly.
In growing economies, the demand for capital to invest in new factories or homes tends to outstrip growth in the money available for lending.
This pushes up interest rates as people compete to borrow money.


Inco Ltd. (N,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Robert Lansing, 66, an Actor On Stage, Screen and Television
Robert Lansing, whose rugged good looks and deep voice served him well on stage and in films and television, died on Sunday at Calgary Hospice in the Bronx.
He was 66 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Ann.


Gaylord Entertainment Co.  (GET,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Closing Date In January Announced for 'Carousel'
The award-winning revival of Rodgers and Hammerstein's "Carousel" that has been playing at the Vivian Beaumont Theater since February is to close on Jan. 15, Lincoln Center announced yesterday.
Although the show won five Tony Awards, including best revival of a musical, and about 90 percent of its seats have been filled each week, Lincoln Center administrators decided it would cost too much to keep it open through the usual January-to-March attendance slump.


Harold Hill Smith, 84, Geneticist Whose Work Led to Cell Fusion
Dr.
Harold Hill Smith, the geneticist whose research produced the first fusion of a cell from a human with one from a plant, died last Wednesday at a nursing home in State College, Pa.
He was 84 and a resident of Shoreham, L.I.
He suffered from a heart ailment for some time and died of natural causes, his family said.


Duke Power Co. (DUK,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


Safeco Corp.(SAFC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Latest Thing for Masses of Data, but Is It Going to Work?
THE CD-ROM market is exploding, although no one knows how big the blast is.
Look at the advertisements in the newspaper and you will see that the little disks are beginning to rival programs supplied on floppies.
The ads, or a visit to a retailer, also attest that a desktop computer without a CD-ROM drive and a sound card is getting to be a rarity.
Our own local video-rental shop has recently started stocking compact disks.
With something on the order of 600 megabytes of space, the disks are ideal for data-intensive works like encyclopedias, unabridged dictionaries, phone books and elaborate games with animation and sound.
And with many applications, word processors, database managers and, especially, graphics programs, filling up to 30 high-density floppy disks even in compressed form, regular programs on CD's are becoming more and more common.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about turmoil at Sony Pictures Entertainment misidentified the studio that produced the money-losing films "Little Nikita," "Old Gringo" and "Ishtar" in the 1980's when Jeff Sagansky worked as a top executive at Tristar Pictures.
Columbia Pictures, not Tristar, produced them.


Cyrix Corp.(CYRX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rollins Inc.(ROL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fire Boxes to Be Removed Because of Budget Cuts
Fire Department officials said yesterday that budget cuts would force them to begin eliminating the red fire-alarm boxes that have stood sentinel on sidewalks throughout New York City for more than a century.
Union officials immediately criticized the plan, which they said would imperil poor neighborhoods.


Indonesia's Peoples Fight to Gain Justice
To the Editor:
"Restart the Rights Clock in Indonesia" (editorial, Oct. 17) did not go far enough in urging an end to bloodshed, murder and torture by Indonesia's military.
The oppression of workers by preventing them from forming free trade unions and by forcing them to work for foreign companies at slave wages are only aspects of the slavery of Malay Archipelago peoples at gunpoint.


At a Civil War Prison, A Salute to All P.O.W.'s
What was once a field rank with pools of fetid water and odors of gangrene and death now gently rolls with hillocks of fluffy broom sage and gold and purple asters.
One hundred and thirty years ago, when it was encircled by stockade walls and strewn with sway-backed tents, the field was Andersonville, the infamous Confederate camp where 45,000 Union troops were imprisoned, and where 13,000 died.
It is a haunting place whose name over time became synonymous with the horror, privations, disease and thwarted escapes common to all prisoners of wars.
Now, with President Clinton's signing of an appropriations bill last month, Andersonville will also become the site of the nation's only museum dedicated to American P.O.W.'s, from the Revolution to Somalia.


'40 Acres' Promise to Blacks Was Broken
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 20 report that 20,000 black Americans have claimed tax credits based on the denial of land to former slaves after the Civil War gives an inaccurate account of this dispute's historical background.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: NEWS ANALYSIS Who Can Do the Most?; Mayor's Endorsement of Cuomo Reflects Political Interests and Financial Realities
In the end, his advisers said, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's decision to do what once might have seemed unthinkable came down to a simple calculation: that whatever damage he might do to his standing as a Republican, on balance his political, governmental and personal self-interests would best be served by having Mario M. Cuomo as Governor, and so he should do all he could to assure it.
Mr.
Giuliani's bold stroke put him squarely in the mold of the Mayor he most admires: Fiorello H. La Guardia, the Republican eclectic who captivated and cultivated his city for three terms through Depression and war on the strength of bipartisan elan and alliances, yet was ultimately frustrated in his hopes for a bigger spot on the national stage.


Company Reports: Market Place; USAir Posts Another Loss; Pilot Concessions Seem Key
USAir reported another money-losing quarter yesterday, the latest evidence of the airline's intractable financial problems, which are unlikely to be solved without concessions from its pilots.
The earnings report also made clear that USAir's star-crossed flying record, which has seen five fatal crashes in the last five years, is adding to the pressure on both the company and the pilots to act.
The company said its crashes in July and September resulted in a $40 million shortfall in revenue projections in the third quarter.


MINNESOTA MINING &amp; MFG. CO. (MMM,N)
The Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company said yesterday that its third-quarter earnings rose 7.9 percent, on strong unit sales and increased productivity.
Net income rose to $341 million, or 81 cents a share, from $316 million, or 73 cents, in the comparable period a year earlier.
Sales rose 9.7 percent, to $3.82 billion, from $3.48 billion.


Nalco Chemical Co.(NLC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cisco to Buy Major Maker Of Switches
Cisco Systems Inc., a leading computer networking company, said today that it would acquire Kalpana, a privately held company, in a stock swap valued at about $204 million.
Kalpana, which had been reported to be in merger discussions with the International Business Machines Corporation, is the leading maker of Ethernet switches.
Ethernet is the dominant technology for moving data on computer networks but is limited by its "party line" approach to sharing a network; adding a switch to the system, however, lets more users send data transmissions without conflict, much the way telephone systems work.


Rio Journal; Crime Reigns in the City Renowned for Romance
Back in 1900, with bubonic plague and yellow fever ravaging this tropical seaport, Brazilians chose a hilly farm far from the city limits as the site for what became Latin America's most prestigious school of public health.
Almost a century later, the school's moorish towers poke incongruously above a sea of surrounding shantytowns.
The school has repeatedly been caught in the crossfire between drug trafficking gangs, and it is struggling to survive the plagues of modern Rio: dead-end poverty and angry urban violence.


Chess
Using the language of chess to explain a divorce, Boris Spassky once described himself and his former wife as bishops of opposite color: pieces that travel along different-colored squares and thus never make contact.
Lately, the same could be said of Gary Kasparov and Anatoly Karpov.
Where one plays, the other doesn't.
And vice versa.
While Kasparov, the Professional Chess Association's world champion, won a brilliant victory in late September in the Credit Suisse Masters Tournament in Horgen, Switzerland, Karpov, the International Chess Federation's world champion, participated in the Interpolis Tournament in Tilburg, the Netherlands.


By Spurning G.O.P., Mayor Gambles His Future
To many Republicans across the state and the nation, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's decision to cast aside his party's gubernatorial candidate, George E. Pataki, and endorse Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo was an act of betrayal not likely to be forgotten soon.
The state Republican chairman, William D. Powers, called the Mayor's endorsement late yesterday of the incumbent Democratic Governor "a mistake." Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, in an uncharacteristically subdued response, said simply that the Mayor was "wrong." Senator Phil Gramm, Republican of Texas, called it a disappointment.


Selecting Composers From 4 Different Worlds
The American Composers Orchestra's programs have made a virtue of eclecticism, avoiding at all costs any single-minded perspective on American music.
Sunday's program at Carnegie Hall was almost unnervingly free-spirited: an orchestral etude by Fred Lerdahl, a pipa concerto by Bun-Ching Lam, Roger Sessions's fiercely complex Symphony No. 8 and a kitschily Romantic piano concerto by the forgotten turn-of-the-century composer Henry Holden Huss.
These are works from quite separate musical worlds; few threads can be found among them.
But not every program needs a theme.
Ms.
Lam's "Sudden Thunder," a world premiere, lingers longest in the mind.
It is an altogether mesmerizing sequence of meticulously detailed sonorities, swiftly moving from passages of static meditation to lashings of full orchestral force.
The lutelike pipa, played exquisitely by Wu Man, held its own against the ensemble, sometimes delivering pointillistic splashes of dissociated tones, sometimes strumming fragments of Chinese folk melody.
Ms.
Lam drew on a postwar avant-garde vocabulary without lapsing into its cliches; she showed a clear sense of narrative purpose.


Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos.(MMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Ayer is recasting itself as a big agency with a not-so-big style.
ANXIOUS to turn around the flagging fortunes of Ayer Inc., its four new top managers are remaking the venerable agency in several important ways.
Symbolic of the quadrumvirate's ambitious efforts is the renaming of the agency to N. W. Ayer &amp; Partners, which shrewdly looks two ways at once: to Ayer's rich heritage, since N. W. Ayer &amp; Son was its founding name in 1869, and to the future, with "partners" reflecting an overhauled management structure.


Kysor Industrial (KZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Atlantic Southeast
Shares of Atlantic Southeast Airlines, a regional air carrier, dropped sharply yesterday.
The company reported that earnings were flat in the third quarter, citing in part fare discounting.


Flightless Insect Hints at Origins of Flight
PTEROSAURS, birds and bats took to the air from evolutionary runways that scientists believe they understand fairly well, but insects began flying so much longer ago that details of their stepwise conquest of flight remain obscure.
Scientists at Pennsylvania State University hypothesize, however, that a present-day flightless insect called the stone-fly may be closely related to ancestral insects that first learned to fly more than 330 million years ago.
Last February, Dr.
James H. Marden, a biologist at Pennsylvania State University, and Melissa G. Kramer, his student, began studying the behavior and biology of stoneflies -- the immature nymphs of which are familiar to many fishermen as delicacies for trout.
The nymphs begin life in river or pond water and then develop primitive wings enabling them to skim across water at high speed without actually taking to the air.
Dr.
Marden and Ms.
Kramer have concluded that the humble ancestor of such expert fliers as mosquitoes and wasps may have been very much like the stone-fly.


State to Investigate E.M.S. Role in Death
The State Health Department said yesterday it is investigating whether an ambulance crew acted properly in not transporting a homeless man who later died on the sidewalk across from a hospital.
The man, William Black, 55, apparently told an ambulance crew dispatched by the Emergency Medical Service that he was not sick and did not want to go to the hospital.
When patients decline care, emergency crews are to ask them to sign a form confirming that refusal.
If they are unable to obtain a signature, a supervisor or the police are often called as witnesses.


Art Looted by Nazis Goes on Show in Paris, Seeking Its Owners
In the long history of victorious armies looting the artworks of occupied lands, nothing matches what Nazi Germany did to France between 1940 and 1944 -- nothing, that is, since Napoleon filled French museums and plazas with the finest treasures of nations that he had conquered.
That, of course, is not an issue that France would like to reopen today.
After all, under French law, everything seized two centuries ago now belongs to France.
And in any event, Napoleon forced occupied countries to sign away their ownership to cultural items that he wanted.


U.S. Healthcare Inc.(USHC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


AT&amp;T Capital Corp.(TCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Allegheny Ludlum Corp.(ALS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


New Kind of Memory Found to Preserve Moments of Emotion
DO you remember where you went on your first date?
Or the most terrifying scene of the last movie that really frightened you?
Or what you were doing when you heard the news that the space shuttle Challenger had blown up?
The fact that most people have detailed answers for such questions testifies to the power of emotion-arousing events to sear a lasting impression in memory.


Sports of The Times; Brown Hopes To Wear Out Giant Fans
TWO guys ran into each other in the rain in Giants Stadium on Sunday.
They stopped and looked at each other.
"Hey, what are you doing here?" one asked.
"No," said the other, "what are you doing here?"
In fact, only one of them was supposed to be at that particular spot, which happened to be somewhere around midfield.
The scheme that had been hatched called for the other individual to be somewhere else.


Union Camp Corp.(UCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Amoco Corp.(AN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Deaf to Estrogen's Call: A Man's Strange Story
HE was a towering young fellow, nearly 6 feet 8 inches, the sort of height that prompts strangers in elevators to ask, "Do you play basketball?" or "How's the weather up there?" But that wasn't the problem -- too tall is better than too short in this culture, right?
And, yes, his feet and hands were unusually big; his size 18 shoes were beginning to pinch.
But that wasn't what brought him to the doctor, either.
No, it was his gait.
His knock-knees were getting ever more knocked, the upper legs twisting inward so that his knees were too close together, his ankles too far apart, his feet splayed, his abnormal walk a growing embarrassment to him.
So he consulted an orthopedic surgeon.
By the time his case had been reviewed in detail, his bones X-rayed, his blood sampled, his genes assayed and anatomized, he had overturned a long-standing medical paradigm, belied the endocrinology textbooks and defied scientific predictions merely by being alive.


New Food Plant Is Dedicated To Effort to Feed the Hungry
Faced with dwindling donations from the food industry and growing demand from poor people seeking free meals, a Texas food bank has built a food-dehydrating plant in Lubbock, Tex., strictly to process produce donated by local farmers to feed the hungry.
Breedlove Dehydrated Foods Inc., a new $7 million not-for-profit corporation that officially opened the plant yesterday, is a joint project of the South Plains Food Bank and Second Harvest, a nationwide network of food banks that distributed 900 million pounds of food last year through 188 outlets.


No Fracture for Johnson
LARRY JOHNSON's left foot isn't broken after all.
Instead of missing eight weeks because of a stress fracture, the Charlotte Hornets' forward could be in uniform for the season opener on Nov. 4 at Chicago.
Hornets Coach ALLAN BRISTOW is also ailing, still weak from a kidney infection that put him in a Paris hospital last week.


Campaigning On Economy, Clinton Plays The Teacher
Having played to voters' emotions in a weekend of campaigning, President Clinton went for their minds today, giving a group of business people a long tutorial on the Democratic school of economic theory, complete with numbers and charts.
And like a lot of postgraduate seminars, it included some tough slogging.


Padres Are Cleared
Six months after two members of the San Diego Padres were arrested in New York for allegedly soliciting police officers posing as prostitutes, a criminal court judge has dismissed the charges.
Judge DYNDA ANDREWS ruled last Friday that there was no evidence that DEREK BELL and SCOTT SANDERS had committed any crime last April.


Adia Services Inc.(ADIA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Women Who Choose to Abort Reflect First
To the Editor:
An Oct. 20 Associated Press article reporting that a combination of two drugs available in the United States has been 90 percent successful in inducing abortion contains serious factual error.
It cites the drugs as destabilizing the uterine lining, causing "uterine contractions that expel the fetus."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  EMBARGO SQUEEZES IRAQ  Under the United Nations embargo, Iraq's prosperity has vanished.
The recent movement of Iraqi troops toward the Kuwait border drew attention to the conditions, but it has not ended the embargo.
A1


Corrections
A headline on Sunday about the resignation of the president of General Motors from the Bloomfield Hills Country Club after a black vice president of G.M. was denied membership described the club incorrectly in some copies.
It does not have an all-white membership.


U.S. Murder Case Prompts No Cultural Critique
To the Editor:
The contrast between coverage of the trial and sentencing of Kenneth Peacock for killing his wife (news article, Oct. 21) and the recent killing in New Jersey of Nihal Abequa by her Jordanian husband was fascinating.


Judge Rejects Simpson Prosecutor's Bid to Dismiss Jury Pool
Four days after saying in a closed hearing that many if not most jury candidates in the O. J. Simpson case were lying to be selected and should be given polygraph tests, Marcia Clark, the chief prosecutor in the case, asked Judge Lance A. Ito today to dismiss at least the first pool of 77 prospective jurors, and possibly all 300 who have thus far completed questionnaires.
Judge Ito turned her down, as he did another defense plea to delay the trial and free Mr.
Simpson on bail.


METRO DIGEST
GIULIANI, DEFYING PARTY, BACKS CUOMO
In a dramatic break with New York State's Republican Party, Mayor Giuliani endorsed Mario M. Cuomo, a national symbol of the Democratic liberal tradition, in his quest for a fourth term as Governor.
A1.
DECISION BASED ON WHO CAN DELIVER
The Mayor's decision to do what once might have seemed unthinkable came down to a simple calculation: that whatever damage he might do to his standing as a Republican, on balance, his political, governmental and personal self-interest would best be served by having Mario M. Cuomo as Governor.
News Analysis, A1.


Deluxe Corp.(DLX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rochester Gas &amp; Electric Corp.(RGS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dominion Resources Inc.(D,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


St. Paul Cos.(SPC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Stormy Voyage on OS/2 Warp
THE International Business Machines Corporation has historically displayed tenacious self-delusion in sticking with "technically superior" products long after the wider world has found them wanting.
OS/2 Warp, the eighth edition of I.B.M.'s operating system (and therefore dubbed "version 3") is but the latest in a hapless line that includes Micro Channel Architecture hardware and the mercifully forgotten software called Topview.
Perhaps because, like Star Trek, OS/2 has a fanatical band of adherents with too much time on their hands, this version tips its hat to the Starship Enterprise.
Trying it put me in mind of a different mythological vessel: the ghostly Flying Dutchman, condemned to haunt the seas and lure other ships to their doom.


Andrew D. Kopkind, Writer on Politics And Editor, 59
Andrew D. Kopkind, a political journalist whose work appeared in The New Republic, The New York Review of Books and The Nation, died on Sunday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 59 and had homes in Manhattan and Guilford, Vt.
The cause was bladder cancer, said JoAnn Wypijewski, the managing editor of The Nation.


Genlyte Group Inc.(GLYT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


POP
Salsa Celebrates Itself, Its Singing, Looks and Talent  Madison Square Garden
La Combinacion Perfecta, the nearly four-hour salsa show on Saturday, was a riot of congratulation.
The performers gave thanks to the audience and to various Latin American countries, but mostly to Puerto Rico.
The audience stood and cheered the performers, especially those draped in Puerto Rican flags.
Because they often sang duets, the performers also got a chance to praise each other, improvising lines that extolled the quality of each other's singing, their looks, their talents.
And they all thanked Ralph Mercado, the promoter.


Is a Team of Clydesdales Next?; In Heady World of Microbreweries, Growth Is the Word
The New Haven Brewing Company's line of beers is about as local as it gets.
Who is the guy on the label of Mr.
Mike's Light Ale, grinning behind the bar with the big sloshing tankard of suds?
It is Mike Gettings, the company president.
The dignified face on the label of Blackwell Stout?
Blackwell himself, the brew-house dog, who even contributed a paw print of approval.
But the big question is, can Mr.
Mike and Blackwell travel?
Can a company that has reveled in its connection to the community sell its products nationally, head to head against the big players, in places where Blackwell is just another dog on a beer bottle and where nobody knows his name?


A Feat Even Cy Young Would Applaud
It will be years before Greg Maddux will know whether he will ever get to grace the stage at Cooperstown and join the likes of Sandy Koufax, Jim Palmer, Whitey Ford, Tom Seaver, Bob Gibson and Steve Carlton.
But Greg Maddux already knows that he has achieved something none of those Hall of Fame pitchers has.
In a unanimous selection for a season curtailed by a strike, Maddux yesterday was voted the National League Cy Young award for a third straight year by the Baseball Writers Association of America.


Because It's There


Piper Jaffray Is Planning $5 Million Fund Bailout
Piper Jaffray Inc., the brokerage firm that managed a number of mutual funds with sharp losses, said yesterday that it would infuse $5 million into one of those funds, American Adjustable Rate Term Trust -- 1995.
Strictly speaking, the reason for the bailout was not the loss, but that Piper Jaffray had made what turned out to be inaccurate predictions about the value of the fund.
Paine Webber had to make a similar bailout of one of its mutual funds in June, mainly because the brokerage firm had said in its marketing materials that the fund had low risk.


Illinois Central Corp.(IC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Prof. Ray L. Birdwhistell, 76; Helped Decipher Body Language
Ray L. Birdwhistell, an anthropologist and expert on how people communicate with body motions, died on Wednesday at his home in Brigantine, N.J.
He was 76.
The cause was liver cancer, said his wife, Anne.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; WPP Unit Is Suing Interpublic on Hiring
WPP Group USA said yesterday that it had sued the Interpublic Group of Companies, accusing Interpublic of violating an agreement not to hire certain executives from two WPP agencies, J. Walter Thompson and Ogilvy &amp; Mather.
"We think there is an enforceable contractual obligation with IPG that has been violated and we intend to seek the damages provided for," Philip S. Reiss, a lawyer at Davis &amp; Gilbert in New York, WPP's law firm, said in confirming a report this week in Adweek.


Keane Inc.(KEA,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wolfgang Behl, Sculptor and Teacher, 76
Wolfgang Behl, a sculptor and teacher, died on Oct. 17 at St.
Francis Hospital in Hartford, the city where he lived.
He was 76.
The cause was lung cancer, said his daughter, Elizabeth Behl-Amter.


A Mortgage Penalty, or a Plus?
What sounds like a consumer-friendly provision -- the prohibition in many states of penalties for homeowners who pay off their mortgages early -- actually raises the cost of mortgages, experts in housing finance say.
And that has the effect of forcing low-income home buyers to subsidize high-income home buyers, they add.
The problem, the experts say, is that lenders demand higher interest rates and higher fees on new mortgages with no prepayment penalty because they are not sure how soon the mortgage will be repaid.
So all the homeowners who never pay off mortgages early, because they did not move or refinance, wind up paying for a benefit they do not use.


Federal Recycling Program Requires More Active Commitment
To the Editor:
One year ago today, on Oct. 20, 1993, President Clinton issued his recycling executive order.
For too long, the Federal Government had tarried while recycling programs struggled for lack of markets that would "close the loop."


'Perfect Anti-Kennedy' Opposes the Senator
In the hush of his library at 7:30 A.M. on Wednesday, Mitt Romney was a formidable sight.
His white shirt was immaculate, his gray and black pin-striped trousers were sharply creased, his black wingtips shined.
The man who is giving Senator Edward M. Kennedy the toughest race of his 32-year political career had already jogged three and a half miles.
And he was whistling.
He had not had a drop of coffee.
Mr.
Romney, who like many fellow Mormons tries to avoid caffeine, says he has never had coffee or tea.
His press secretary, Ann Murphy, arrived with a container of hot chocolate for him.


Average Voter Doesn't Have Fax Machine; In Touch With Whom?
To the Editor:
"Washington Really Is in Touch" (Week in Review, Oct. 16) misses the point: In touch with whom?


Baghdad's Burden -- A special report.; Iraq Is Near Economic Ruin But Hussein Appears Secure
Children lie on filthy hospital beds, murmuring in pain as they die of diarrhea and pneumonia.
Some of the Arab world's finest artists peddle their work for as little as $12 a painting.
A 50-year-old retired policeman, victim of a stroke a year ago, limps from merchant to merchant in a food market looking for what he can afford on a pension driven down by inflation to the equivalent of $2 a month, barely enough to buy one chicken.
In this city, which only five years ago ranked as one of the most vibrant and prosperous capitals of the Middle East, the plight of Iraq is amply evident, but political improvement is not.
Gone are the mounds of imported goods, sweets, pistachios and varied nuts that were a fixture of many Baghdad street markets.
They have been replaced by spontaneous flea markets where sullen middle-class men and women offer their cutlery, used furniture and family possessions for sale to make ends meet.


Fritz Cos. (FRTZ,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stelco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Yield on the Long Bond Ends the Day Above 8%
Prices of Treasury securities fell in light trading yesterday, with the yield on the long bond ending at more than 8 percent after toying with that significant threshold for two weeks.
A weak dollar and apprehension ahead of the Government's report on Friday on the gross domestic product helped to drag bond prices down.


Exxon Corp.(XON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sears Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
The computer ranking of college football teams yesterday failed to reflect data from the Texas-Rice game of Oct. 16, an omission that affected the ranking and related statistics.
A corrected version appears today on page B12.


Giuliani Talks of Agonizing Over Best Man for the City
Following is a transcript of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's endorsement of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday, with excerpts from the question-and-answer session that followed, as recorded by The New York Times.
The election this year presents a fundamental dilemma causing many of us probably to do the same thing, agonizing over a decision we have to make, the choice we have to make for Governor.
The choice will have a lot to do with the future of New York City and New York State.
I think we all know that the question is compounded by the risk that we take if we make the wrong choice.
My problem is further complicated because as the Mayor of New York City, I have to think about the entire city and not just my own personal position.


2 Reagan Officials Dispute Drug Claims Against North
Two senior officials in the Reagan Administration today defended Oliver L. North, the Republican candidate for Senate in Virginia, against assertions that he ignored information about drug activities by rebel forces in Nicaragua that were fighting the leftist Government that was in power there a decade ago.
Elliott Abrams, the former Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, and former Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d disputed the assertions, made in The Washington Post on Saturday, calling them false, malicious and politically motivated.


Contel Cellular (CCXLA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rexene Corp.(RXN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


What Rhymes With, uh, Plagiarism?
David Sumner is not a famous name in the world of poetry.
Neither is he unknown.
Like hundreds of other people, he has had reasonable success in placing work in tiny poetry reviews, most of them published at lesser campuses, and from time to time he has managed to break through to midlevel publications.
Mr.
Sumner does stand out from the struggling poetry pack in one important respect, however.


In New Jersey, Barbs and Theatrics
Even before the Rollerblading, hairy-legged guy in the duck suit appeared on the campaign trail, there was ample reason to believe that feathers would fly in the last few weeks of the United States Senate race between Frank R. Lautenberg and Chuck Haytaian.
Attacking Mr.
Haytaian's voting record during his 13 years in Trenton, the Lautenberg camp charged in a recent press release, "Chuck Haytaian has missed well over 700 votes in the Assembly -- ducking many of them when he was in the State House voting on bills immediately before and after the votes in question. Haytaian has ducked votes on child safety issues (quack), on environmental protection issues (quack) and on crime issues (quack)."


Heartland Express reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Grow Group Inc.(GRO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dislocated Toe Puts Oakley in Quite a Bind
Charles Oakley was examined by a foot specialist after practice this afternoon and the doctor confirmed what the Knick forward already knew.
In a statement released after the examination, the Knicks said that Oakley has a partly dislocated toe on his right foot and that various methods of treatment are being considered.


DANCE
Spirited Cast and Audience Revive the Swing Era  Joyce Theater
Excited young dancegoers and their equally enthusiastic grown-up companions filled the theater on Saturday afternoon when Hubbard Street Dance Chicago offered a special family matinee.
The presentation featured the company's only New York performance of "The 40's," Lou Conte's choreographic tribute to the big-band swing era.


Raul Julia, Broadway and Hollywood Actor, Is Dead at 54
Raul Julia, an actor who distinguished himself in classics on Broadway and off and also became a success in Hollywood movies, died yesterday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y.
He was 54 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications of a stroke on Oct. 16, said Alice Siegel, a hospital spokeswoman.


Stocks Fall As Rates Exceed 8%
The stock market faltered again yesterday as long-term interest rates punched past 8 percent, after flirting with that psychologically important level for three weeks.
The Dow fell 36.00 points to 3,855.30, while the broader S.&amp; P. 500 declined 4.06 points to 460.83.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index fell 4.17 points to 761.21.


Players Sue to Raise N.B.A. Salary Cap
The National Basketball Association's already-tense labor problems worsened yesterday when two players sued the league in Federal Court, alleging that the league artificially reduced the salary cap for the upcoming season.
The lawsuit came 11 days before the start of the season and as the league and the players' union await a decision by the United States Court of Appeals over whether the N.B.A.'s salary cap, college draft and right-of-first-refusal signing system constitute violations of Federal antitrust law.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Modern Tchaikovsky With Historical Touches  Carnegie Hall
Within the breast of every early-music expert beats the heart of a Tchaikovsky conductor.
Few have the chance to get their hands on modern orchestras and all those inauthentic instruments, but Roger Norrington, who ended his four-year tenure as head of the Orchestra of St.
Luke's on Saturday night, pursues his opportunities with zeal and intelligence.


Many Voices of One Man In an Ethnic Urban Tour
"Some People," initially produced by Performance Space 122, has reopened, in a slightly revised form directed by Jo Bonney, at the Susan Stein Shiva Theater at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
Following are excerpts from Ben Brantley's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 13, 1993.
The astonishing gamut of voices that emerge from the mouth of one Danny Hoch, a fiercely talented 22-year-old from Queens, demand and deserve concentrated attention.
In "Some People," his one man, 11-character show, Mr.
Hoch takes a whirlwind tour of the Tower of Babel that New York City has become, isolating the dense, individualistic speech styles of people of widely disparate ethnic backgrounds.


Toyota Has Decided to Set Age Limits On Its Managers
The Toyota Motor Corporation wants a more youthful look -- not for its cars but for itself.
Japan's largest automobile company has decided to set age limits for managers of certain ranks.
From now on, the company said last week, its deputy general managers can be no older than 53 and section chiefs no older than 50.
Managers who reach the age limits will be given a task like long-term strategy development in which they will have no subordinates but will receive the same salary.


A Push to Revamp Municipal Bonds
Sometime before this year ends, the Securities and Exchange Commission plans to enact new regulations to change the way bonds are traded in the municipal bond market, where the nation's cities and towns go to borrow money.
The proposed changes would modernize a market that many say is closer to the 19th century than the 21st: Right now, it is difficult for the buyers of municipal bonds to get financial data on municipal issuers, to find current bond prices and to know dealers' profits.


INSIDE
Aristide Selects Premier
The Haitian President selected a commodities trader as Prime Minister, political figures said to help recharge the economy.
Page A3.
Reagan Aides Defend North
Two top officials in the Reagan Administration said reports were false that Oliver North ignored drug activities by forces he aided.
Page B9.
Westchester Student Killed
A Mount Vernon high school baseball star was stabbed to death inside the school, the police said.
Page B1.
A Narrow Escape at Sea
A British sailor fought water rushing though his damaged hull for eight hours until his rescue.
Page B13.
Raul Julia Dies
The Broadway and Hollywood actor, whose work ranged from Shakespeare to "The Addams Family," was 54.
Page B10.


Executive Changes
AXE-HOUGHTON ASSOCIATES INC., Rye Brook, N.Y., an asset management subsidiary of the Hoenig Group Inc., named Robert P. Follert executive vice president of marketing.
CENTURY 21 REAL ESTATE CORP., Irvine, Calif., appointed Thomas C. Sawyer director of advertising.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a bombing that killed 50 people in Sri Lanka misspelled the surname of a political leader who was among the dead.
He was Gamini Dissanayake.


Panel Rules That Police File On Rowland Should Be Public
A police report about a domestic disturbance in April at the former home of John G. Rowland, the Republican candidate for governor, should be made public, a hearing officer for the state Freedom of Information Commission said today.
But there might not be much to read.


Alone in a Sea of Trouble; BOC Yacht-Race Rescue Came While the Boat Was Sinking
Rough seas had been slamming against the hull of Josh Hall's 60-foot sailboat for five straight days.
An experienced ocean racer, Hall was familiar with the sounds and the feel of a turbulent sea, the slapping and banging of the waves, and the seismic motion that runs the length of the boat as it rides up the front side of a wave and falls off the back.
But at dusk on Oct. 17, alone in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean on his 31st day at sea in the BOC round-the-world race, the sound Hall heard was different.
In retrospect, it would make the pounding of the previous five days seem melodious by comparison.


Life USA Holding Inc.(LUSA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Deputy Mayor Challenged On Cuts in Youth Agency
Faced with a barrage of questions on the Department of Youth Services and charges that records had been altered, Deputy Mayor Ninfa Segarra told a City Council committee yesterday that the Giuliani administration was justified in cutting off funds to 146 community organizations that offer youth programs.
In the hearing before the Council's Youth Services Committee, the chairman, Councilman Victor L. Robles, contended that Ms.
Segarra was responsible for the decision to drop the community organizations and award contracts to nearly 100 new ones.
He also said that the administration was warned by workers within the agency of the problems that could be created in providing youth programs.


DDB Needham Gets Bud Bowl Campaign
The seventh annual installment of the popular Bud Bowl Super Bowl advertising campaign, which Anheuser-Busch has been running since 1988, will be created by DDB Needham Chicago, the Bud Light agency, rather than D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in St.
Louis, which handles the company's flagship Budweiser brand.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $10 million.


N.H.L. Talks Held Quietly; Season Is Cut By 4 Games
On the same day the National Hockey League announced cancellation of four games from the 84-game schedule of each team, negotiators for the league and the union met secretly in Chicago and made no progress yesterday, leaving the expectation that more substantial cancellations are sure to follow.
On the 24th day of the lockout, Commissioner Gary Bettman and Bob Goodenow, the players' labor leader, succeeded in their quest to keep their first bargaining session in two weeks secret from the news media until it was over.
But they did not succeed in their effort to narrow the gap between them.
No further talks are expected this week.


In Farm Country, an Animal Haven
GENE BAUSTON couldn't find the cows.
It happens sometimes.
"They were here," he said, peering at a pasture where tell-tale signs that big animals had visited were all over.
"Where do 27 cows go?" he said, after a 15-minute climb up a hill.
"Oh, here they are. And there's Maya!"


CHRONICLE
RICHARD C. WADE, distinguished professor of urban history at the Graduate School and University Center of the City University of New York, is stepping down at the end of the semester, so the school is giving him a retirement party.
In fact, it is giving him a conference.
On Thursday morning, a panel of scholars will talk about "Urban History: Past and Present." In the afternoon, the panel members will discuss "The Duty of the Scholar to His Times," a pet topic of Dr.
Wade, 73.


The Dangerous Hits Just Keep on Coming
It was a rough Sunday for quarterbacks in the National Football League.
Troy Aikman, Chris Miller and Vinny Testaverde were knocked out of games with concussions.
Stan Humphries left late in the Chargers' 20-15 loss to Denver with a sprained ankle.
And the Bengals lost starter David Klingler (sprained knee) and backup Don Hollas (shoulder injury).
While knee, ankle and shoulder injuries to quarterbacks are almost accepted as routine, concussions are more scary.
The danger of repeated concussions was re-emphasized last week when Bears fullback Merrill Hoge retired because of lasting effects from a blow to the head he took in a game against the Bills on Oct. 2.
Two years ago, Jets receiver Al Toon retired when he couldn't shake the effects of a concussion.
By his own count, Toon estimated that he had suffered 10 concussions in his nine- year career.


Liz Claiborne Inc.(LIZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Huge North Carolina Study Seeks Clues to Beach Erosion
WILLIAM A. BIRKEMEIER was on a concrete pier, leaning into a howling gale.
The sky was dark gray, the air was raw and the sea was crashing into the pilings below in breakers more than six feet high.
"Ah," he said, doffing his cap and sweeping it toward a seascape of uncompromising grimness, "this is great!"


Tecumseh Products Co.(TECUB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Amerada Hess Corp.(AHC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Israelis Look To Clinton Trip For Progress With Syrians
While their attention is focused mostly on the peace treaty that they will sign with Jordan on Wednesday, Israeli officials are already looking beyond that ceremony to the fate of their negotiations with Syria.
History will be made with the Jordanians, the Israelis say, but the bigger question for Middle East peace is what happens the next day when President Clinton meets in Syria with President Hafez al-Assad.


USX-Marathon Group (MRO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Beckman Instruments Inc.(BEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On My Mind; A Tour Of Syria
When President Clinton visits President Assad of Syria in Damascus, I hope it is not one of those quick in-and-out trips.
Mr.
Clinton should stay a couple of days.
There are a lot of interesting things to be seen in Syria, and fun to be had.
For instance, it won't take him but a few minutes' limo time to visit the downtown office of Hamas.
He should ask for Musa Abu Marzuk, who is one of the top three officials of Hamas worldwide.


How to Get Ticket Refund
In separate announcements yesterday, the Rangers, Islanders and Devils disclosed virtually identical refund policies.
Holders of single-game tickets to games that have not been played on the originally scheduled dates were urged to hold on to them for use in case the games are rescheduled.
However, beginning the day after a missed game, such tickets may be presented for refund at the point of purchase.
Those tickets ordered by phone from Ticket Master must be mailed along with a refund request to Ticket Master, P.O.
Box 1452, Radio City Station, New York, N.Y. 10101.
Once a game is rescheduled, application for a refund must be made more than 48 hours before the start of the rescheduled game.


NEW YORK UNIONS AND MAYOR AGREE ON 7,600 JOB CUTS
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the leaders of New York City's municipal labor unions reached agreement yesterday on a plan to cut 7,600 more jobs from the city's payroll by offering a second round of severance packages as an alternative to layoffs.
The Mayor and the unions, who announced the deals at City Hall last night, also agreed on ways to save $190 million in the cost of health care for city workers -- a concession that Mr.
Giuliani had sought earlier in the year but that the unions resisted until now.
While that is a one-time saving to be accomplished by tapping health reserves, both sides agreed to various changes in benefits expected to save a further $100 million a year starting next year.


California Energy Co. (CE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Comptroller Faults Foe
H.
Carl McCall, the New York State Comptroller, accused his Republican opponent, Herbert London, of stoking tensions between blacks and Jews.
Page B1.


Indecent Proposition in California
If the polls are right, a mean-spirited, impractical and probably unconstitutional California ballot initiative is headed for easy victory Nov. 8.
Proposition 187 would deny public education, non-emergency medical care and other state and locally funded benefits to illegal aliens.
Gov.
Pete Wilson has made support for Proposition 187 a central theme of his re-election campaign.
The Republican senatorial challenger, Michael Huffington, also backs the measure.


Latest Killing of a Sri Lanka Politician Fits a Familiar Pattern
Little more than a decade ago, Sri Lanka was a model of civic development in the third world, with a literate voting public and an impressive crop of potential political leaders drawn from a range of parties.
Now most of those leaders are dead, victims of ethnic militancy or intense political rivalries that turned lethal in unsettled times.
The latest politician to die, in an explosion so powerful that it took the lives of at least 52 people, was Gamini Dissanayake, leader of the parliamentary opposition and a presidential candidate in an election scheduled for Nov. 9.
Mr.
Dissanayake, his campaign manager and several other major figures in his United National Party were killed early yesterday morning as the candidate began to walk away from the stage where he had addressed a political rally.
More than 200 people were wounded.


Ware Ready to Sign With Canadian League
ANDRE WARE, the 1989 Heisman Trophy winner at the University of Houston and a former Detroit Lions quarterback, is set to sign with the Ottawa Rough Riders of the Canadian Football League.
Ware will join the practice roster immediately but probably will not play in the team's final two games of the regular season.
He said yesterday that he would sign a two-year contract "within the next day or two."


Beard Accuses The Nets Of Quitting
Excruciating pain used to be found only in Kenny Anderson's left hamstring, Kevin Edwards's sore right Achilles' tendon or deep inside Chris Morris's bruised thigh.
Six games into the preseason, the pain has spread to Coach Butch Beard.
It's in his eyes every time he calls a timeout.
It's in his mind every time he shakes his head in disgust.
And, now, it's in his words.


Slow Down on Technology, Diller Tells Magazine Chiefs
Barry Diller, chairman and chief executive of QVC Inc., warned magazine executives today that they were becoming "victims of your own hype" in the rush to new electronic media.
He accused them of simply slapping versions of their magazines on line without slowing down to go through the long, often painful, process of creating a truly new technology.


Europe Stays Close to the Curves
Some call it glamour and some call it retro, but the word that really sums up the European spring shows is shape.
Clothes followed the curves of the female body, accentuating the breasts, waist and hips.
But a woman of fashion doesn't have to be endowed like a 1950's movie queen.
She can borrow curves from a Karl Lagerfeld jacket with a built-in bra or a John Galliano suit with hip padding.
She can whittle her waist with a laced-up corselet from Emanuel Ungaro.
Or she can flaunt her own figure in a bias-cut satin dress.


Intel and CNN Set New Computer Service
The Intel Corporation and CNN will announce a new service on Tuesday that will permit business personal computer users to view CNN or CNN Headline News broadcasts on their computer screens.
The new service is significant because it hints at the power of interactive television in blending personal computing and video.


Space Studies Find Line Across Pacific Linked to Currents
OBSERVATIONS from space shuttles and other vehicles have shown a remarkable, clearly visible line that marches for hundreds of miles across the Pacific Ocean as if the waters were being divided.
Scientists are not invoking a miracle to explain the strange phenomenon, but the line is nevertheless a wonder of nature.
They attribute the dark green line, which is several hundred yards wide, to an abundance of microscopic plants that thrive where cold, nutrient-rich water welling up from polar seas meets warm equatorial currents.
The explosion of life from this encounter feeds much of the ocean.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Duo-Pianists Show Power In Their New York Debut  92d Street Y
Valentina Lisitsa and Alexei Kuznetsov have each won piano competitions as soloists, but they have been performing as a duo since 1988, when they met as students at the Kiev Conservatory.
In 1991 they won the Third International Murray Dranoff Competition, the only major contest for duo-pianists, and on Saturday evening they made their New York debut.


Harte-Hanks Communications Inc.(HHS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Serpt 30


Music Notes
Silenced, but Temporarily
Musica Sacra, one of New York City's most highly regarded choral groups, has canceled the four-concert season it had planned to give at Carnegie Hall.
Letters were mailed early this month to the choir's subscribers saying "we're down but by no means out" and explaining that because of "a continuing deficit and uncertain prospects for funding," the concerts scheduled for November and March, as well as the group's popular annual performances of Handel's "Messiah" in December, would not take place.


Alfred A. Giardino, 81, Ex-Chief of New York Board of Education
Alfred A. Giardino, a former president of the New York City Board of Education and chairman of the city's Board of Higher Education, died on Sunday while attending his 60th class reunion at Brooklyn College.
He was 81 and lived in Riverdale, the Bronx.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said his wife, Lucienne.


Gooden Files As Free Agent
Dwight Gooden declared free agency yesterday, but the owners' Player Relations Committee reminded the Players Association that the Mets pitcher cannot sign with a new club until he is removed from the suspended list.
Gooden was one of 19 players who filed, bringing to 100 the number of players who have placed their names on the free-agent list.


From 'Courageous' to a 'Disappointment'
George E. Pataki
"Rudy Giuliani has done a very good job turning around the city and bringing change that was needed to the city government. We're going to bring about that same change to the state government.  Beyond that I don't want to comment." Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo
"From the Mayor's point of view, it's an extremely intelligent and courageous approach. If he decides that I'm the best choice for the city and his people, then he's done the right thing. This should have some weight with the people of this city. I think whenever a politician speaks clearly on a decision in a way that puts the people first before a politician and his career, then that's a good thing. . . .
"Will it make a difference? I would assume that the fact that David Dinkins, Ed Koch, John Lindsay and Abe Beame and now Mayor Giuliani -- a couple of Republicans and Democrats, but all of them leaders of this city -- have all concluded that I'm the best alternative for the city, that should have some weight with people in the city."  Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato
"It comes as no surprise to me. Rudy Giuliani is wrong. I haven't taken a personal view of this. I have talked to the Mayor and said it, I think he's done a good job. I think in this instance, he is wrong. . . .
"This is not a contest between me and Giuliani -- that may come some day -- but it is not that contest at this time. This is a contest between Mario Cuomo and George Pataki."  Senator Phil Gramm, Republican of Texas
"I would be disappointed in that a lot of Republicans helped Rudy when he ran for mayor. For him to turn around and support Cuomo, who is anathema to everything that we want for New York and America, would be a disappointment. I think there are going to be a lot of Republicans who are going to be disappointed in Rudy." Fran Werner,, Queens County G.O.P. leader
"Well, I can't see the Republican Party supporting him in the future for anything. Everybody's going to think twice." Jay Severin, Republican strategist
"He now lives and dies on his own, to a large degree. The Republican Party has a big tent, but it doesn't have an airplane hangar."


Hayes-Dana reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
The chart atop the Business Digest on Monday misstated the major financial indicators for last week in some editions.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed the week at 3,891.30, down 19.17 points; the dollar was last quoted at 97.22 yen to the dollar, down 0.88 yen; the crude oil contract for December delivery closed at $17.38 on the New York Mercantile Exchange, up 41 cents; the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond ended at 7.97 percent, up 14 basis points.


No Headline
"He now lives and dies on his own, to a large degree. The Republican Party has a big tent, but it doesn't have an airplane hangar." -- JAY SEVERIN, Republican strategist, on Mayor Giuliani.  [ B4:4. ]


Crane Co. (CR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Peco Energy Co.(PE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Stocks slumped, weighed down by higher interest rates and a weak dollar.
The S.&amp; P. 500 fell 4.06 points.  [ Page D1. ]


DuPont Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shaw Industries(SHX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Infant Killed in House Fire
An 18-month-old girl was killed yesterday when a fire engulfed the top floor of her family's two-story row house in East New York, Brooklyn, trapping the infant and her brother, fire officials said.
The fire started just before 9:30 P.M. at 642 Glenmore Avenue near Warwick Street, said Bob Broderick, a fire department spokesman.


Average Voter Doesn't Have Fax Machine
To the Editor:
"Washington Really Is in Touch. We're the Problem" (The Week in Review, Oct. 16) sees the new forms of instant electronic communication such as faxes, computers and C-Span as greatly expanding the ability of citizens to influence Congress.
You claim that "every citizen" is now able to be in touch with Washington, and "American government is in touch with everyone."


GIULIANI, DEFYING HIS PARTY, BACKS CUOMO FOR 4TH TERM; SEES PATAKI AS BAD FOR CITY
In a dramatic break with the state's Republican Party, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday endorsed Mario M. Cuomo, a national symbol of the Democratic liberal tradition, for a fourth term as New York's Governor.
Standing alone at a lectern in the Blue Room of City Hall, Mr.
Giuliani, the city's first Republican Mayor in a generation, said he remained committed to his party's ideals but could not support its candidate, George E. Pataki.
He characterized Mr.
Pataki as unsympathetic to the downstate region and a captive of others -- a clear reference to Mr.
Giuliani's rival, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.


Freemont General Corp.(FMT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tandy Corp.(TAN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Observer; The Anarchy Vogue
I'm against government.
Used to be you couldn't do that.
Be against government, I mean.
It meant you were an anarchist.
Like Sacco and Vanzetti.
They were anarchists, weren't they?
In those days anarchists got locked up, though I think Sacco and Vanzetti were hanged or went to the chair, which is neither here nor there, and I wish I hadn't brought it up.
I mention anarchy only because of my Congressman.
Came in here the other day, said, "Friend, you can fool some of the people all of the time, and I can tell from looking at you that you're part of that sweet-smelling, ever-loving, eternally foolable some."


Candidates Hedge Their Bets On an Immigration Measure
Amid signs that recent attacks by nationally prominent Republicans and Democrats may have slowed the momentum of a ballot initiative on illegal immigrants, candidates in California's much-watched gubernatorial and Senate races are backing and filling to adjust their handling of the issue.
The initiative, Proposition 187, which would deny most education and health benefits to illegal immigrants, still seems likely to be approved.
But with both Democratic and Republican strategists saying their private polls confirm a slip in momentum for passage, bets are being hedged.


Ruptured Pipeline Spreading Hot Oil In Russia's Arctic
A ruptured pipeline in the Russian Arctic has spilled two million barrels of hot oil, soaking the fragile permafrost and posing potentially major environmental damage to the region, according to reports received by the Federal Department of Energy.
William H. White, the Deputy Secretary of Energy, said yesterday that the pipeline leak was months old, but that a dam that was jury-rigged by a Russian oil company to contain the leaking oil apparently burst in the last several days.
He said that American industry officials in the remote Komi region of the Arctic reported that the spill had reached a tributary of the Pechora River, near the city of Usinsk, which in warmer months pours into the Arctic Ocean.
The spill is continuing to advance, he said.


Bears Retire Numbers
DICK BUTKUS and GALE SAYERS will have their Chicago Bears' jersey numbers retired -- and no, they hadn't been so honored already.
The Bears' president, MIKE McCASKEY, said the two Hall of Famers would be honored during halftime ceremonies at next Monday night's game against the Green Bay Packers.


USX-U.S. Steel Group (X,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cardinal Health (CAH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Democrats Show Surprising Life in House Races
Even as the Democrats are bracing for devastating losses in the mid-term elections, they are fighting back with unexpected strength in the South, which was supposed to be the party's most vulnerable region.
Democrats are so vigorously resisting the Republican groundswell that 12 House seats now held by Democrats -- and which some party officials had all but written off -- are viewed as virtually tied.
Those races are in Florida, Georgia, Mississippi, North Carolina, Tennessee and Virginia.


The Rivlin Memo and Fiscal Honesty
Newt Gingrich, the House Republican whip, raised political hypocrisy to new levels this weekend when, citing a leaked White House memo, he accused Democrats of threatening Social Security and Medicare.
This from the author of a "Contract With America" -- which, by pledging to whack a trillion dollars out of the Federal budget, would virtually guarantee huge cuts in entitlements.
The decision by the memo's author, Budget Director Alice Rivlin, to put budget options in writing during election season may not have been the brightest political move.
But at least she, unlike Mr.
Gingrich, tried honestly to confront the nation's fiscal problems.


USX-Delhi Group (DGP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Black &amp; Decker Corp.(BDK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Mr. Giuliani's Thunderbolt
You can line up the political cliches on this one.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's endorsement of Gov.
Mario Cuomo's re-election campaign was: a stunning development, a bombshell announcement, a defining moment.
Hard-line Republicans will also call it a betrayal, and by the measurement of lockstep party loyalty, it was.
But there is another yardstick of greater importance to New York, and by that standard Mr.
Giuliani stands very tall.
Throughout a tough mayoral campaign and during his first months in office, he promised repeatedly that he would put the interest of the city above partisan considerations.
Seldom has a political promise been kept more dramatically and in the face of greater opportunities to take an easier path.


The Jets' Other Johnson Will Finally Get the Ball
They are a who's who of runners: Ricky Watters, Eric Dickerson, Marshall Faulk and Johnny Johnson.
Anthony Johnson has lost out to every one of them.
As the Jets returned to the field today after their bye week, they unveiled Johnson as a new back, and prepared him for a major role in Sunday's game against the Colts at the RCA Dome.


Brown Is Still Starter, but Change Could Be Swift
Like a young warrior who turns to the master who helped train him, Dave Brown will sometimes seek out the former Giant quarterback Phil Simms for guidance.
A quarterback to quarterback chat -- from the one who has been in the hot seat to the one currently in it.
And from all their conversations, one piece of advice Simms gave Brown sticks out: "The fans here really had no choice but to like me because I wore them out."


Terra Industries(TRA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Amdahl Corp.(AHM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Harold H. Wein, 78, Economics Professor
Harold H. Wein, a retired professor of economics and business management, died on Oct. 13 at Michigan Capitol Medical Center in Lansing.
He was 78 and lived in Okemos, Mich.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Corrections
A picture caption on Oct. 15 about protests after the killing of a kidnapped Israeli soldier misidentified the kidnappers in some editions.
They were Palestinian militants, not Israeli militants.


CHRONICLE
BARRY TUCKER, president of the Richard Tucker Music Foundation, wanted to give silver castanets to RISE STEVENS, the mezzo-soprano, at the foundation's benefit concert on Sunday at Avery Fisher Hall.
But Mr.
Tucker, a son of the tenor Richard Tucker, who died in 1975, learned that this was easier said than done.
"I wanted the silver castanets to reflect the 80 performances of 'Carmen' that she did with my father, and I wanted to engrave something on them," he said.
"I called music stores everywhere and they all said, 'There's no such thing, but why don't you try Stephen Weiss Music in Philadelphia.' "


COMPANY BRIEFS
SAVIN CORP.
Stamford, Conn., has agreed to be sold to the Ricoh Co. of Tokyo for $42 million in cash.


To Get Along, One Sometimes Has to String Along


Prewar Black Movies, Downside Up
They were called race movies.
Between World Wars I and II, black producers, directors and actors turned out hundreds of films whose characters departed from the Hollywood stereotype of the shuffling, eyeball-rolling, comically cowardly black.
Often watched in the South's segregated theaters between midnight and 2 A.M., the movies are the subject of "Midnight Ramble," tomorrow night's offering on "The American Experience." The program's commentators see these works as black America's answer to "The Birth of a Nation," described by the narrator as "one of the most pernicious pieces of propaganda ever produced," with blacks depicted "as apelike, oversexed, corrupt and lazy."


U.S. Hints at Better Ties if Syria Signs Peace Pact With Israel
Secretary of State Warren Christopher held out the prospect of improved relations with Syria today if Damascus made peace with Israel and cracked down on terrorists along Israel's northern border.
In openly broaching the idea, which could lead to a flow of Western aid to Syria, Mr.
Christopher was seeking to coax Damascus to move ahead in its nearly stalled peace talks with Israel.


Gifts-for-Guns Program Is Now Going National
With the backing of several corporate sponsors, Fernando Mateo, a Washington Heights businessman, announced yesterday a new nationwide effort to take guns off the streets for Christmas that will include a flashy publicity campaign and a wide variety of gifts to be exchanged for guns.
Mr.
Mateo attracted national attention last year when he promoted an idea first suggested by his 14-year-old son to exchange Christmas gift certificates for guns.
His toys-for-guns offer was credited with taking 3,000 guns off New York City streets during the holiday season and it was duplicated in cities around the country.


Rockport to Replace Bartle Bogle Hegarty
The Rockport Company said yesterday that it would not renew its yearlong contract with Bartle Bogle Hegarty in London when it expires on Dec. 31.
As a result, Rockport is talking to several agencies about the creative portion of its global footwear account with billings estimated at $3 million to $4 million.
In confirming a report this week in Adweek, Kate Toomey, a spokeswoman for Rockport in Marlboro, Mass., said the company was "looking to put an emphasis on the 35-to-49 age group," rather than the younger consumers addressed in advertising by Bartle Bogle.


CHRONICLE
BARRY TUCKER, president of the Richard Tucker Music Foundation, wanted to give silver castanets to RISE STEVENS, the mezzo-soprano, at the foundation's benefit concert on Sunday at Avery Fisher Hall.
But Mr.
Tucker, a son of the tenor Richard Tucker, who died in 1975, learned that this was easier said than done.
"I wanted the silver castanets to reflect the 80 performances of 'Carmen' that she did with my father, and I wanted to engrave something on them," he said.
"I called music stores everywhere and they all said, 'There's no such thing, but why don't you try Stephen Weiss Music in Philadelphia.' "


Lubrizol Corp.(LZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Appointments By Times Co.
The New York Times Company announced several appointments yesterday in its information services division, which includes The New York Times News Service and Syndication Sales Corporation as well as Times On-Line Services and NYT Custom Publishing.
Patricia A. Ecke, publisher of TimesFax, was promoted to vice president, specialized publishing.
James E. Patterson, director of The New York Times Index and Times On-Line Services, was named vice president, business information services.
Richard W. Stockton, general manager of NYT Custom Publishing, was appointed vice president for the operating unit.
Vincent R. Cimmino, group controller, was named vice president, finance, for the information service group.


So, Libby, Should I See the Movie?
IF YOU ASK ME  By Libby Gelman-Waxner  A Wyatt Book for St.
Martin's Press. 236 pp. $20.95.
Readers of Premiere magazine know the monthly columnist Libby Gelman-Waxner as a tireless practitioner of what one of her fans calls "glandular criticism." Her marriage to Josh Waxner, "a wildly sought-after Upper East Side orthodontist," and her job as "an extremely successful assistant buyer in juniors' activewear" are no obstacles to Libby's career as a guerrilla movie fan, happily throwing brickbats and valentines at the screen.


Ladd Furniture Inc.(LADF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Boy's Father Testifies in Kidnap Trial of Rabbi
The father of a Jewish teen-ager testified yesterday that an ultra-Orthodox rabbi who is charged with kidnapping the youth asked the father to write a phony letter after the boy disappeared, authorizing the rabbi to hide the boy from his mother.
The prosecution is arguing in the Brooklyn trial of the rabbi, Shlomo Helbrans, that the rabbi criminally abetted the April 1992 disappearance of the teen-ager, Shai Fhima Reuven, who was then 13.


Is Heisman a Hurdle Too High for McNair?
Steve McNair, the sensational Alcorn State quarterback, faces mighty hurdles in his longshot bid to win the Heisman Trophy.
He plays for a Division 1-AA team that was prohibited by the National Collegiate Athletic Association from playing in the Liberty Bowl.
No Division I-AA player has won the award.
Jerry Rice, who played for Mississippi Valley State, finished ninth.
Walter Payton, playing for Jackson State, finished 14th.
Alcorn State isn't atop ABC's list of choices for its Saturday afternoon college football lineup.
ABC's selections run to Division I-A schools with Heisman hopefuls like Rashaan Salaam (Colorado), Ki-Jana Carter (Penn State), Lawrence Phillips (Nebraska), Napoleon Kaufman (Washington) and Eric Zeier (Georgia).
ABC's one Alcorn State game, Sept. 24 against Sam Houston State, reached Mississippi and iotas of Louisiana and Texas -- 2 percent of the country.


Foreman Eats, And Speaks
George Foreman, a Wendy's burger in front of him, was speaking yesterday on the telephone from Houston.
"I got to keep up my strength," said the 45-year-old, who will fight Michael Moorer for the heavyweight title Nov. 5 in Las Vegas, Nev.
Foreman admitted, though, that his humor has cost him in the ring.
The judges do not take seriously a heavy, stolid fighter who is often 20 years older than the people he meets.


Don't Punish Universities for Research Costs
To the Editor:
Re "Navy Settles a Fraud Case on Stanford Research Costs" (news article, Oct. 19): After months of accusations, the truth is out.


Police Investigating Shooting By an Officer of Man in a Car
A police officer fatally shot a Brooklyn man in the passenger seat of a stopped car Monday, the police said, and investigators said yesterday that they were reviewing the incident.
The victim, tentatively identified as Anthony Merisier, 25, of East New York, was shot in the chest after he and the driver of the car, Joel Clervil, 24, were pulled over by two officers about 6 P.M. at the intersection of Hinsdale Street and New Lots Avenue in East New York, said a police spokesman, Detective Andrew McInnis.


Cygne Designs
The New York Times Shares of Cygne Designs, a New York designer of women's clothing, hit a 52-week low yesterday in Nasdaq trading before recovering.
After the market closed on Monday, the company said that it would report lower-than-expected third-quarter earnings.


Watergate Redux as Robb Hits Back
As if the poor voters of Virginia did not have enough scandals to sort through, what with Iran-contra, extramarital rub-downs and cocaine at parties, Charles S. Robb has offered up another one: Watergate.
Senator Robb and his Republican opponent, Oliver L. North, have been dueling throughout their campaign with a Madame Tussaud galaxy of officials from past administrations and scandals.
But this week the nasty competition over who has the better -- or worse -- character reached strange new heights.


A Wide Impact, From Soup Kitchens to Recycling; Transportation
The new round of budget cuts proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani would in large and small ways affect nearly every agency of city government.
Here are the agencies that will endure the biggest cuts.
Although the Mayor wants to reduce the city's subsidy to the Metropolitan Transportation Authority by $113 million, agency officials said the $1.25 subway fare would not rise before next July.


Debate on Race and I.Q. Recalls Past Prejudice; Social Science Remedy
To the Editor:
As a psychometrician, I welcome many aspects of Jim Holt's critique of "The Bell Curve" (Op-Ed, Oct. 19).
But Mr.
Holt uses a strategy long known to bigots who denigrate an outgroup.
He clumps together all social science research and then assigns to the entire class characteristics of the most despicable members.
While this may be seen as cleverness by some, it is the same brand of cleverness that makes "The Bell Curve" so loathsome.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Business Technology
Communications giants are scrambling to reshape their industry, driven by a Federal deadline for bidders on new wireless licenses.
An alliance announced by Sprint and three big cable television operators caps a frenzy of recent deal making.  [ Page A1. ]
Three regional telephone companies are said to be planning a video programming service for phone customers.
The deal involves Michael Ovitz, the most powerful agent in Hollywood.  [ D1. ]
A new type of long-life lighting uses microwave energy.  [ D6. ] Companies
Eli Lilly agreed to restrictions on operating the PCS Health Systems drug marketing unit.
An accord with the F.T.C. would allow Lilly to complete its $4 billion purchase of PCS.  [ D1. ]
Chemical producers are enjoying a sudden surge in demand.
Big jumps in chemical prices have bolstered earnings at some oil companies, which have seen declines in refining operations.  [ D1. ]
RJR Nabisco said earnings nearly tripled, showing strong operating gains in its food and tobacco businesses.  [ D2. ]
Eastman Kodak expects more cutbacks, after reporting a 31 percent decline in third-quarter earnings.  [ D2. ]
Opening arguments were heard in the Government's case against General Electric on charges it conspired with De Beers to fix prices of industrial diamonds.  [ D2. ]
Continental Airlines said its chief executive had resigned.
The carrier also reported lower-than-expected earnings.  [ D5. ]
Cadbury Schweppes is talking with Dr Pepper about a possible takeover.
Some analysts see strong reasons for a merger.  [ D5. ]
William R. Hoover plans to retire as chief executive of Computer Sciences after leading the company for 22 years.  [ D5. ]
Kubota of Japan will scale back its computer business and close its Silicon Valley subsidiary, Kubota Graphics.  [ D5. ] International
Soweto has a new identity: an emerging market in South Africa.
The township, once synonymous with the misery of apartheid and political upheaval, is seen as a market of great untapped potential.
White businesses are investing in the black townships, in projects like the first shopping mall in Soweto.
Some black entrepreneurs, however, resent being pushed aside.  [ D1. ]
Projections for German economic growth were raised substantially.
Five research institutes projected growth of 2.5 percent this year and 3 percent next year.
Still, stocks fell in Frankfurt.  [ D2. ]
Hungary is struggling with an economic slump.  [ A14. ]
Markets Stocks ended mixed.
The Dow industrials fell 4.71 points.  [ D8. ] Prices of Treasury securities were little changed after a mildly disappointing auction of two-year notes.  [ D17. ]
The dollar fell to a new low against the Japanese yen and a new two-year low against the German mark before recovering.  [ D18. ]
Copper prices climbed as inventories continued to shrink.  [ D18. ] Today's Columns
Someone knew to sell Outboard Marine stock before the company announced that earnings for the quarter would be well below estimates.
While some attributed the selloff to leaked information, there is no proof that this was the case.
But it is the kind of market action that helps to cause bitterness among many investors, including both individuals and institutions, who worry that they are not treated as well as more favored holders when there is news to release.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D1. ]
Madison Avenue now runs through cyberspace.
The New York office of BBDO Worldwide is on Compuserve, the first agency on such a big on-line service.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D19. ]


Lab Studying Lyme Disease To Reopen
A Lyme disease research laboratory that closed at New York Medical College in Valhalla in June when the top scientist left for Yale University will reopen at the State University College at Purchase, officials announced today.
The state agreed to provide the site and $180,000 in operating expenses for the laboratory, the only one of its kind in the state that studies the deer ticks that spread Lyme disease.


Trojan Treasure Is Viewed
The Schliemann Treasure -- the hoard of ancient gold and silver discovered in the ruins of ancient Troy in the 1870's that has been hidden in Russia since the closing days of World War II -- has finally come to light, says a group of German museum officials who viewed the treasure yesterday at the Pushkin Museum in Moscow.
"I have seen all 260 pieces of the treasure, and the experience was overwhelming," said Klaus Goldmann, a curator at the Berlin Museum of Pre-History who was one of three German museum officials invited by the Russian Cultural Ministry to inspect the treasure.


Ceremony Will Be Hot, Windy, and Made for TV
At 2:15 P.M. today, the desert showed what it can do to the best-laid plans of mice and advance men.
It kicked up a storm just as teams from Israel and Jordan were about to start a dress rehearsal for Wednesday, when the two countries will sign the peace treaty in a ceremony here, a barren patch two miles north of the Gulf of Aqaba.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the flooding in Texas referred incorrectly in some editions to the reopening of the Houston Ship Channel.
It occurred on Sunday evening, not on Monday.


British Health System Is Well Worth the Price
To the Editor:
When I was in Edinburgh last month, I fell and was sure that I had broken my ankle.
A police officer who was nearby rushed to help and called an ambulance, which arrived in minutes.
He said to me: "Don't worry your head, dearie. You're in Scotland now, and this won't cost you a penny. This is not America."


Continental Medical Systems Inc.(CNM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Consolidated Freightways Inc.(CNF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 21
Oct. 14
Oct. 22
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.2
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.4
3.6
Gasoline stocks
202.7
208.6
208.7
Distillate stocks
145.1
143.9
134.6
Crude imports, daily
7.2
7.1
6.7
Product imports, daily
1.4
2.0
2.0
Crude stocks
333.0
339.9
332.4
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
90.2
90.5
91.7
Source: American Petroleum Institute


A Femme Fatale Who Lives Up To the Description
A hired assassin, an innocent fall guy and a husband and wife intent on killing each other made a sterling film noir spectacle out of "Red Rock West," John Dahl's recently released sleeper.
Now Mr.
Dahl, whose work will never again fall into the sleeper category, is back with "The Last Seduction," which makes his earlier miscreants look like a collection of cream puffs.
"Red Rock West" was memorably smart and steely.
But it's a walk in the park picking buttercups compared with this.
Nothing else about "The Last Seduction" is as polite or colorless as its title.
Certainly not Bridget Gregory (Linda Fiorentino), the hot, slinky monster who is this film's central character.
There were 1940's noir heroines with Bridget's brand of undiluted self-interest, but she also throws in a few tricks from the "Basic Instinct" school of interpersonal relations.
Only in the insect or animal worlds are there comparable models for feminine behavior.
And the female praying mantis is nicer to her mates than Bridget is to the men in this movie.


Germans See Growth; Markets Drop Anyway
Reporting that the German economy was driving itself out of deep recession, a group of leading economic research institutes significantly increased projections today for economic growth this year and predicted that the output of Europe's largest economy would rise further in 1995.
But the forecast of strong growth did not stop the German stock and bond markets from falling.
Touched off by fears of renewed inflation in the United States and continuing weakness in the dollar, stocks on the benchmark DAX index fell 2.51 percent and bonds had one of their worst days in weeks.


Johnson Controls Inc.(JCI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brunswick Corp.(BC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Here's How 24 Plus 6 Can Equal 40 Million
PSSST.
Listen up.
Forget the elections.
What I am about to tell you could mean a whole lot of bucks.
Like maybe 40 million.
You interested?
O.K., here goes.
Twenty-four.
That's right, the number 24.
Statistically speaking it has been hot, real hot.
How hot?
Hot enough to have come up as one of the six winning numbers in five out of the last six drawings for the New York Lotto jackpot.
There has, however, been no winning ticket in any of these lotteries.
The prize money has been rolled over six times, growing to proportions that are definitely worth your time.
They are worth Bill Gates's time.
What I am telling you is the emmis, the McCoy, the real skinny, and I hope you appreciate that you don't get this kind of information anywhere else.
Still, if you don't believe me, you could look it up.


The Stars Are Returning, But It Will Be for Charity
The owners won't let them play on their ice, so National Hockey League players will take their sticks and pucks and play on somebody else's ice.
The N.H.L.
Players Association plans to announce today or tomorrow a two-night all-star event for charity in Hamilton, Ontario, on Nov. 10 and Nov. 12, featuring such players as Wayne Gretzky, Mark Messier and Brett Hull.


Free of Abuse Charge, Principal Returns
Frank Catrambone said he was neither angry nor bitter, only relieved to be back at work 13 months after being accused of molesting two young girls.
But when he returned as principal to his brown brick school today, the only child he let himself hug was the son of a cousin.
Among the adults, there were hugs aplenty.
His secretary.
The school nurse.
The head of the P.T.A., who leaped at the sight of him and gasped and cried and handed out cookies at the welcome-home celebration in the gym.


Amid Real Dramas, A New Opera House Opens in Tel Aviv
For two nights this week, Israel celebrated the opening of its first opera house.
On the face of it, such an event should not be able to compete with the signing of a historic peace treaty or a horrific act of terrorism that left 22 people dead.
But the construction of the $50 million opera house for the New Israeli Opera was at least in part an act of defiance against other pressures and a proud assertion of cultural ambition.


Texaco Inc.(TX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


HealthTrust Inc.(HTI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Ashland Coal (ACI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Spiegel Inc.(SPGLA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the Giuliani Administration's agreement with city unions on job cuts misstated the meeting place and omitted the identity of one participant.
The site was outside the office of Local 375 of the Technical Guild, not at City Hall; the man second from the right was Lewis G. Albano, president of the local.


Phillips Petroleum Co.(P,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page last Wednesday about a review of advertising agencies by the Coleman Company misstated the location of the Rojek Marketing Group, which is managing the review.
It is in Cleveland, not Cincinnati.


Kemet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chevron Corp.(CHV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Lack of Ice Time Has Lemaire Just Spinning in Circles
Jacques Lemaire's eyes lighted up the moment he stepped out of the Devils' dressing room and saw people skating on the ice at South Mountain Arena here this morning.
Of course, the sight of 12 skaters engaging in a scrimmage was not nearly enough to quench Lemaire's thirst for hockey in this autumn of inactivity.


AirTouch Communications (ATI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Noranda Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Devils' McNab Calls It a (Long) Career
After 48 years in hockey as a player, coach and administrator, the last 12 with the Devils, MAX McNAB retired from hockey yesterday.
The 70-year-old McNab served the team as director of operations, general manager and executive vice president.
As a player, McNab was the center for GORDIE HOWE and TED LINDSAY in helping Detroit capture the Stanley Cup in 1950.


U.S. Surgical Corp.(USS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
BASEBALL  Yomiuri Giants Take Lead in Japan Series  Masahiro Kawai drove in the winning run with a sacrifice fly in the top of the 10th inning last night as the Yomiuri Giants edged the Seibu Lions, 2-1, and took a lead of two games to one in the four-of-seven-game Japan Series.
Kawai hit the decisive fly with the bases loaded and one out before 31,000 at Seibu Stadium in Tokyo.
The Pacific League champion Lions had 10 hits against four Giants pitchers. (AP)


Worley Restricted After Missing Game
Chicago running back TIM WORLEY, who missed a team flight to Detroit over the weekend and is said by the team to be tending to personal matters, was placed on the reserve nonfootball injury list yesterday.
His spot was filled by receiver KENNY SHEDD, who had been on the Jets' practice squad.
Worley, a two-time offender of the National Football League's substance-abuse policy, returned to his home Sunday afternoon and met with Coach DAVE WANNSTEDT on Monday.
Worley has since remained unavailable for comment.


Wrigley (Wm.) Jr.  Co.(WWY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Real Estate
BEFORE there were superhighways, motorists traveling in or out of Philadelphia from the north used Route 1.
On the way they passed a huge, red-brick Gothic building in Northeast Philadelphia, set amid large clusters of small houses.
This was the Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company warehouse and catalogue shipping center, which sent goods to mail-order shoppers from Maine to Virginia from the 1920's until 1990.
The five-million-square-foot complex included a Sears retail store, several warehouses, its own power station and other structures, as well as a regional headquarters for the company.
Operations wound down gradually and ceased in February 1993.
Later in the year, the main buildings and 48 of the 120 acres of land were sold to a Philadelphia developer, the Rubin Organization.


Tribe Donates $10 Million
The Mashantucket Pequots, a Connecticut Indian tribe whose primary source of income is a casino near Ledyard, Conn., has contributed $10 million to the fund-raising campaign for the National Museum of the American Indian.
The donation is the largest ever to the Smithsonian Institution, of which the new museum would be a part.


Lawson Products Inc.(LAWS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


County's Charter Revision In Peril, Despite Wide Favor
Despite bipartisan support for a new Nassau County charter, the outcome of a Nov. 8 referendum on the proposal is a tossup, political and civic leaders say.
Because of the tight race for governor, officials say, there is little interest in local races this year, let alone the referendum.


Meredith Corp.(MDP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Food Notes
Merchants' Halloween
A number of food shops and restaurants in Greenwich Village will be doling out Halloween treats to children from 3 to 5:30 P.M. on Monday.
The door-to-door Halloween party, in the Bleecker Street neighborhood between the Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue, is sponsored by a new group called Merchants of Greenwich, organized by Ken Lipsmeyer, the owner of 9 Jones Street restaurant.
Each participating shop and restaurant will display a large orange sign with a pumpkin.
Children must be accompanied by an adult.


Regulators And Lilly In Accord
Bowing to the Federal Trade Commission, Eli Lilly &amp; Company agreed yesterday to accept restrictions on operating the giant PCS Health Systems drug marketing unit, which Lilly plans to buy from the McKesson Corporation in a $4 billion deal.
Lilly, based in Indianapolis, said it would sign a consent agreement assuring that other drug makers would have access to the PCS lists of preferred drugs, according to people familiar with the case.
PCS is the largest of the prescription drug benefit managers, which employers and insurers hire to make price-cutting deals with drug manufacturers.


Forest Laboratories Inc.(FRX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SWEEPING REVISION IN COMMUNICATION IS ON THE HORIZON
Telecommunications companies and their customers are on the verge of the most sweeping revision of the nation's communications landscape since the breakup of the Bell System in 1984.
In a frenzy of deal-making capped by the Sprint Corporation's announcement yesterday of an alliance with three of the country's biggest cable television companies, the industry's biggest companies are forming partnerships that are likely to give consumers and businesses alike a broad new range of communications options during the next decade.


RJR Nabisco's Earnings Climb Sharply
The RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation reported sharply higher third-quarter earnings and strong operating gains in its food and tobacco businesses yesterday, rebounding from the cigarette price-cutting war initiated by its major competitor, the Philip Morris Companies, in 1993.
The impressive results came after the image of the company had been battered by investors displeased by an offer to buy the financially troubled Borden Inc.


Troubled N.Y.R.A. Hands Control to Noe
The New York Racing Association confirmed reports yesterday that it was naming Kenneth Noe Jr. as president and general manager.
Noe, who is 66 years old, has signed a contract and will be introduced at Aqueduct tomorrow, according to a brief statement by Allan R. Dragone, the chairman of the N.Y.R.A.
He fills two vacancies at once, replacing Gerard J. McKeon, who resigned as president last week, and Jerry Lawrence, who resigned as general manager in August.


Experts Call for Easing Plague Precautions on Travel From India
A team of specialists from the World Health Organization who investigated the recent outbreak of pneumonic plague in India called today for a relaxation in international restrictions on travelers from India.
The team, four Americans from the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta and two Russians, said four major Indian cities -- New Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta and Madras -- should be regarded as plague-free since no evidence had been found that plague had been transmitted there.


Correction: Passage Omitted From Text of Giuliani's Talk
A transcript of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's statement endorsing Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo was incomplete yesterday.
Following is the passage that was omitted at the end of the Mayor's statement.
Although I am by no means the most partisan member, I do believe that there are principles of the Republican Party in need of much greater emphasis in New York and in America, and I will continue to fight for them: emphasizing government as a last resort, not a first; placing responsibility on individuals; focusing on stricter enforcement of the law; using principles of property ownership and small business to give hope to people who are poor.
Republicans in government can give reality to these principles.
They are worth fighting for.


Commission Supports New Reform
Fearing a loss in the momentum of the college sports reform movement it has spearheaded, a private commission asserted today that higher academic standards for student-athletes have been successful and stressed its continued support for further measures scheduled to go into effect next year.
Fifteen of the 22 members of the Knight Foundation Commission on Intercollegiate Athletics met here Monday to address challenges to Proposition 16, a standard for freshmen academic eligibility for student-athletes that incorporates both the Scholastic Aptitude Test and grade point averages.
The commission sees Proposition 16 as a logical successor to Proposition 48, the first rule that created an S.A.T. minimum score for freshman eligibility (a combined score of 700 with at least a 2.0 grade average in 11 core courses).


Fresenius USA Inc.(FRN,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Glenn Gets Role on Kickoff Returns
When the record is 4-3, when a victory is this much away from a loss, little things mean a lot.
And so the Jets, still trying to put together a perfect package, or at least one with a minimum of loose ends, continue to fine tune and fiddle this week as they prepare to play the Colts in Indianapolis.
Who knows what will make a difference in the game?
Coach Pete Carroll is paid to find an edge, and he plucked Brad Seely from the Colts to coach his special teams.


Ex-Foes on Common Ground
They are polar opposites on many issues, but Mayor Giuliani and Governor Cuomo share many common, formative traits.
Page B6.


An Old Coach's New Offensive
Lou Saban's first job was to caddy for Al Capone's brother at the Acacia Country Club in Chicago every Tuesday afternoon.
Ralph Capone tipped well, but he never spoke on the fairways and Saban and his brother always suspected that he carried a gun.
Saban was 9 years old at the time, and was simply looking for a way to earn a few dollars a week.
In the 64 years since then, Saban has been hard-pressed to top that job for sheer story-telling value -- not that he hasn't tried.


New Jerseyans Learned the Hard Way About Cutting Taxes
To the Editor:
New Yorkers should learn a lesson from the citizens of New Jersey, who were duped into believing Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman when she told us that our state taxes would be reduced and that our local taxes would not go up.


In New Jersey, the Candidates Make a Radio Show the Issue
Trading accusations and insults about who is a hypocrite and who is out of touch, about who is a big spender and who is a racist, the two candidates for United States Senate tangled tonight in a sharp-edged televised debate here.
In many ways, the hour-long encounter between the incumbent Democrat, Frank R. Lautenberg, and his Republican rival, Chuck Haytaian, was a microcosm of the campaign so far.
It was short on direct discussion of issues and long on sound bites, some plucked directly from their own advertising, that attacked on the other candidate.


Swordfish the Sicilian Way
SPAGHETTI with swordfish is a classic Sicilian dish.
Here, some liberties have been taken.
The anchovies have been replaced by olive paste because there were no anchovies in the house, and yellow pepper was added to give body to the sauce when the amount of oil in the traditional recipe was reduced.
As is the case with many authentic Italian pasta dishes, there is more pasta than sauce; in this country, the opposite seems to be true.
The swordfish sauce is so suffused with flavor that you will be surprised by how little is needed for the spaghetti.


Student Raped in Brooklyn
A 15-year-old student at Bishop Ford High School in Brooklyn was sexually assaulted yesterday by a stranger in the school bathroom, the police said.
The girl, who rides each day with her mother on a bus to the school, at 500 19th Street near Prospect Park West, had arrived shortly after 7 A.M. and gone to her locker and then to the bathroom, the police said.


Less Demand For New Bills At Auction
Prices of Government securities were little changed yesterday after a mildly disappointing auction of two-year notes.
Retail demand was significantly lower than in recent two-year sales, traders said, disappointing many market participants who had thought the sale would be more popular.
Over all, the market remained sour.
A weak dollar in the currency markets and expectations of further Federal Reserve rate increases contributed to the mood.


Premark Intl.(PMI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Corrections
A headline in some copies misstated the amount the city expects to save by cutting health care costs for city workers.
It is $190 million, not $200 million.


Kansas City Southern Industries (KSU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clark Equipment Co. (CKL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mildred Natwick, 89, Actress Who Excelled at Eccentricity
Mildred Natwick, a versatile actress who created an engaging gallery of eccentric, whimsical and spunky characters in plays, films and television for more than 60 years, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 89.
Miss Natwick, a small woman with sharp features and a mischievous manner, was a familiar figure on the Broadway stage, where she appeared in some 40 productions.
Among other roles, she played an idiosyncratic secretary in George Bernard Shaw's "Candida," an extroverted medium in Noel Coward's "Blithe Spirit" and a shrewish wife in Jean Anouilh's "Waltz of the Toreadors."


Shell Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about the plan to eliminate 7,600 New York municipal jobs referred incompletely to the employees exempted from a special severance offer.
Along with teachers, the offer excluded police officers, firefighters and other uniformed officers.


Candidates Continue Angry Tone
In their fifth debate, H. Carl McCall and Herb London kept up the already angry tone of their battle for the state comptroller's job, trading insults and mocking each other's platforms.
Mr.
London, the Republican candidate, called Mr.
McCall, the Democratic incumbent, "the Hans Christian Andersen" of New York politics, saying he was revising the facts of his tenure.
Mr.
McCall, in turn, accused his opponent of vigilantism because he is against tougher gun laws.


CHRONICLE
It was trip back in time for ROSEMARY LEARY, a former wife of Timothy Leary, the psychedelic drug guru, when she went to the preview of an auction of 74 letters she had written to him.
They were all written in 1970, while he was in prison in San Luis Obispo, Calif., for possession of marijuana.
The letters were bought by Stanford University for $1,900 from the Pacific Book Auction Gallery in San Francisco.
Ms.
Leary said she had no idea how the letters ended up at the gallery, but that she did not intend to retrieve them.


Sunbeam-Oster (SOC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Ingersoll-Rand Co. (IR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American General Corp.(AGC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Interpublic Group of Cos.  (IPG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CDI Corp.(CDI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Another British Minister Resigns Over Outside Lobbying Deals
A junior British Government minister resigned today over reports that he failed to disclose outside lobbying deals, the second junior minister to quit under a cloud in a week, leaving Prime Minister John Major scrambling to limit the political damage from questions about his Conservative Party's ethical standards.
The latest resignation came from Neil Hamilton, who gave up his post overseeing business affairs after denying for five days that he had done anything wrong.


What's for Lunch? American
IT was lunch time at Public School 144 in Forest Hills, Queens, and nearly 200 youngsters crowded along the beige picnic-style tables, tearing into brown bags and plastic boxes as if they were birthday gifts.
Others lined up for hot food served on trays as two cafeteria workers dished out sandwiches and pizza and gently prodded the children to take some salad and not to forget their milk.


Consolidated Edison Co. of New York (ED,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kubota Ends A High-Tech Business
Kubota Ltd., the Japanese tractor manufacturer that tried to become an electronics company by investing in American technology start-ups, gave up on much of its dream today.
The Osaka-based company said it would scale back its computer business and cease manufacturing engineering work stations.
It will also close its 120-person Silicon Valley subsidiary, the Kubota Graphics Corporation, by the end of the year.


On Pro Football; What's Stirring in the Lions' Den?
Before the 1992 season, the Detroit Lions sought Pat Swilling with vigor.
They offered him huge dollars, nearly $2 million a year, but in reality, they had no chance.
The New Orleans Saints simply matched the offer and Swilling, as a restricted free agent, was forced to remain a Saint.
On the day of the 1993 draft, the Lions tried again.
This time they won.
Swilling was acquired for Detroit's first and fourth-round picks.


Mytishchi Journal; Why Vote for This Man? If He Loses, Jail Awaits
This is a measure of politics in the new Russia.
There will be a special election here on Sunday to replace a member of Parliament gunned down outside his apartment house in late April, in a killing thought to be mob-related.
One of the 12 candidates is Konstantin Borovoi, the founder of the first commercial exchange in the Soviet Union, whose posters show him in an audience with the Patriarch of the Russian Orthodox Church, Aleksy II.
Mr.
Borovoi says he narrowly escaped assassination twice in a year.


New York Seeking To Retake Housing Fixed by Squatters
When Peter Spagnuolo first saw the building on East 13th Street that he now calls home it was little more than a roofless hulk -- burned by arsonists and stripped by vandals of its wiring, windows and bathroom and kitchen fixtures.
The city, which owned the building, paid little attention as Mr.
Spagnuolo and others who needed places to live dug out the garbage and debris, rebuilt the roof, reconnected plumbing lines and wiring and put back kitchens and bathrooms.


Warning To Rookies: Don't Dare Cross Line
Veteran major league baseball players have a message for young, or financially unstable, or nonroster type players who might consider serving as strikebreakers next spring.
And their message is this: Do it, and you will pay.
Bobby Bonilla won't ride in a cab with you, or eat with you, or speak to you in the locker room.
John Franco will strongly consider beating you up.
When you face Scott Kamieniecki on the pitcher's mound, he just might send a fastball a little too far inside.
Pete Smith will never respect you, not even if you hit .400 for the season.


For Cuomo and Giuliani, an Odd Marriage of Shared Burdens
They have never shared so much as a meal and could not fairly be called friends, their friends say.
On some issues, like the death penalty, they are polar opposite icons of their parties.
Through two bitter mayoral elections and two Republican Presidencies, they were pointed intellectual and oratorical adversaries.
But behind Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's odd marriage of political expediency and prideful principle, those close to them say, lie months of mutual appreciation of the burdens of governing, and two lifetimes of common experience in class, outlook, education, law and public office.


A Wide Impact, From Soup Kitchens to Recycling; Correction
The new round of budget cuts proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani would in large and small ways affect nearly every agency of city government.
Here are the agencies that will endure the biggest cuts.
Under the Mayor's plan the Correction Department would make more job cuts, eliminating more than 800 uniformed positions and 185 civilian jobs.
Including the cuts approved last summer by the City Council, the department will have 1,710 fewer jail officers than the 11,077 it had last year.


Starving at 900 Calories
To the Editor:
Re "From Mega-Food, Mega-Girth" (Living section, Oct. 19): Why does your illustration suggest that people should be eating 900 calories a day rather than 2,000?
At 900 calories, most people would waste away to nothing.
Your article scarcely pertains to New Yorkers, most of whom are thin and are already overly concerned about gaining a pound.
Our society continues to focus on eating as a moral flaw.
Your article contributes to that fixation.
SARAH SEARS  Brooklyn, Oct. 20, 1994


Dentsply International Inc.(XRAY,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Wide Impact, From Soup Kitchens to Recycling; SCHOOLS
The new round of budget cuts proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani would in large and small ways affect nearly every agency of city government.
Here are the agencies that will endure the biggest cuts.
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, huddling with top aides yesterday to study the additional $190 million in cuts to the school system, declined to discuss their specific impact, but he called them "larger than expected."


Debate on Race and I.Q. Recalls Past Prejudice; A Left-Brain Measure
To the Editor:
There are many flaws in the racial inferiority theory put forward in "The Bell Curve," namely Louie Armstrong, Maya Angelou, Fats Waller, Ella Fitzgerald, Mahalia Jackson, Rita Dove, Alvin Ailey, Toni Morrison, Billie Holliday, Miles Davis, Charlie Parker, and so on.


S. A. Kingsbury, 71, Expert on Proverbs And Folk Wisdom
Stewart Ashley Kingsbury, who did research on the origins of proverbs, folk wisdom and place names and edited several reference books on the subjects, died on Sunday at his home in Marquette, Mich.
He was 71.
The cause was cancer, said a spokesman for Northern Michigan University, where Dr.
Kingsbury was a professor of English and linguistics from 1969 until he reached emeritus status three years ago.


Kinder, Gentler But Still Indelicate
Looking back, it was an awful moment in the glorious history of the Giants.
It was 1992, and Ray Handley, beginning his second and last season as the Giants' head coach, could not decide whether to start Phil Simms or Jeff Hostetler at quarterback.
Both had led the Giants to Super Bowl victories.
Teammates were divided.
Dissension was rife.
A disaster awaited.


Public &amp; Private; The Out-Of-Work Wife
It so happened that in the hours before Lady Diana Spencer was to become the Princess of Wales in 1981, I was working on a story on Eighth Avenue, hanging out with a group of prostitutes.
At daybreak I intended to go home and watch the royal wedding, my companions to get some sleep.
But before we parted they gave an unforgettable valediction to the bride.
"She's got the richest john in the world," one of the women said.
This purely commercial view of matrimony seemed exceedingly harsh.
But if published reports are to be believed, the Princess is nearly as cynical about her marriage now as the women working the West Side of Manhattan were on her wedding day.
And a new biography of her husband reflects an arrangement more like a family business transaction than a love affair.


Slain Candidate's Widow to Lead Party in Sri Lankan Election
As mourners filed past the body of the latest victim of this country's cycle of political violence today, the dead man's political party nominated his widow to succeed him as its candidate in a presidential election next month.
Gamini Dissanayaka, killed with 51 others in an apparent suicide bombing at an election rally in Colombo on Sunday, was the presidential candidate of the United National Party, which is hoping to hold on to the presidency after losing parliamentary elections in August.
The candidacy will now be take over by Srima Dissanayaka, his widow, who is a lawyer with extensive political experience of her own.


Shift at Top Of Computer Sciences
William R. Hoover, who built the Computer Sciences Corporation into one of the top computer service companies in the world, will announce his retirement as chairman and chief executive on Monday, the company said yesterday.
Mr.
Hoover, who will turn 65 in January, will be succeeded by Van B. Honeycutt, 49, the president and chief operating officer, who has been with the company for 19 years.


Arboreal Armories; A Bush Grows in Brooklyn, Concealing the Weapons of Youth Outside Family Court
It is not your standard weapons locker.
It is, in fact, a bush, and it stands outside Kings County Family Court in Brooklyn.
But weapons are what often hang in its dense array of branches -- knives, Kung Fu stars and razors.
According to prosecutors and court officers, the weapons are stored in the bush by any number of the boys and girls who file into 283 Adams Street daily to stand trial, to be sentenced or to be ordered into the custody of a parent or guardian.


New Jerseyans Learned the Hard Way About Cutting Taxes; A Levy on Vacant Lots
To the Editor:
In "Promises and Deficits" (column, Oct. 19), Bob Herbert notes the ominous implications for New York City in the income tax cuts proposed by George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor of New York.
Mr.
Herbert quotes City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone: "If you're going to cut the personal income tax, you're going to have to make it up with real estate taxes and sales tax increases. Those are the only other broad-based taxes."


Mideast Fanfare for President Clinton


A Passive Faust Goes To the Devil Slowly
Marionettes, dolls and pieces of clay have never seemed as sinister and surreal as they do in the films of the brilliant Czech animator Jan Svankmajer.
His shorts, many evoking Poe or Kafka, bring the menace of the subconscious to life, and his extraordinary feature "Alice" depicts an eerie wonderland darker than any Lewis Carroll dared.
His new feature, "Faust," combines his usual mix of animated elements with a great deal of live action to tell an updated version of the old devilish story; the result will probably be more intriguing to Svankmajer cultists than to newcomers.
Mr.
Svankmajer's Faust (Petr Cepek) is a dour-looking man who lives in today's Prague and is first seen walking out of a subway.
He is handed a map with a large red mark on it, and eventually follows the directions to a ramshackle building that conceals an abandoned dressing room.
There he puts on Faust's costume, begins reading from a script of Goethe's play and finds himself in the middle of a peculiar experience that is part real, part theatrical.


15 More Arrested In Plane Ticket Scam
Heidi Travel Plus, a travel agency on Austin Street in the Forest Hills section of Queens, has gone out of business, but not before helping to book one final group tour.
Destination: Federal Court in Brooklyn.
Participants: travel agents, brokers and others accused of a ticket-fraud scheme that has cost airlines an estimated $20 million, according to the people who set up Heidi Travel.


Transcript at Rabbi's Trial Is Interpreted in Two Ways
An ultra-Orthodox rabbi accused of having kidnapped a Jewish teen-ager said he would pay $10,000 for the youth's mother to give up custody of the boy, according to a secretly recorded conversation presented as evidence at his trial.
The prosecution in the Brooklyn trial holds that the transcript of the conversation shows that the rabbi, Shlomo Helbrans, and his wife, Malka, criminally assisted in the disappearance of the teen-ager.
The boy, Shai Fhima Reuven, vanished in April 1992 after his mother sent him for bar mitzvah instruction to a Brooklyn yeshiva that the rabbi ran.
He was 13 when he disappeared and is now 15; he did not resurface until last February.


No Headline
"It would be a wrecking ball, not renovation crews that the city would be bringing here if it were not for us. You can't neglect buildings the way these were and expect to come back years later and to turn them into housing again." SAM SMITH, a New York City squatter.  [ B3:2. ]


Sports of The Times; What to Do With Sudden Fortunes?
HIS timing was usually perfect on the ice.
Bryan Trottier could swoop in behind a vulnerable opponent, plant a vicious elbow in his back and deliver a soft pass to Mike Bossy.
Goal, Islanders.
Ice was his element.
He was playing a game he had learned on the ponds and rinks of Saskatchewan.
But it was much harder to read a zoning board than a zone defense, much harder to read the market than a two-on-one advantage.


In Moscow, Differences On Oil Spill
Russian officials today had differing and sometimes conflicting accounts of a major oil spill from a pipeline in the Russian Arctic republic of Komi, but they agreed that the main damage occurred more than a month ago, that a cleanup was under way, and that the spill was considerably smaller than American officials said on Monday.
"The Komi local authorities assert that they are taking all necessary measures to eliminate the consequences," said Vera A. Lubyako, an aide to the Deputy Minister for Environmental Protection and Natural Resources.
She said officials from various ministries were traveling to Usinsk.


Giuliani and Cutbacks: How Much Will Voters Bear?
The sweeping new reductions in municipal government proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday were praised by fiscal monitors as another large step toward bringing the city's finances into structural balance.
But the question that quickly emerged was, how long will such cutting remain politically sustainable?
Faced with a $1.1 billion gap in the city budget that was enacted four months ago, Mr.
Giuliani acted swiftly, outlining a new round of cuts that on top of those already enacted, amount to the deepest since the fiscal crisis of the 1970's.
And for the most part, the monitors said, he relied on 5,300 new work-force reductions and on program cuts, avoiding the kinds of gimmicks and one-time asset sales that can help close an immediate budget gap but do not provide any continuing savings.


Benefit for British
The Hanover Band, a period-instrument ensemble from Britain, is to present a benefit concert on Tuesday at 7:30 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
Roy Goodman is to conduct the 74-piece orchestra in performances of Beethoven's Third Symphony ("Eroica"), Weber's Clarinet Concerto No. 2 (with Colin Lawson, soloist) and Schumann's Fourth Symphony.
The concert is to benefit the Royal Society for Nature Conservation.
Tickets are $6 to $35.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Foundation Health Corp.(FH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Fred Lester, fullback, to the practice squad.
Baseball  National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Announced that Eddie Lyons, major league advance scout, and Marv Foley, bullpen coach, will not be offered contracts for the 1995 season.
NEW YORK METS -- Claimed Bill Spiers, infielder, off waivers from the Milwaukee Brewers.


Foster Wheeler Corp.(FWC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Light Source To Replace Many Bulbs
A new type of energy-efficient, long-life lighting developed by a Maryland company with support from the Energy Department may allow the replacement of hundreds of floodlight bulbs with just a few of the new units.
The technology uses microwave energy to produce white light similar to that emitted by the sun.
The microwaves excite the element sulfur, which is combined with an inert gas in a golf-ball-sized bulb.
Unlike conventional light bulbs, the new units have no electrodes inside to burn out, the most common form of lamp failure.


Cadbury Seeks Control of Dr Pepper
Like an eager suitor pursuing a reluctant maiden, Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C. announced yesterday that it had intensified its courtship of Dr Pepper/Seven-Up Companies.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Cadbury, the purveyor of Schweppes, Canada Dry, Crush, Sunkist, Mott's and A&amp; W root beer brands that is based in London, said it had talked with Dr Pepper about taking control of the company, which is based in Dallas and is the third-largest United States maker of soft drinks.


Bryn Terfel in an All-German Recital
The Welsh bass-baritone Bryn Terfel rode into New York on a wave of publicity based largely on advance word from Europe, where he has been patiently building his career for the last four years, and from the Santa Fe Opera and the Ravinia Festival, where he made his first American appearances.
He arrived with a double stamp of approval from James Levine, who brought the 28-year-old singer to the Metropolitan Opera for his debut as Figaro last week and was the accompanist for his first New York recital on Monday evening at Alice Tully Hall.
These performances were certainly the most heralded vocal debuts of the season, which is not to say that unheralded ones won't prove equally important.
Yet during intermission, and even before the recital, some in the crowded lobby murmured gravely about early signs of vocal burnout.
That is a legitimate concern, of course, particularly for a young singer who is being urged to take on heavy Wagnerian roles.
Still, in an ideal world a new singer might be given a couple of seasons of grace before this kind of talk gets started.
As it is, the line between art and blood sport is thinner than is commonly admitted.


MGM Grand Inc.(MGG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Harry Simmons, 51; Designed Housing For the Inner City
Harry Simmons Jr., the founder of Simmons Architects and an associate architect for the AT&amp;T Building in Manhattan, died on Sunday in a plane crash in Massachusetts.
He was 51 and lived in Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Mr.
Simmons was known primarily for designing and rehabilitating lower- and middle-income housing that addressed the social needs of the inner city.
Often, this meant keeping residential projects low to the ground, organized around a courtyard, with communal spaces and amenities to foster a sense of social cohesion.


Student Accused in Stabbing Says He Acted in Self-Defense
A lawyer for the 17-year-old student charged with fatally stabbing another student at Mount Vernon High School on Monday said today that his client had acted in self-defense after being attacked by the victim and several other students in a hallway.
But the Mount Vernon Police Chief, Michael J. Craparo, said it was not clear whether the victim, Shebule Jackson, had been one of at least four youths who had accosted the suspect, Hopeton Minott.


Executive Changes
AMSCO INTERNATIONAL INC., Pittsburgh, appointed Daniel P. Barry president and chief executive and Frank DeFazio chairman.
INTERSTATE/JOHNSON LANE, Charlotte, N.C., named James H. Morgan, its president and chief operating officer, to be its chief executive.


Myron S. Malkin Is Dead at 70; Designed Space Shuttle Program
Dr.
Myron S. Malkin, a physicist who was the first director of the space shuttle program and a former Defense Department official, died on Monday at a hospital in Bethesda, Md.
He was 70 and lived in Bethesda.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Kemper Corp.(KEM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


County's Charter Revision In Peril, Despite Wide Favor
Despite bipartisan support for a new Nassau County charter, the outcome of a Nov. 8 referendum on the proposal is a tossup, political and civic leaders say.
Because of the tight race for governor, officials say, there is little interest in local races this year, let alone the referendum.


UConn Women's Player Quits After Arrest
A player on the Connecticut women's basketball team quit school yesterday, two days after she and a member of the men's team were arrested in an early morning shoving match on the Storrs campus.
SUE MAYO, 19, a sophomore from Montgomery, N.Y., said she decided to return home and re-evaluate her academic and athletic options.
Mayo and RUDY JOHNSON, 21, were arrested by the campus police early Sunday outside Johnson's dormitory room.
A police report said a "verbal dispute escalated to a physical pushing match."


York Intl.(YRK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Northern Telecom Ltd.(NT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mr. London, In Deep Mud
Even in the tense final weeks of an election campaign, it is not too much to ask that candidates and their supporters observe at least minimum standards of fair play.
Herb London, the Republican candidate for New York State comptroller, sinks beneath that minimum with a new television commercial that continues his campaign's effort to portray H. Carl McCall as anti-Semitic.
The offensive ad has not yet run, but the financially pressed London campaign has chosen to release it to news organizations.
It opens with huge white letters on a black background: "Kill the Jews?" Mr.
McCall, his opponent and the incumbent Comptroller, is then shown in black-and-white film slightly speeded up to create a sinister image, reinforced by the superimposed statement, "Carl McCall lies."


Tosco Corp.(TOS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cancer Care at H.M.O.'s: Do Limits Hurt?
AS more and more Americans get their medical care through health maintenance organizations, a debate has developed over the quality of care cancer patients may be receiving if they are H.M.O. members.
While some experts suggest that when H.M.O. patients are restricted to the group's own doctors they may not get the best possible care, other studies and experts interviewed say that being treated at a cancer center may often not be in the patient's best interest.
They say care at a cancer center often involves unproved or experimental treatment that may or may not affect the patient's chances for survival or quality of life.


If You're a Victim, Could That Be Your Own Fault?
The camera's affection for victims has been evidenced on every sort of show over the years, from made-for-television hankie soakers to talk fests featuring dysfunctionals.
The reiterated message is that everybody is hurting and needs help.
Viewers have learned that someone or something else is to be blamed for any action, however revolting, and experts have come through with fancily named traumas to suit the case at hand, be it murder or addiction or just plain nastiness.
Now comes evidence that the pendulum is swinging.
Last week the NBC "Nightly News" carried segments under the title "A Nation of Victims" that directed attention to what a reporter called the "not my fault" syndrome.
And tonight, with "The Blame Game: Are We a Country of Victims?," ABC News goes in for outright victim-bashing.


Hartford Steam Boiler Inspection &amp; Insurance Co.  (HSB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  WHITHER NUCLEAR CHINA?
China is the third-largest nuclear power in terms of explosive strength, but without a visible enemy it is wrestling with choices about the future of and funding for its nuclear program.
A10  CLINTON IN CAIRO  President Clinton landed in Egypt as he began his Middle East tour by visiting the tomb of Anwar el-Sadat, the Egyptian leader killed by Muslim radicals.
A8


GREAT COOKS: Jean-Jacques Rachou; A Quiet Chef Is Mentor to A Generation
THE stocky, smiling man who answered the door of his midtown apartment wearing a T-shirt, tan pants and jogging shoes was hardly recognizable as Jean-Jacques Rachou, the punctilious, taciturn owner and chef of La Cote Basque, Manhattan's palatial homage to classic French cuisine.
Mr.
Rachou, 58, temporarily left his kitchen and staff of 50 to prepare a lunch for four at his home recently.
He was assisted by his son, Didier, a tall, scallion-thin, 25-year-old professional guitarist with shoulder-length brown hair.


Endorsement? Pataki Seeks Other Topics
Campaigning in the heart of Giuliani country, State Senator George E. Pataki worked hard yesterday to change the subject from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's newest strength -- his endorsement by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani -- to one of his oldest vulnerabilities -- his passionate opposition to the death penalty.
At stops in Staten Island, Borough Park, Bensonhurst and Nassau County, Mr.
Pataki played down the dramatic endorsement of the Democratic Governor by the Republican Mayor, never diverting from a simple, scripted response that he, like Mayor Giuliani, would bring change to government.
And whenever possible, he said that what he really wanted to talk about was the death penalty, specifically Mr.
Cuomo's refusal to allow Oklahoma to execute Thomas Grasso, who had killed people in both states and has said he wants to die.
Mr.
Cuomo has insisted that state law requires that Mr.
Grasso serve his 20-year-to-life sentence in New York before being extradited.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ENVIROTEST SYSTEMS CORP., Phoenix, a vehicle emissions testing company, said the State of Ohio had approved two 10-year contracts expected to be worth about $157 million.
HUGHES AIRCRAFT CO., Los Angeles, said its radar system unit had won a $152 million contract from the McDonnell Douglas Corp., St.
Louis, to upgrade the APG-63 radar for the F-15.


Graham Symposium This Week in Michigan
A four-day symposium on Martha Graham is to be held this week at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor.
Called "In the American Grain: The Martha Graham Centenary Festival," and presented by the University Musical Society, the event tomorrow through Sunday is to examine the choreographer's career and collaborations.
It is to feature exhibitions, seminars, films, symphony concerts and dance performances.
Sculptors who worked with Graham will be represented in exhibitions of sets by Isamu Noguchi and drawings by Alexander Calder.
Claire Bloom will be the host of a special program on Sunday, the 50th anniversary of the premiere of "Appalachian Spring." Aaron Copland's score, which was commissioned by the Library of Congress, will be discussed by Wayne Shirley, music specialist at the Library.


Empire District Electric Co.  (EDE,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


INSIDE
China's Nuclear Future
China must make decisions about the financing and shape of its nuclear arms program in the absence of a strategic enemy.
Page A10.
Duel of Endorsements
Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia and Oliver L. North engage in a battle of endorsements.
Page A25.
Cone Wins Cy Young
David Cone of Kansas City edged the Yankees' Jimmy Key for American League pitching honors.
Page B15.


Little Country School Copes With Change
The Cabot School does not look like much.
The ventilation system doesn't ventilate.
The furniture is frayed.
Every week, the custodian makes a trip behind the white clapboard school to make sure the septic tank is working.
But when all 18 seniors graduate from the public school of 248 students in this hamlet of dairy farms deep in the Green Mountains, each will get a full page in the yearbook.


OFF THE PODIUM WITH: Rachael Worby; In Private Life, She's a First Lady
BY the light of a full moon, Rachael Worby is flying over the mountains and villages of West Virginia from one life to another.
It is nearly midnight, and she is traveling with her husband in his sleek state-owned plane.
She is still dressed in her sweat-drenched work clothes, the baggy black wool pants suit that she wore earlier in the evening to conduct the Wheeling Symphony Orchestra.
Now, she is en route to Charleston, where she lives in a palatial red brick house with a brass plaque on the front door that reads "Governor's Mansion."
A tiny, bone-thin woman with big green eyes and dark brown hair down to her waist, Ms.
Worby has a unique combination of job titles: symphony conductor and First Lady of a state.
Born and raised in Nyack, N.Y., she grew up in Carnegie Hall, knowing, she says, that "I wanted to be Leonard Bernstein." Four years ago she married Gaston Caperton, the Governor of West Virginia.
Governor Caperton shocked many of his constituents with a First Lady who, he says, "does not have teas: she has more important things to do."


Giuliani's Move Dismays Limbaugh
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's endorsement of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo received a blistering review in one quarter today.
Rush Limbaugh used a large part of his radio broadcast to consider the implications of the Giuliani endorsement.
He said it was particularly galling that Mr.
Guiliani's move was being described, in a New York Times editorial and elsewhere, as putting principle above partisanship.


Vatican Establishes 'Stable and Official Relations' With P.L.O.
Seeking broader influence in the Holy Land, the Vatican today established a form of diplomatic relations with the Palestine Liberation Organization to balance its ties with Israel.
But, in setting up what it called "permanent and official" relations with the P.L.O., the Vatican withheld gestures that might have been deemed by Israel to constitute recognition of a Palestinian state.


Gary Larson's Creatures Off the Printed Page
With Disney's "Lion King" on its way to being the biggest moneymaker -- $1 billion over all -- in Hollywood history, the entertainment industry is envisioning a Golden Age of Animation.
Beware of producers looking for a golden anything.
But there's no doubt that the animation scene on television these days is glistening with vitality.
The newest welcome entry: Gary Larson.
Joining a substantial list of print-press cartoonists venturing into animation (see: Matt Groening and "The Simpsons"), Mr.
Larson is, as it happens, planning to run his last cartoon panel of "The Far Side" on Jan. 1.
Fans here and abroad are grieving.
Mr.
Larson's dark and bizarre world of cowboys and hunters, cows and insects, provides a unique take on contemporary anxiety and lunacy.
On CBS at 8:30 tonight, "Tales From the Far Side" is being offered as a Halloween special, but Mr.
Larson's peculiar vision defies neat categories.


A Maverick Ups the Ante On Loyalty
Since Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's surprise endorsement of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, politicians have been debating how the Republican Mayor's maverick act might affect him in his own party.
But there was virtual unanimity yesterday on a related question: What does this do to the Democrats who might run against him in 1997?


Galoob (Lewis) Toys (GAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.63
4.72
3.03
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.02
5.07
3.07
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.49
5.51
3.17
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.85
7.84
5.38
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.04
8.04
5.98
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.87
8.86
7.02
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.82
6.74
5.43
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Wide Impact, From Soup Kitchens to Recycling; Social Services
The new round of budget cuts proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani would in large and small ways affect nearly every agency of city government.
Here are the agencies that will endure the biggest cuts.
At the Department of Social Services, the Mayor proposes a wide array of budget cuts, reductions in personnel, consolidations and shifts of some services from the city to private companies and the state and Federal governments.
Under the Mayor's proposal, Social Services would be cut by $103 million for the current fiscal year, with a reduction of 99 positions.


Magnetek Inc.(MAG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Maxicare Health Plans Inc.(MAXI,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In America; Throwing a Curve
In Montclair, N.J., where I grew up in the 1950's and 60's, there was an elderly woman named Mildred Maxwell who would greet the periodic outbursts of segregationists and other racial provocateurs with the angry and scornful comment, "There isn't a hell hot enough for that man and his ideas."
Mrs.
Maxwell comes to mind whenever I think (angrily and scornfully) about Charles Murray and his book "The Bell Curve," a scabrous piece of racial pornography masquerading as serious scholarship.


Strictly a Spectator


As China Upgrades Its Nuclear Arsenal, It Debates Need for Guns vs. Butter
In the next few months, as American and Russian reconnaissance satellites watch, China's nuclear weapons agency will lower a hydrogen bomb into an 1,800-foot shaft beneath the Gobi Desert.
Then, at the most politically opportune moment, the order will go out to detonate it.
Like one exploded earlier this month, the warhead may be the prototype for China's new submarine-launched ballistic missile.
Or it may be a miniaturized warhead that could be bolted to China's first multiple-warhead missile able to reach Russian and American cities.


A Significant Stop in Syria
The official reason for President Clinton's trip to the Middle East is to witness today's signing of the Israel-Jordan peace treaty.
But the intriguing stop will be the meeting tomorrow in Damascus with Syria's President, Hafez al-Assad.
White House officials see the treaty signing as a chance to lift the President out of the gloom of a frustrating midterm election campaign and emphasize his recent foreign policy successes in Haiti, North Korea and Iraq.
If he can somehow manage to add substance in Syria to ceremony on the Israel-Jordan border, he can improve his Presidential image as well as the prospects for Mideast peace.


Western Atlas Inc.(WAI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Class Notes
Craig Leonard has seen the future of higher education, and it looks like a computer-generated, lemon-colored Life Saver in a hula skirt dancing under a spotlight to tropical bongos.
Well, that is the way it looks to the lucky artiste-entrepreneurs lazing in the sun at the Ringling School of Art and Design in Sarasota.


Blazers' Robinson Calls Off His Holdout
CLIFFORD ROBINSON rejoined the Portland Trail Blazers yesterday and said his 11-day holdout was worth it, even though he didn't get the contract extension he wanted.
The All-Star forward decided to return after meeting with the Blazers' owner, PAUL ALLEN, on Monday at Allen's home in Seattle.
"We just aired our differences," Robinson said.
"Both sides had to compromise, and we came up with something good to get me back here."


WHX Corp.(WHX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kodak, With Net Off 31%, Sees Cutbacks
The Eastman Kodak Company, still struggling to cut its operating costs, reported a 31 percent decline in its third-quarter earnings yesterday and said more cutbacks were coming.
The report, released before the stock market opened, sent Kodak's shares falling $1.50 in early trading, but they recovered later to close at $48, up 25 cents on the day.


Seaboard Corp.(SEB,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 10


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday about President Clinton's campaign appearance in Seattle misspelled the surname of a Congressional candidate in some copies.
She is Harriet Spanel.


Protective Life Corp.(PL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A listing in the Benefits column on Sunday about a fund-raiser for the Hudson Riverkeeper Fund, to take place this evening at the Architects and Designers Building, 150 East 58th Street, misstated the time.
The event starts at 6:30.


Owners Reject Velarde's Free Agency Bid
RANDY VELARDE joined a Yankee teammate, JIM ABBOTT, on two lists yesterday: the list of 111 players who have filed for free agency and the list of 11 players whom the clubs have rejected because, the clubs say, they don't have sufficient service time.
Velarde was among the 22 players who declared themselves free agents yesterday, but the owners' Player Relations Committee promptly rejected him and ALVARO ESPINOZA, formerly of the Yankees and most recently with Cleveland.


International Specialty Products Inc.(ISP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BMC West Corp.(BMCW,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In an effort to get closer to leading-edge consumers, BBDO New York goes on line.
THE information highway has a Madison Avenue on-ramp.
The New York office of BBDO Worldwide, the world's fourth-largest agency, has established a presence on the consumer on-line information service Compuserve Inc., believed to be the nation's largest, with an estimated 2.3 million paying subscribers.


Book Notes
A Hollywood Property  Publishers may have their greedy episodes, but for big money and pirhanalike action nothing beats Hollywood when it smells a competitive movie on the horizon.
Last week, word began wafting through the film world that a British writer named Nicholas Evans had written "The Horse Whisperer," a warmhearted novel about a girl who, after her leg is amputated in a horseback-riding accident, moves to Montana with her mother and the horse.
There's a romance in there, too, featuring the mother and a man who has a mysterious rapport with horses.


Companies Cited in Payoffs For Co-op Work Are Named
After months of waiting, owners of hundreds of Manhattan apartments now stand to learn who paid off the managers of their buildings to gain lucrative plumbing, renovation and hardware supply contracts.
Under court order, the Manhattan District Attorney's office yesterday made public the names of seven companies cited in the indictments in June of 48 managing agents and the guilty pleas of 37 more managing agents and companies.
They were charged with extorting kickbacks from the contracting businesses in what prosecutors called an industry-wide corruption pattern.


Oakley Expects Toe Surgery 'Sooner or Later'
Charles Oakley sat out of last night's exhibition game against the Washington Bullets after he once again raised the possibility of having surgery to correct a partly dislocated toe on his right foot.
Although an operation would be a last resort, Oakley said, "Sooner or later, I'm probably going to have to have surgery."


Interface Inc.(IFSIA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Avon Products (AVP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Franco Is Seeking a Top-of-the-Line Pact
John Franco's agent, Dennis Gilbert, has begun conversations with the Mets' general manager, Joe McIlvaine, about signing Franco to a new contract that the Franco camp hopes will make him the highest-paid reliever in the game.
Franco, who led the National League with 30 saves in the strike-shortened season, is hoping to be offered at least a two-year deal.


Market Place; Selloff in Outboard Marine Had a One-Day Head Start
Outboard Marine disappointed Wall Street yesterday.
Well, most of Wall Street, because someone evidently had advance word and jumped ship early.
Outboard, a maker of boat engines, largely for the leisure market, disclosed in a news release after the market closed on Monday that earnings for the fiscal fourth quarter, which ended on Sept. 30, would be well below estimates.


Hollywood Dreams Lure 3 Baby Bells to Ovitz
The Creative Artists Agency is expected to join with three regional Bell companies as early as next week in forming a potentially controversial venture to offer video entertainment programming for telephone customers on the East and West Coasts, movie-industry executives said today.
The venture would involve Bell Atlantic, Nynex and Pacific Telesis, who have hired Michael Ovitz, the most powerful talent agent in Hollywood, to organize an enterprise that could provide movies and programming for as many as 46 million businesses and homes.
Representatives of the agency and the three telephone companies are planning to work through the weekend to complete the deal.


Dominion Textile reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Officer Held for Larceny
A 12-year police veteran was arrested yesterday in Brooklyn and charged with petty larceny and misconduct when he took $700 that had been placed in a car a test by the police department's Internal Affairs unit.
Officer Michael Wittich, 37, assigned to the 67th Precinct in East Flatbush, was taken into custody after he took the so-called "bait money" while on patrol, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
The sergeant said that such integrity tests are becoming common.
Officer Wittich was suspended without pay.


Cogeco Inc. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Off the Menu
Restaurant Passes Hurdle
Television City, the big theme restaurant that David and William Liederman are planning to build at the corner of West 50th Street and Avenue of the Americas, has cleared a legal hurdle.
CBS Inc. had sued in Federal Court in Manhattan to prevent the Liederman brothers from calling the restaurant Television City, which is the name of the broadcasting company's production studios in Los Angeles.
Last week, Federal District Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy ruled that the company's trademark of the name protects it "in the field of television product services" but does not give it exclusive use for all markets and products.
CBS has not decided whether it will appeal the ruling.
Opening in Grand Fashion
Some restaurateurs prefer what are known in the trade as soft openings, without all the hype.
But not Barbara Smith.
The former model is inaugurating B. Smith's Union Station, the Washington branch of her restaurant at 771 Eighth Avenue (at West 47th Street), with considerable fanfare.


Uncovered Short Sales Fell on Nasdaq for Month
The bears have been backing off a bit, as uncovered short sales in Nasdaq stocks fell slightly for a second consecutive month, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
The number of shares borrowed and sold short, but not covered, edged down to 834.1 million in the month that ended on Oct. 7, from 840.5 million in the previous month.
While that decline -- eight-tenths of 1 percent -- is not big, it is the second monthly drop since short interest peaked in August at 849.2 million shares, 1.8 percent above the current level.


Births to Young Teen-Agers Decline, Agency Says
The rate of births to girls 15 to 17 years of age declined 2 percent in 1992 -- the first decline since 1986, according to data made public yesterday by the National Center for Health Statistics.
Population experts said the decline, while slight, marked an important turning point from the 27 percent increase in births to young teen-age mothers from 1986 to 1991.


A Wide Impact, From Soup Kitchens to Recycling; HOSPITALS
The new round of budget cuts proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani would in large and small ways affect nearly every agency of city government.
Here are the agencies that will endure the biggest cuts.
City money for public hospitals and clinics would be cut by an additional $107 million, but Health and Hospitals Corporation officials say they can still avoid service cuts and layoffs through increased revenues.


Excerpt From Debate By Kennedy And Romney
Following is an excerpt from the debate last night between Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, and his Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, at Faneuil Hall in Boston, as transcribed by The New York Times.
Q.
Mr.
Romney, you personally oppose abortion and as a church leader have advised women not to have an abortion.
Given that, how could you in good conscience support a law that enables women to have an abortion, and even lets the Government pay for it?
If abortion is morally wrong, aren't you responsible for discouraging it?


CHRONICLE
No trifle, this truffle: ANDY BALDUCCI, president of the food shop in Manhattan bearing his family's name, did not hesitate an instant when he got a call from GIOVANNI BASILE, the principal officer of a truffle company in Italy, announcing a monumental find: a white truffle weighing 600 grams, or 1 pound 4 ounces.
"He said: 'Balducci, I found a monster. I haven't seen it yet, but if you like, I will fly to Alba, look at it and call you back,' " Mr.
Balducci said, explaining that the annual truffle festival was taking place in Alba, Italy.
"I said, 'Of course.' He flew to Alba and said, 'It's a fact.' I said, 'Ship it.' "


Cone Over Key in Close Cy Young Contest
The battle for the Cy Young Award in the National League ended on Monday in a walkover for the unanimous choice, Greg Maddux.
But it was a different story in the American League yesterday, where David Cone and Jimmy Key -- fire and ice, power and finesse -- waged a classic duel that resulted in one of the closest races in league history.
Cone, the Kansas City Royals' right-hander, edged Key, the Yankee left-hander, by 12 points, the fifth smallest margin since the inception of the award by the Baseball Writers Association of America in 1956.


A Wide Impact, From Soup Kitchens to Recycling; SANITATION
The new round of budget cuts proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani would in large and small ways affect nearly every agency of city government.
Here are the agencies that will endure the biggest cuts.
Cuts in the Department of Sanitation budget would have a significant impact on the city's recycling program.
The Mayor's proposal would reduce money for advertising and outreach programs encouraging people to recycle their trash.


Calculating Effects of a G.O.P. Congress: More Respect or More Deadlock?
Suppose the Republicans took over Congress. What difference would it make?
To hear Democrats anxious to get their core voters out, it would mean the end of civilization as we know it, with Medicare dollars going to pay for arms spending, a leering Bob Packwood in charge of the Senate Finance Committee and the new Speaker of the House, Newt Gingrich, third in line for the Presidency.


Debate on Race and I.Q. Recalls Past Prejudice
To the Editor:
"Anti-Social Science?" (Op-Ed, Oct. 19), Jim Holt's consideration of the debate on race and I.Q. scores, is an important rebuttal to deceptive and dangerous efforts to stigmatize a large portion of our population.


Eastman Chemical Co.  (EMN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Japan Hints at Conditions on Aid for North Korea Atom Plants
Japan's Finance Minister hinted today that Tokyo might make its pledge to help pay for modern nuclear reactors in North Korea contingent on contributions by European countries.
In what could be the first of many debates over how to pay for the politically sensitive, multibillion-dollar project, Finance Minister Masayoshi Takemura argued in Parliament that Europe had an obligation to contribute to the North Korea project because Japan had helped to pay for the cleanup of the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear disaster.


Torre to Stay On as Cardinals' Manager
JOE TORRE survived a front-office shake-up with the St.
Louis Cardinals yesterday, getting another season to prove himself as manager under the team's new general manager, WALT JOCKETTY, who was hired on Oct. 14.
Torre has managed the Cardinals for four seasons, producing a second-place showing in 1991 and three third-place finishes, including a 53-61 record in the strike-shortened season this year.


Williams Cos.(WMB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Necessary Budget Pain
Confronting a real budget crisis, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has offered a new plan for more spending cuts.
The supposedly balanced budget that the New York City Council adopted barely four months ago has already developed a huge gap -- $1.1 billion according to Mr.
Giuliani, and possibly even more.
The Mayor has made impressive headway in reducing the city payroll and negotiating better contracts with city unions.
But it is time now to squeeze harder.
If the June reductions were painful, the new cuts will be more so because they carve deeper into programs that have already been trimmed.
For the first time, there is a small cut in the police budget.
Indeed, the new plan is page after page of mostly small trims, a little here, a little there.
The Mayor is headed in the right direction, but the big savings that could right the basic imbalance in the city's finances have yet to happen -- for example, major productivity gains in labor contracts or fundamental welfare reform.
Likewise, his search for programs that can be terminated is moving slowly.


Universal Corp.(UVV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Melville Corp.(MES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


A Choice and an Echo
Just when the Democrats seemed to have something going with their attacks on the Republicans' "Contract With America," the Republicans have pounced on a counterweapon -- an internal Administration memo prepared by Budget Director Alice Rivlin.
Titled "Big Choices," the memo is a list of largely unpopular options to hold the deficit in check and permit adequate financing of programs like the new national service corps, welfare reform and Head Start.
There is a fundamental difference, though, between the two documents.
The Republican contract was signed by more than 300 candidates for Congress and presented by their leader, Newt Gingrich.
The memo by Ms.
Rivlin, a distinguished economist, is a set of hypothetical choices, with no endorsement from President Clinton or anyone else.


In a Church, Lamb Images
No specific doctrine was preached in Deborah Hay's "Lamb, Lamb, Lamb, Lamb, Lamb . . .," which was offered on Friday night at St.
Mark's Church by the Danspace Project and Movement Research.
Yet this gentle ceremony for 26 dancers seemed at home in a house of worship.
Dancers kept sitting on benches at one side of the space like members of a choir.
A couple on small platforms struck poses as if they were squirmy saints.
The choreography often celebrated communal harmony, especially in passages of jolly hops and in sequences in which everyone danced in a ring and joyfully slapped their knees.
At one point, dancers darted forward, buzzing like euphoric bees.
And at the conclusion, everyone sang "Mary Had a Little Lamb."


In Giuliani Strongholds, They'll Vote For Cuomo for Their Own Reasons
Crawford Avenue in Gravesend, like many streets in southwest Brooklyn, was a block of electoral granite for Rudolph W. Giuliani when he ran for Mayor last year.
Support doesn't get much more solid, after all, than when you get 95 percent of the vote.
"It's conservative," Jimmy Holgan, a construction worker and father of three, said of his block off Coney Island Avenue.
"And sure, it's Rudy country."


A Mall Comes to a Black Township
Late last year, a group of white executives from Sanlam Properties, a leading South African development company, piled into a mini-van and rode into terra incognita, the sprawling black metropolis of Soweto.
As Jacobus A. Swanepoel, Sanlam's regional manager, recounts that journey, it is tempting to imagine a carload of cartoon capitalists with dollar signs ringing in their eyes -- ka-CHUNG, ka-CHUNG.
Soweto, impoverished, alien, oppressed, battle-torn Soweto, suddenly seemed a land of untapped opportunity.


Once-Promising Hungary Struggles With Economic Slump
Hungary, once viewed as Eastern Europe's beacon of economic hope, is facing a slump unknown since the country started on its journey toward capitalism.
Export earnings have crashed.
Inflation is on an upward trend.
And Hungary continues to have the highest per capita foreign debt in Europe.


Lincoln National Corp.(LNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Boycott Urged On Talk Show Called Racist
A coalition of New Jersey ministers and civil-rights advocates yesterday urged sponsors to boycott a talk show on WABC-AM radio whose host, they maintained, regularly makes racist remarks.
Their demands come as one advertiser, New Jersey Transit, said it was taking a second look at whether to advertise on the show.
Rick Remington, a spokesman for New Jersey Transit, the state agency that operates commuter trains and buses, said the decision "was prompted by the concerns raised by the black ministers last Friday" at the State House in Trenton.


Continental Air's Chief Steps Down
Continental Airlines said yesterday that its chief executive and vice chairman, Robert R. Ferguson, had resigned.
The carrier also reported lower-than-expected earnings for the third quarter.
The announcements underscored that the nation's fifth-largest airline had not yet stabilized itself after emerging last year from its second tour through bankruptcy.


In Brighton Beach, the Good Life Has a Russian Accent


Coleman Carrying Nets, But He Will Need Help
With three members of their starting five having spent more time in the training room than on the practice floor, the Nets are beginning to rely more and more on the All-Star forward Derrick Coleman for points, rebounds and posturing.
It is a position the Coleman welcomes as he elevates his status among the league's premier power forwards.
Yet the Nets, hampered by injury in a 1-5 preseason, may have to face a burdensome future on the court soon.


A Junior Troupe, Growing Up Fast
Jiri Kylian was not one of the founders of Netherlands Dance Theater, but as artistic director he has continued and enriched its mission as a creative organization.
Although his splendid dancers in this company have ended their run at the Opera House of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, the Next Wave Festival continues with the equally superb members of Netherlands Dance Theater 2, a junior ensemble founded by Mr.
Kylian in 1981. (The main company was formed in 1959.) The opening bill on Monday night at the academy's Majestic Theater (651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene) was perfect: three United States premieres by Mr.
Kylian and two other choreographers that were both serious and entertaining, never less than clever.
There was also a revival of the piquant 1983 "Stamping Ground," a Kylian ballet inspired by Australian aboriginal dances.


Saatchi Shifts Texaco And Star to Bates
The Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company P.L.C. said yesterday that it had transferred the account of Texaco Inc. and Star Enterprises, a refining and marketing company co-owned by Texaco and Saudi Refining Inc., from Campbell Mithun Esty to another Saatchi agency, Bates Worldwide.
The transfer, which was expected, sends to Bates what had been Campbell Mithun's largest account, with estimated United States billings of $60 million to $80 million.
William D. Dunlap, worldwide chief executive for Campbell Mithun in Minneapolis, said he did not "view it as a blow" for the agency because, "This was my idea to go into the future."


Cleanup of a Houston River Proceeds Slowly


Region Briefs; L.I. Man Convicted Of Burying Baby Alive
A Hempstead man has been convicted of helping to bury alive the 2-day-old baby girl his wife said she conceived by a former boyfriend.
A Nassau County jury deliberated for almost seven hours before finding Fortino Franco Perez, 29, guilty of second-degree murder.


How Elvis Became Elvis: A Legend's Early Years
LAST TRAIN TO MEMPHIS The Rise of Elvis Presley  By Peter Guralnick  560 pages.
Little, Brown. $24.95.
Should you seek a working hypothesis as to why Lisa Marie Presley married Michael Jackson, "Last Train to Memphis: The Rise of Elvis Presley," by Peter Guralnick, will provide one.
Aren't we always told that women seek some version of their fathers in the husbands they choose?
Lisa Marie's father had done most of his best work by the time he was 25.
He was precociously assured onstage and unnervingly childish off.
He didn't wear clothing; he wore costumes set off by lacquered hair and makeup.
He studied the tricks and manners of other stars, played with every racial style he could find (first artfully, then compulsively), and when he had done that, he went one step beyond into something that approached the extraterrestrial.


Court Bars Return of Refugees to Cuba
Responding to a lawsuit that seeks political asylum for Cuban refugees held in detention camps, a Federal district judge here barred the Clinton Administration today from turning over to Havana a group of refugees detained at the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba.
The emergency order, by Judge C. Clyde Atkins, blocked the last-minute departure of a flight carrying 23 Cuban refugees who had requested repatriation.
A hearing was scheduled for Wednesday on whether to grant a temporary restraining order to block other flights until the refugees had a chance to meet with lawyers.


For Key, 17 Victories Are Merely 17 Victories
He pitched the Yankees to a big lead in the American League East, and he led the majors with 17 victories, but when it came time to memorialize a shattered season, Jimmy Key was left without so much as an asterisk yesterday.
Never mind.
Finishing second behind David Cone of the Kansas City Royals in the annual voting for the American League Cy Young Award didn't seem to bother Key any more than the sore left pitching shoulder he shrugged off in racking up a 17-4 record with a 3.27 earned run average.


Wine Talk
IN 1966, when Leon Adams first visited the Yakima Valley in Washington State, he was amazed to find pedigreed grapes like cabernet sauvignon being blended with nondescript concords to make cheap jug wines.
Mr.
Adams, who wrote "The Wines of America," the first serious chronicle of this country's wine history, convinced some of the growers that they might make some good wines if they brought someone from California to show them how.
"Such as who?" one grower asked.


A Wide Impact, From Soup Kitchens to Recycling; CUNY
The new round of budget cuts proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani would in large and small ways affect nearly every agency of city government.
Here are the agencies that will endure the biggest cuts.
If the City University of New York is forced to absorb a midyear budget cut of $7 million, it may have to defer midyear admissions to 15,300 community college students, university officials said today.


Coastal Corp.(CGP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Howard Quirk, 70, Executive Of Chubb Family Foundation
Howard Evans Quirk, a former executive officer of the Victoria Foundation of New Jersey, one of the country's oldest and largest community-oriented philanthropies, died on Sunday at his home in Montclair, N.J.
He was 70.
The cause of death was apparently a heart attack, his family said.


Dyersburg Corp.(DBG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Personal Health; Postpartum depression: shedding light on the blues.
DIANA (who asked that her last name be withheld to protect her privacy) had a high-level position at a leading university in New York when she gave birth to her first child.
The last thing she expected was the debilitating depression that overcame her in the weeks and months after her son's birth.
Troubled by insomnia, loss of appetite, withdrawal from her friends and family, persistent sadness, anxiety, self-doubt, difficulty concentrating and even thoughts of death, she struggled to handle the responsibilities of her demanding job and care for her new baby, toward whom she felt great ambivalence.


International Shipholding Corp.(ISH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Breed Technologies Inc.(BDT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A dance review on Thursday about a performance of Hubbard Street Dance Chicago at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday misidentified a leading dancer in "Mae." She was Laura Elena Haney, not Christine Carrillo.


Frozen Food Express Industries Inc.(FFEX,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


METRO DIGEST
Mayor Giuliani proposed a second round of budget cuts that would squeeze almost every government service in New York City.
A1.
Fiscal monitors question how long such cutting can be politically sustained.
News Analysis, B5.
ENDORSEMENT?
PATAKI SHIFTS TOPICS
George E. Pataki worked hard to change the subject from Governor Cuomo's newest strength -- his endorsement by Mayor Giuliani -- to one of his oldest vulnerabilities -- his passionate opposition to the death penalty.
A1.


In a Mixed Session, Dow Drops 4.71
The stock market closed mixed yesterday as a key sale of Treasury securities indicated that short-term interest rates were headed higher.
But some soft economic data, which many traders interpreted as good for stocks and bonds, helped cushion the blow of the Treasury auction.
A modest recovery by the dollar against most other leading currencies also helped.


Clinton Arrives in Egypt on Mideast Tour
Determined to pursue what he called "new steps" toward peace in the Middle East, President Clinton touched down in the Egyptian capital early this morning, the first stop on a whirlwind trip that will take him to Israel and five Arab countries in four days.
Despite arriving at nearly 1 A.M., Mr.
Clinton began his inaugural tour of the Middle East by going directly from the airport to the tomb of Anwar el-Sadat, the Egyptian leader who was assassinated by Muslim gunmen in 1981, two years after becoming the first Arab head of state to sign a peace treaty with Israel.


Petrochemical Profits Are Helping Oil Companies
An increase in demand for petrochemicals, used in making plastics, synthetic rubber and fibers, is causing a shortage of supplies and a jump in prices.
Although the demand for chemicals historically rises during an economic recovery, the industry was taken by surprise by the sudden surge in demand during the third quarter -- and producers are now scrambling to increase production.
And for the country's big oil companies, most of which have huge chemical subsidiaries, profits from chemicals have been jumping sharply, helping to give the companies higher earnings from operations for the quarter.


GIULIANI PROPOSES $800 MILLION MORE IN SPENDING CUTS
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday proposed a second round of budget cuts that would squeeze almost every government service in New York City, from schools to hospitals to prisons, from recycling to bridge painting to food programs for the poor.
Saying the cuts would be difficult but necessary to keep the city on a course to economic recovery, Mr.
Giuliani outlined a plan to close a $1.1 billion gap that has opened in the $31.6 billion budget the Mayor and the City Council balanced just four months ago; more than $800 million of the $1.1 billion would come from cutting spending already budgeted for the city's agencies this year.


Avery Dennison Corp.(AVY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Metropolitan Diary
NOTHING unusual here: a young mother with a child in one arm and a collapsed stroller in the other descending the stairs of an Upper East Side town house.
But Deborah Ann Mitchell, passing by, stopped in her tracks when the mother and child reached the sidewalk and she heard the child call out in authoritative tones: "Taxi!"


2 Studies Find No Breast-Implant Tie to Connective-Tissue Illness
Two studies presented today found no association between silicone gel breast implants and connective-tissue disease, confirming earlier findings in smaller studies.
The leader of one of the new studies, which were presented in Minneapolis at a meeting of the American College of Rheumatology, said in a telephone interview that "women with breast implants should be somewhat reassured by these data."


A Nonexistent League Is Faced With a Real Delay
The president of the United States Soccer Federation said yesterday the anticipated spring 1995 start-up of a professional league is not definite.
"We are considering 1995," said Alan Rothenberg, in remarks relayed through a spokesman.
"We are considering 1996. We're considering 10 teams. We're considering 12 teams. Whatever is right for Major League Soccer. We've said all along we wouldn't move on until everything is absolutely right."


Giuliani Threatens to Cut Funds To Force Merger of Police Forces
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani delivered what amounted to an ultimatum to the city's transit officials yesterday, saying they had 90 days to merge the transit police with the city's Police Department or he would cut off virtually all the financing of the transit force.
In a letter to the head of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the Mayor said the city would stop making payments for the police force that patrols the city's subways as of Jan. 24.


CONSECO PURCHASE OF KEMPER IS DELAYED
Conseco Inc. said yesterday that its proposed $3.25 billion purchase of the Kemper Corporation would be delayed until next year because the company would not decide how to finance the purchase until late November.
Conseco, a Carmel, Ind., insurer, had wanted to complete the purchase of Kemper, a Chicago financial services company, by the end of the year.
It has until March 31 to conclude the deal.
Conseco said it might still sell one or more stakes in the Western National Corporation, the Bankers Life Holding Company and CCP Insurance Inc., but said the sales were not needed to acquire Kemper.
On the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, Conseco shares fell $1, to $36.25, and Kemper shares fell $1.75, to $52.625.


Kennedy and Romney Meet, And the Rancor Flows Freely
In a vivid piece of political theater, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts attacked his Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, tonight for his views on abortion, health care and Social Security.
"I am pro-choice," Mr.
Kennedy said during an exchange on abortion.
"My opponent is multiple choice."


Hunger and Dissent Stalk a Struggling Ethiopia
After two decades of war and famine, political oppression and mass killings, the recipe for restoring a shattered economy under a democratic government remains elusive here.
In the three years since rebel troops overthrew a Marxist regime and committed themselves to democratic rule, there have been measurable gains.
The government of President Meles Zenawi has cooperated with the World Bank, devalued its currency and begun to open its markets.
There is general stability and peace.


SCEcorp (SCE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


String Quartet Playing For AIDS Charities
As soon as the Tokyo Quartet finished celebrating its 20th anniversary in 1989, its players began laying plans for their 25th, this season.
They immediately decided two things.
One was that they would celebrate by playing complete Beethoven quartet cycles in several cities.
The other was that the six-concert cycle in New York, which opens tomorrow evening at Carnegie Hall, should benefit a charitable cause.
There was considerable discussion about what the cause should be, and music education programs had an early lead.
But the issue was settled in June 1991 when the group's press representative, John Dudich, committed suicide, leaving a letter saying he could no longer continue his struggle with AIDS.


Debate on Race and I.Q. Recalls Past Prejudice; No Evolutionary Reason
To the Editor:
Jim Holt's article on "The Bell Curve" (Op-Ed, Oct. 19) made a number of important biological points about race and intelligence.
His perspective becomes even richer if we consider the context of our evolutionary history.


Emphesys Financial Group Inc.(EFG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In a Bar, the Patrons Watch the Sport of Boston Politics
In the name of good conversation, the television at Doyle's bar and restaurant is almost never turned on.
The exceptions have been Presidential inaugurations, the World Series (without the sound), the Challenger shuttle explosion, the assassination of John F. Kennedy -- and, tonight, the debate between Senator Edward M. Kennedy and Mitt Romney.
"This is like Halley's Comet!" said James Killilea, the Boston Democratic Election Commissioner, watching the screen at Doyle's as the much-anticipated faceoff began.
"Good debates don't come around that often. There was the J.F.K.-Nixon debate in 1960. There was the Eddie McCormack-Ted Kennedy debate in 1962; that was dynamite."


World News Briefs; India Blocks Departure Of Kashmiri Mission
Three civilian leaders from Kashmir were forced today to cancel a visit to the United Nations and Washington to argue their case for political negotiations to end a secessionist war in Kashmir, after they were denied passports by India.
The three -- Bahauddin Farooqi, former chief justice of the Jammu and Kashmir High Court; Mian Abdul Qayoum, president of the Kashmir Bar Association, and Noor Ul Hassan, head of the Kashmir Forum for Human Rights and Civil Liberties -- were part of a delegation headed by Abdul Gani Lone, who holds valid travel documents.


Corrections
A transcript of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's statement endorsing Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo was incomplete yesterday.
The omitted passage appears today on page B6.


Enerflex Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Genicom Corp.(GECM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


A Wide Impact, From Soup Kitchens to Recycling; POLICE
The new round of budget cuts proposed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani would in large and small ways affect nearly every agency of city government.
Here are the agencies that will endure the biggest cuts.
The Mayor has proposed cutting the Police Department's budget by $67 million -- the first cuts he has offered for the department -- but the reductions would come entirely from the ranks of civilian employees.


Again, Developers Eye a Civil War Site
To the Editor:
A tragedy is occurring at Brandy Station, Va.
Brandy Station was the site of a Civil War battle that was the largest engagement of cavalry forces in our country's history.
It would seem to reasonable people, wishing both to preserve their country's history and to honor the fallen and the principles for which they gallantly fought, that this site would be preserved.


International Recovery Corp.(INT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SCI Systems Inc.(SCIS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


3 Leaders Offer Words Of Hope for the Future
Following are excerpts from remarks yesterday by Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel, King Hussein of Jordan and President Clinton at the signing of the Israeli-Jordanian peace accord, as provided by the Federal News Service, a private transcription agency: PRIME MINISTER RABIN
From this podium, I look around and see the Arabat.
Along the horizon from the Jordanian side and the Israeli side, I see only a desert.
There is almost no life here.
There is no water, no well and not a spring -- only minefields.
Such were the relations between Israel and Jordan during the last 47 years, a desert; no one green leaf, no trees, not even a single flower.


The Breeders' Cup Attracts A Record of 126 Entrants
A record total of 126 horses were pre-entered in the seven Breeders' Cup races yesterday, with Bertrando and Best Pal paying $360,000 apiece in supplemental fees to join the stampede in the wide-open $3 million Classic.
The list includes 33 horses from Europe, but American horses will be cast in starring roles: Lure going for his third straight victory in the Mile race; Paradise Creek shooting for his ninth in 10 starts this year in the Turf race; Sky Beauty trying to outrun Heavenly Prize in the Distaff, and Flanders seeking to extend her command in the Juvenile Fillies and to welcome Wayne Lukas back as the most successful trainer in Breeders' Cup history.


Parents and Schooling
To The Home Section:
Many parents would agree that "Getting Involved in Improving Schools" (Parent &amp; Child, Sept. 22) supports the research showing that "children's success in school is very dependent on how actively involved their parents are." But you remind me that Dr.
Haim Ginott, author of "Between Parent and Child," used to say that loving parents should get out of the school business entirely.


Money Store Inc.(MONE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Holmes Says He'll Fight McCall
LARRY HOLMES will challenge OLIVER McCALL for the World Boxing Council heavyweight championship on Jan. 21, a longtime Holmes aide said yesterday.
"Larry signed for the fight on Monday, and McCall has agreed to it, I know that," the aide, DICK LOVELL, said by telephone from Holmes's offices in Easton, Pa.
Lovell said no site has been selected.
"Yes, Larry signed a contract Monday, and he's got a title shot," the promoter DON KING said by telephone from Rome, where he is attending the World Boxing Association convention.
"Oliver signed Monday, too."
Holmes, who will be 45 on Nov. 3, was W.B.C. or International Boxing Federation heavyweight champion from 1978 to 1985.
McCall won the W.B.C. title with a surprising knockout of LENNOX LEWIS on Sept. 25 in London. (AP)


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: The Incumbent, Running in the Past; Can Giuliani Chase the Musty Smell From Cuomo's Campaign?
It was the day after he had unexpectedly won the endorsement of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo was flying high -- flying as high, that is, as his wary, pensive, rather equivocal nature would let him.
"Don't shove those things in so close," he said as the photographers and reporters thrust their cameras and microphones into his face, launching one of those rugby-scrum news conferences that are the hallmark of New York City campaigns.
"You'll kill me, and just when my chances are starting to look good."


Greed Is Ushering In The Goofy Season
One time, a very long time ago, the golf season actually had a beginning and an end.
It started in January at La Costa with the Tournament of Champions and it ended in September at Akron, Ohio, with the World Series of Golf.
It was a much simpler time then.
Jack Nicklaus won everything and touring pros didn't have butlers.
"We used to get to September and put the sticks up for two months and spend time with the family," Nicklaus said.
"But it's different now."


Is Howard Really Finkelstein? Money Rides on It
Is Robert Howard really Howard Finkelstein?
A lot of investors in Mr.
Howard's Presstek Inc., would like to know.
But not even the Securities and Exchange Commission can say for sure.
And the lingering mystery has roiled a hot stock and left the S.E.C. blushing.
Investors count on the S.E.C. to weed out rogues in the universe of publicly traded companies, paying particular attention to repeat offenders.
Sometimes, though, the agency slips up through bad record-keeping or incomplete research, inadvertently setting the backdrop for confusion in the markets.


Bucharest Journal; Little Care and Less Love: Romania's Sad Orphans
In a drab dormitory, small children old enough to walk and talk grip the rails of their cribs in frustrated attempts at locomotion, silently rocking back and forth.
A playroom filled with toys, a paradise of imagination and exercise donated by foreigners, remains locked because the children's caretakers consider it too much trouble to supervise.
The caretakers, women in white uniforms, sit a few yards away in the corridor, smoking and chatting.
In one crib, the oldest child, 6-year-old Gheorghe, his hair a tousle of dark curls and his eyes wide and brown, lies on his back, occasionallymanaging to pull himself up to peer out of his little prison.
Until a few months ago, when an American volunteer visited, no one had bothered during Gheorghe's six years of institutional life to encourage him to sit or stand.
Even the volunteer's interest has not enabled him to overcome his stunted development.


Linamar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Retaliation Won't Deter Islamic Terrorists; Palestine's Boundaries
To the Editor:
You err when, in reporting on the treaty draft between Israel and Jordan (news article, Oct. 18), you describe the agreed demarcation line as following, "with small modifications, a British demarcation line between Jordan and British-mandated Palestine drawn up in 1922."


Aunt Jemima Is Least of U.S. Blacks' Worries
To the Editor:
Re "Aunt Jemima Gets a Makeover" by Brent Staples (Editorial Notebook, Oct. 19): It amazes me how some African-Americans misplace their ire on racial inequality issues and perceptions of inferiority.
As an African-born American, I cannot comprehend how the picture of a black man on a box of rice demeans my sense of being or harms my status and capability in the society.


Have Stroller, Will Exercise
IN this age of relentless exercise, it was inevitable: strollers serving as equipment for working out.
Postpartum mothers and mothers of toddlers are twisting, breathing deeply and doing deep knee bends at new exercise classes in Riverside Park, Central Park and Battery Park City.
Elizabeth Trindade, the founder of the program and a personal trainer, began to organize the classes last spring.
The sessions include about 27 exercises, most of them done while the mother holds onto the stroller bar as if holding a ballet barre.
The baby goes along for the ride, sometimes just staring, sometimes performing his or her own form of exercise, like leg raises that wind up with toes in the mouth.


Acquittal for Rabbi's Wife


Ipalco Enterprises Inc.(IPL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cruise Line Chooses Citron
Crystal Cruises, a luxury cruise line based in Los Angeles, said yesterday that it had selected Citron Haligman Bedecarre in San Francisco to handle its account, which had been at Eisaman, Johns &amp; Laws in Los Angeles since August 1993.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.
Citron Haligman was awarded the account after a two-month review that also involved Eisaman, Johns; Dailey &amp; Associates in Los Angeles, and Vitro Robertson in San Diego.
A campaign is expected to begin in January.


Michael Kasdan, 66, Producer and Potter
Michael Kasdan, a former Broadway producer and theater manager, died on Saturday at his home in Mahopac, N.Y.
He was 66.
The cause was lymphoma, said Susie Goldsmith, his cousin.


Freeport McMoran Resource Partners L.P. (FRP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Pacific Commander Praises Vietnam on M.I.A.'s
The commander of American military forces in the Pacific praised Vietnam today for its cooperation in accounting for American troops missing from the Vietnam War.
He suggested that the Vietnamese would continue to cooperate enthusiastically regardless of whether Washington established full diplomatic and trade relations with Hanoi.
The comments here by Adm.
Richard C. Macke delighted his Vietnamese hosts, who have long argued that the United States should not use the issue of missing Americans to delay normal diplomatic ties.


Ford Motor of Canada (FC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Almost 13,000 New Vehicles Are Recalled by G.M.
The General Motors Corporation is recalling almost 13,000 cars and trucks in 21 model lines to replace a faulty transmission that could cause the 1995 vehicles to break down after only a few miles on the road.
Because the defect is not safety related, the company was not required to notify the Government about its action, and did not do so.
The G.M. divisions that sell the defective cars and trucks -- Buick, Cadillac, Chevrolet, Oldsmobile and Pontiac -- are notifying owners.
G.M. believes that many of the vehicles are on dealer lots.


Cold Hearts in France
What is a country to do when it prides itself on being "a land of asylum" -- a haven for the persecuted, dedicated to human rights -- yet feels threatened by a flood of hundreds of thousands of refugees?
I am not talking about the United States but about France.
These painful questions have become urgent here, too, and the wrenching demands of conscience versus expediency have brought the Government under attack.


Acordia Inc.(ACO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hedda Nussbaum, Filing Suit, Testifies to Personal Agony
Her face still disfigured and her nose still flattened because of the many times it had been broken, Hedda Nussbaum reappeared in a Manhattan courtroom yesterday.
In a case that riveted the nation, Ms.
Nussbaum testified in 1988 against her companion, Joel Steinberg, in the fatal beating of Lisa, the 6-year-old girl they had illegally adopted.
Back then she seemed dazed and uncertain, recalling in a numbing monotone the psychological horror and physical abuse she said she and the girl had suffered.


No Headline
"The forces of terror will try to hold you back. Already they take deadly aim at the future of peace in their zeal to kill hope and keep hatred alive, they will deny all that peace can bring to your children. We cannot, we must not, we will not let them succeed." -- PRESIDENT CLINTON.  [ A12:6. ]


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Tokyo String Quartet misstated the opening date for its Beethoven concert series at Carnegie and Avery Fisher Halls.
It was last night; it is not tonight.


Agreement on Rules In Metro-North Talks
The Metro-North railroad has agreed with four unions, representing half its unionized work force, on how to negotiate with them.
The agreement, reached on Tuesday night, is meant to reduce the possibility of wildcat job actions in the next few weeks, the railroad said yesterday.


Finding on Universe's Age Poses New Cosmic Puzzle
The most accurate measurement yet of the distance to a remote galaxy has yielded a refined estimate of the rate at which the universe is expanding, bringing scientists much closer to determining one of the most fundamental and elusive numbers in cosmic theory: the age of the universe.
Astronomers who made the measurement, announced yesterday, called it a critical milestone in establishing a scale for calculating cosmic distances.
While they cautioned that it would take more observations to be sure, their findings provided persuasive support for earlier studies that, taken together, suggest that the answer may already be at hand.
The universe, they estimate, is 8 billion to 12 billion years old.


Fred Springer-Miller; Sportsman, 65
Fred Frank Springer-Miller, a former I.B.M. systems engineer who helped design the first fully computerized Olympic scoring system, for the 1964 Winter Games at Innsbruck, Austria, died on Saturday at his home in Greenville, S.C.
He was 65.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


Bar Association Starts Fund-Raising Campaign
The City Bar Association in New York yesterday announced a campaign to raise $3 million for its programs to provide legal services to the needy.
The three-year campaign, led by former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance, is part of the association's 125th-anniversary celebration next year and the centenary in 1996 of its landmark headquarters at 42 West 44th Street, between Fifth and Sixth Avenues.


Economic Scene; A deficit plan becomes the Administration's latest scandal.
ONCE again, we learn, the Clinton Administration is racked by scandal.
More haircuts on the runway?
More sports tickets for high officials, courtesy of the Tyson chicken barons?
No: the Rivlin memo.
In a confidential note to President Clinton dated Oct. 3, Alice M. Rivlin, the director of the Office of Management and Budget, provided specific options for coping with the Federal budget deficit.
Not surprisingly, they discussed what Ms.
Rivlin called "big choices" about raising taxes and slashing spending.


Giuliani Urges Fusion Vote: Cuomo on the Liberal Line
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani reiterated his endorsement of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo last night, adding the new twist of asking New Yorkers to vote for Mr.
Cuomo on the Liberal Party line.
"It will send a very strong signal that you offer independence and you offer independent, bipartisan thinking, that you can rise above party labels and show us how to come together," Mr.
Giuliani said at a Liberal Party dinner attended by both the Republican Mayor and the newly indebted Democratic Governor.


Nicolas Roussakis; Composer Was 60
Nicolas Roussakis, a composer and a founder of the American Composers Orchestra, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 60.
The cause was cancer, said Jesse Rosen, the managing director of the orchestra.


Drug-Merger Chill?
Scrutiny by the Federal Trade Commission of Eli Lilly &amp; Company's $4 billion deal to buy PCS Health Systems, the nation's biggest prescription drug benefit company, is raising questions about whether such deals make financial sense.
Lilly's decision on Tuesday to accept the commission's restrictions on PCS operations intensified doubts about the high prices that big drug manufacturers have been paying for these drug marketers, which buy drugs at discounts from the manufacturers in return for delivering large volumes through employer health plans.
And it has raised concerns that the commission will seek to put restrictions on two other deals completed in the last year.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Comeback for Agassi  Andre Agassi, blanked in the first set and down by 2-4, 15-40, in the second, produced an impressive comeback yesterday to beat Nicklas Kulti of Sweden in the second round of the Stockholm Open.
The United States Open champion, ranked eighth in the world, won by 0-6, 7-5, 6-4.
Pete Sampras, playing in his first ATP tournament since early September, struggled before beating the Czech qualifier Daniel Vacek, 7-6 (8-6), 6-1.
Seventh-seeded Michael Chang became the highest-seeded player to fall, losing by 6-4, 6-3 to Sweden's Magnus Larsson. (AP) COLLEGE FOOTBALL  A New Bowl Alliance  The Cotton and Holiday Bowls have announced an agreement that gives them access to teams from the expanded Big Eight, the Pacific-10 and the Western Athletic Conferences, as well as an opportunity to invite Notre Dame.
Under the new agreement, the Holiday Bowl, played in San Diego, will get the two teams not chosen by the Cotton Bowl, and both the Cotton Bowl and Holiday Bowl will have the option of selecting Notre Dame if it is left out of the alliance games.


Market Place G.E.C.'s chairman may be ready for battle with British Aerospace.
SOMETIME in the next few days, the General Electric Company P.L.C. of Britain is expected to make a decision that could have profound ramifications for the British military contracting industry.
Lord Weinstock, who has headed G.E.C. for 31 years and built its GEC Marconi division into the nation's second-largest military supplier, is likely to decide whether to start a hostile bid for VSEL P.L.C., a naval shipyard and Britain's leading submarine builder.
If he goes ahead with a bid -- and the betting among analysts here is that he will -- Lord Weinstock will be taking on not only VSEL, but the country's biggest arms maker, British Aerospace P.L.C.
Ultimately, some industry executives and analysts said, the wrangling over VSEL could lead G.E.C. to make a bid for British Aerospace itself.


It's a Grim Message: Dummies Fail More Often
THE BELL CURVE Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life  By Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray.  845 pages.
The Free Press. $30.
Charles Murray, best known for attacking welfare, and Richard Herrnstein, an experimental psychologist who argued that intelligence is largely in the genes, built public careers as the dark angels of social science.
And with the publication of "The Bell Curve," their reputations have apparently been secured: The 845-page tract has driven liberal editorial writers to rug-chewing and led the editors of The New Republic to elicit 17 separate rebuttals.


Female Fighter Pilot Killed in Crash Off California
One of the Navy's first female combat pilots was killed in a training accident off Southern California on Tuesday, the Navy said today.
The pilot, Lieut.
Kara S. Hultgreen, 29, of San Antonio, crashed into the sea as she was preparing to land her F-14 Tomcat on the aircraft carrier Abraham Lincoln.
The F-14's radar-intercept officer, Lieut.
Matthew P. Klemish, ejected and was rescued by Navy helicopters.
Her body has not been recovered.


Block Drug Co.  (BLOCA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
Twenty-five years ago, they stood trial together in the Chicago Seven conspiracy trial.
Tomorrow evening, most of the Chicago Seven -- DAVID DELLINGER, JOHN FROINES, TOM HAYDEN and LEE WEINER -- will be together again, along with BOBBY SEALE, one of the original eight defendants, and their lawyers WILLIAM M. KUNSTLER and LEONARD WEINGLASS.
They will reflect on the case in a panel to be moderated by ARTHUR KINOY, another of their lawyers.
The Chicago Sevenwere found guilty of conspiracy to incite riots at the 1968 Democratic National Convention, but the verdicts were overturned on appeal.
The other three defendants were Abbie Hoffman, who died in 1989; Rennie Davis, and Jerry Rubin.


METRO DIGEST
BUDGET COUNTS ON HELP FROM ALBANY Buried throughout the plan Mayor Giuliani put forward to close a $1.1 billion gap in New York City's budget is what amounts to a sizable bill to Albany -- payable to City Hall.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  PANELS APPROVE INVESTIGATIVE AGENCY Defying the wishes of Mayor Giuliani, two City Council committees passed a bill that would establish a permanent agency with full investigative powers to monitor corruption in the Police Department.
B3.


CHRONICLE
When Andrei Sakharov , the Soviet-era dissident nuclear physicist and Nobel Peace Prize winner, came to the United States in 1988, he was invited to the home of RONALD S. LAUDER, and the two men had their picture taken together.
"That meeting changed my life, and I keep the picture on my desk," Mr.
Lauder, the cosmetics company president, said yesterday after a news conference announcing that he has been named chairman of the Andrei Sakharov Archives at Brandeis University in Waltham, Mass.
"When people ask me questions dealing with moral issues, I often look at the picture and wonder what he would say."


Cuba Takes Another Step in Opening Up Its Economic System
In another move to open up its devastated economy, Cuba announced today that it would allow the free sale of a wide range of materials and consumer products that have until now been tightly controlled by the state.
In a decree signed by President Fidel Castro and published in today's editions of the Communist Party newspaper Granma, the Government said it would create a network of retail markets for handicrafts, left-over industrial supplies and surplus products made by state companies.


Champion Enterprises Inc.(CHB,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Halloween: A Big Boom In Boos
DAVID FOX, a financial analyst, began collecting recipes for edible dirt in his office at J. P. Morgan several weeks ago, part of his enthusiastic preparation for his daughter's Halloween party on Saturday.
Mr.
Fox, 43, of Chappaqua, N.Y., plans to make his haunted basement spookier than ever for 9-year-old Emily and her friends, and also to render it "a more tactile experience," he said, which will include the eating of fake dirt.


Usery Talks With Players
BILL USERY JR., the Federal mediator recruited to work on the baseball strike, now 11 weeks old, held a session with the players' union at its offices in New York yesterday.
"It's in the nature of the process not to discuss what was discussed so I won't," said Eugene Orza, the union's No. 2 official." Nine more players filed for free agency, raising the total to 120, plus the 11 whose status is in dispute because of 52 days lost from the strike. Among those filing yesterday were pitchers BOB WELCH and BOBBY WITT of Oakland, and first baseman JOHN KRUK of Philadelphia.


Norfolk Southern (NSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Two Chief Rivals in the Battle Over DNA Evidence Now Agree on Its Use
Two scientific experts who have been on opposite sides in the battle over the use of DNA analysis as court evidence say in a jointly written article that their disputes have been resolved and that the technique should now be regarded as generally acceptable.
The two experts are Dr.
Eric S. Lander, a molecular biologist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who has testified against the use of DNA typing -- also called DNA fingerprinting -- as courtroom evidence, and Dr.
Bruce Budowle, a chief scientist for the Federal Bureau of Investigation who has argued that the technique is reliable enough to be so used.
The two former opponents now write that "the DNA fingerprinting wars are over."


Singer Co.(SEW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Treasury Prices Decline Ahead of G.D.P. Report
Prices of Government securities were lower in choppy trading yesterday, despite an auction of five-year notes and a durable-goods report that were both slightly better than expected.
Both the economic report and the auction sparked small rallies that were soon cut short by investors waiting to unload securities ahead of the report on third-quarter gross domestic product on Friday.
Market investors were selling on every uptick of 5/32 or 6/32 in bond prices, traders said.


Southern Co.(SO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Timken Co.(TKR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2 Council Committees Pass Bill to Create Police Agency
Defying the wishes of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, two City Council committees passed a bill yesterday that would establish a permanent agency with full investigative powers to monitor corruption in the Police Department.
The bill, which largely follows the recommendations of the Mollen Commission's report on police corruption, would authorize the agency to conduct independent investigations and to subpoena witnesses.
Mr.
Giuliani said he would wait to see what action the full Council took before deciding whether to veto the bill.
But aides said he would probably veto the bill if it is approved in its present form, with subpoena and investigative powers.


GOING HOME WITH: Heather Whitestone; Placing the Person Ahead of the Crown
AT the Summit Club, here in her hometown, Miss America has been on her feet for almost two hours, smiling, shaking hands and reading lips.
Heather Whitestone, the first Miss America with a disability (she lost her hearing after a bout of Hemophilus influenza at the age of 18 months), could teach the ramshackle House of Windsor a thing or two about dignity and grace.
But doesn't she ever get to sit down?
Apparently not.
"They just cut that part of their brain out and don't think about it till they get home," purrs an official of the Miss Alabama Pageant.
And she's one of the milder middle-aged belles running this show.
Welcome home, Heather.


Tambrands Inc.(TMB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


And Capping All, Heat to Remember
First of all, there was the desert heat. And second and third of all, for that matter.
It was so fierce -- in the high 90's -- that it almost had a life of its own at the treaty-signing ceremony today on the Israeli-Jordanian border.


In 1994, What Draws Eyes? The Megaprize
At 5 o'clock tomorrow afternoon, before a private assemblage of formally dressed guests, a sculptor, a painter, a composer and an architect will be ushered into the presence of Prince Hitachi of Japan and his wife, Princess Hanako, who will present each of them with a medal and a check for roughly $150,000.
The ceremony, held in the Meiji Memorial Hall in Tokyo and filled with as much protocol as a royal wedding, will mark the fifth time the Praemium Imperiale, or Imperial Prize, has been conferred on a group of cultural luminaries by the imperial family of Japan.
In truth, the imperial family does not actually give the prize, but only presents it on behalf of the Japan Art Association.
And the Japan Art Association is not the real maker of the prize; it is acting on behalf of Fujisankei Communications, a vast Japanese media conglomerate whose chief executive conceived the prize in 1988 and which has been paying the bill, estimated at roughly $3 million a year, to keep it going since its first awards were given in 1989.


Giuliani Budget Expects Albany To Pay a Greater Share of Costs
Buried throughout the plan Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani put forward to close a $1.1 billion gap in New York City's budget this year is what amounts to a sizable bill to Albany -- payable to City Hall.
Mr.
Giuliani's plan calls on the state to pick up millions of dollars in costs of programs that the city would cut, some large and some small.
He also wants the state to continue paying its share of programs that are financed jointly by the city and state -- even if the city cuts its share.


Corrections
A brief sports article on Tuesday about the refund policies of hockey teams in the New York area referred incorrectly to single-game tickets for the Islanders.
Returns for refunds must be made at least seven business days in advance of the rescheduled game, not up to 48 hours in advance.


Suit to Block Emission Rules Is Dismissed
A Federal District Court judge in Syracuse has thrown out a lawsuit by the Big Three auto manufacturers to block New York State's adoption of the California low-emission vehicle rules.
New York now requires that all new cars sold within the state meet California's tough emission standards.
The Ford Motor Company, General Motors and the Chrysler Corporation complained that because New York has not also adopted California's strict standards on gasoline, if they are forced to meet the stricter emissions standards they would have to manufacture a car especially for use in New York.
Under the Federal Clean Air Act, other states may adopt California's rules or use the Federal rules, but may not require a third option.


Aflac Inc.(AFL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ford Profits Up Sharply In Quarter
With car and truck sales climbing in the United States and manufacturing costs falling in Europe, the Ford Motor Company today reported that its earnings had more than doubled to $1.12 billion for the three months ending Sept. 30.
Vigorous demand for products like the Windstar mini-van, Mustang sports coupe and four-wheel-drive Explorers enabled Ford to cut marketing costs in the quarter, fattening its profit on every vehicle sold.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  ISRAEL AND JORDAN SIGN TREATY  Israel and Jordan agreed to peace, settling land and water disputes, agreeing to cooperate in tourism, trade and other areas, and pledging that neither would let its land be used for attacks on the other.
A1


Corrections
A brief report in the Music Notes column on Tuesday about Placido Domingo's new post as principal guest conductor at the Los Angeles Music Center Opera misstated his immediate performance and recording plans with the company.
He, not the baritone Vladimir Chernov, is to sing the title role in the production of Verdi's "Otello" scheduled for May; Mr.
Domingo will not conduct it.
He is to conduct the company's orchestra and Mr.
Chernov in an aria concert to be recorded by Sony Classical.


Alfred Kassab, 73; Helped Indict Killer
Alfred Kassab, the Long Island man whose persistence led to the indictment and eventual conviction of his son-in-law, Dr.
Jeffrey R. MacDonald, in the 1970 murder of the doctor's wife and two young daughters, died on Monday at his retirement home in Rockledge, Fla.
He was 73.
The cause was emphysema, his family said.


Equitable of Iowa Cos.  (EIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No. 2 Commissioner Of Police Resigns
First Deputy Police Commissioner David W. Scott, one of the highest-ranking black officials in the Giuliani administration, said yesterday that he would retire at year-end to spend more time with his family.
"There comes a time when the phone calls in the middle of the night have to stop," Mr.
Scott, a well-liked and respected career officer, said at a news conference at City Hall.


Essay; Loyalty And Perfidy
Republican Party loyalty has just been dramatically tested from coast to coast.
In New York's grudge fight, a Republican Mayor jumped ship to save a sinking Democratic Governor; that was flat-out party disloyalty.
Contrariwise, in California, a G.O.P.
Presidential hopeful disagreed with a Republican Governor on principle: that was in the zestiest tradition of fighting for a party's soul.


Journal; Getting Real
"One of the reasons why people are so turned off about politics today," said the Mayor of New York on Monday, is "because we don't act like we're real people."
Amen.
But I must confess that I never considered Rudolph Giuliani a real person, either, until I heard his endorsement of Mario Cuomo.


Small Rise In Orders Of Durables
Prospects for further brisk economic growth remained bright today as the Government reported a small rise in orders for long-lasting factory products for September and revised still higher the very big August jump.
Orders for durable goods moved up one-tenth of 1 percent, buoyed by strength in ships and tanks that more than offset declines in automobiles and aircraft, the monthly tabulation of the Commerce Department showed.
Although the gain was relatively meager, analysts said they were impressed by its breadth and by the fact that nonmilitary capital goods other than aircraft advanced 1.3 percent.


Greyhound Lines (BUS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Bank Sells Stock And Is Hit
The New York bank that says it is the largest financial institution operated by blacks has gone public -- with depositors who bought stock already suffering paper losses of millions of dollars.
The Carver Federal Savings Bank sold 2.4 million shares, about 90 percent of them to its depositors, at $10 a share.
But in the first day of Nasdaq trading Tuesday, the stock fell to $7.66, and yesterday it fell again to $7.56.


Jersey Needs an Alternative to Its Bilingual Education Program
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 20 news article on the New York City Board of Education report faulting bilingual education in the city's public schools may have a positive impact on the debate on bilingual education in New Jersey.
The debate deals with the simple question: Should every child of limited English proficiency be forced into a bilingual program, as happens now, or should this child (and his or her parents) be allowed to choose among alternative educational programs available in the district?


A Budapest Theater Casts Off Its Soviet Past
The Vigszinhaz, the theater where the playwright Ferenc Molnar rose to fame, re-opened last weekend after a yearlong, $20 million renovation that restored it to its original neo-Baroque glory.
Gold bas-relief, plush boxes and glistening chandeliers greeted the opening-night audience, which came to see a rousing performance of a new work called "Let's Dance Together."


I.B.M. Finds Flaw in Some New Software
The International Business Machines Corporation said today that it had briefly halted production of its new operating system software, OS/2 Warp, to correct a flaw.
An I.B.M. spokeswoman said production of a repaired version of the software had resumed and "very few" unfixed copies of the $80 product had reached stores.


International Flavors &amp; Fragrances Inc.(IFF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No. 2 in North Korea Is Ill
In a surprise announcement that added to the uncertainty over the transfer of power in North Korea, the French Foreign Ministry said today that North Korea's de facto No. 2 leader, Defense Minister O Jin Wu, traveled to Paris on Tuesday for medical treatment.


Marion Merrell Dow Inc.(MKC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


POP
International Rhythms From Brooklyn Musicians  Prospect Park
Toward the end of its last piece, the Ramiz Islami orchestra from Albania moved into a modal, droning stretch that allowed Mr.
Islami, a clarinetist, to improvise circular patterns with cracked and peeling notes.
Abruptly he changed key, and the band followed, the accordion letting a few notes hover and the drummer slapping away at his snare while the guitarist, playing the bass line, interrupted his one or two notes with a hiccup of syncopation.
It was trance music, aimed at a release that could be heard from many of the performers at the Ethnic Folk Art Center's all-day Brooklyn Ethnic Music Festival in Prospect Park on Sunday.


Murphy Oil Corp.(MUR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Retaliation Won't Deter Islamic Terrorists; The Friends of Hamas
To the Editor:
The proverb "my enemy's enemy is my friend" lends support to the notion that Israel is somehow culpable for the emergence of the militant Hamas movement ("Islam Bent Into Ideology," The Week in Review, Oct. 23).
Yasir Arafat attempts to advance this myth, holding Israel responsible for his own problems.


Commercial-Fishing Halt Is Urged for Georges Bank
Faced with a fishery on the verge of collapse, a Federal council today recommended virtually shutting down commercial fishing in the Georges Bank off Cape Code, once one of the world's richest fishing grounds.
While some fishing could continue, the council, the New England Fishery Management Council, directed its staff to come up with measures that would reduce the catch of cod, haddock and yellowtail flounder, the principal species sought on the Georges Bank, to as close to zero as practical.


Remembering College, Women on the Verge And Silly Traditions
Wendy Wasserstein's "Uncommon Women and Others" has reached the awkward age.
This 1977 comedy about a group of students at an elite all-female college and how they face a future with women's liberation in it, has long since lost the zing of topicality.
However, it has yet to acquire the compensating charms of a period piece.
In more ways than one, it is neither here nor there.


Parents and Schooling
To The Home Section:
Many parents would agree that "Getting Involved in Improving Schools" (Parent &amp; Child, Sept. 22) supports the research showing that "children's success in school is very dependent on how actively involved their parents are." But you remind me that Dr.
Haim Ginott, author of "Between Parent and Child," used to say that loving parents should get out of the school business entirely.


Garzarelli Is Ousted by Lehman
Elaine M. Garzarelli, one of Wall Street's most prominent and flamboyant stock market forecasters, has been ousted by Lehman Brothers.
Lehman said yesterday that Ms.
Garzarelli had resigned, but people familiar with the decision said the departure had been orchestrated by the brokerage firm, which has been trying to cut costs since it became independent earlier this year.


A Hospital That's Friendly
THE staff at the Rhode Island Hospital in Providence was hoping for more than just a pretty, post-modern box for its new Hasbro Children's Hospital.
And after working with parents, local artists and others in the community to make the hospital as homey and efficient as possible, the staff got much more.
There are patient rooms with reclining cots for parents, a family resource and information center; lounges with kitchenettes; private telephone rooms, and light-filled playrooms.


The Agreement: Establishing Principles for a Lasting Peace
Following are excerpts from the official English text of the Israel-Jordan peace treaty:
The Government of the State of Israel and the Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan: BEARING IN MIND the Washington Declaration, signed by them on 25th July, 1994, and which they are both committed to honor;


Tandem Computers (TDM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Launching Pad for a Video Revolution
To understand why some of the regional Bell companies want to team up with Michael Ovitz, the Hollywood superagent, visit the gleaming new digital video production center of the Bell Atlantic Corporation in Reston, Va.
There, Bell Atlantic plans to produce and disseminate television programming for its Middle Atlantic telephone network.
Many of those programs may eventually spring from the venture with Mr.
Ovitz, Nynex and Pacific Telesis that is expected to be announced next week.


Rothenberg's League Still Seeking Backers
A day after he acknowledged that the start of Major League Soccer could be delayed until 1996, Alan Rothenberg, the chairman of the league and president of the United States Soccer Federation conceded yesterday that the birth of a Long Island franchise could be delayed ever further.
"We may have to go without Long Island the first couple of years," Rothenberg said between the year-end meetings that FIFA, the sport's world governing body, was staging at a hotel in midtown Manhattan.
"The big problem with Long Island is finding a place to play until a stadium is built."


Smith Corona Corp.(SCO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thiokol Corp.(TKC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Crowds in Concord, N.H., Line Up for Rabies Shots
It all began with a black and white kitten named Lucy, bought from a pet store three weeks ago.
Ever since Lucy died last weekend of what was later identified as rabies, fear has swept this capital city.
Parents have taken their children out of school for inoculations, and health officials have begun locating, killing and doing post-mortem testing on 27 other kittens that lived at the pet store when Lucy did.


Penn's New President
To The Home Section:
As graduate students and academics-to-be, we were dismayed by your portrayal of the University of Pennsylvania president, Judith Rodin ("In an Ivy League of Her Own," Oct. 20).


Scientific-Atlanta Inc.(SFA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


3 Men Hurl Racial Slurs and Attack Officers in Bar, Police Say
Three minority police officers who had just ended their shifts were assaulted in a Brooklyn bar yesterday by three white men who shouted racial slurs and threw punches and beer bottles at them, officials said.
The three officers were treated for scrapes and bruises at Victory Memorial Hospital after the incident, which took place at 1:50 A.M. at Pennington's Pub, at 717 86th Street in Bay Ridge, said Sgt.
John Clifford, a police spokesman.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with John Farrell, pitcher, on a minor league contract.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Named Rudy Jaramillo batting coach and Jerry Narron third base coach.
Promoted Omar Minaya to director of professional and international scouting.


Sprewell's Daughter Is Mauled
The 4-year-old daughter of Golden State Warriors guard LATRELL SPREWELL was mauled by a pet dog in the family's backyard in Hayward, Calif., team officials said yesterday.
The girl, PAGE, was attacked Friday about 7 P.M. by one of the family's two pit bulls, the police said.
One of the girl's ears was bitten off and she was bitten on her lips, forehead and nose.
Page was rescued by her mother, CANDACE CABBIL, who heard her daughter's screams, the police said.


Northeast Utilities (NU,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


Clinton, in Letter, Assures North Koreans on Nuclear Reactors
President Clinton promised North Korea's leader in a letter released today that if the planned international financing for new nuclear reactors fell through, he would do his utmost to have the United States provide them.
Last week the United States and North Korea reached an agreement in which the North pledged to freeze its nuclear program in return for having the United States and other members of an international consortium build two light-water reactors and provide oil until the reactors are built.


Huffington Admits Hiring Illegal Alien
Representative Michael Huffington, a candidate for the United States Senate who favors stronger measures to stop illegal immigration, said today that he had employed an undocumented alien at his home in Santa Barbara, Calif., until last year.
Officials of the Huffington campaign acknowledged that the immigrant, a woman, worked for five years for the Republican candidate and his wife as a nanny, taking care of their two young daughters.


LILCO TO STUDY TAKEOVER BY NEW YORK STATE
The board of the Long Island Lighting Company told the company's management yesterday to begin discussing a takeover by New York State with officials of the Long Island Power Authority and the New York Power Authority.
The board also authorized hiring Dillon, Read &amp; Company as investment bankers and the law firm of Kramer, Levin, Nessen, Kamin &amp; Frankel, a spokeswoman said.
Two weeks ago Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposed a $9 billion takeover of the utility by the Long Island Power Authority.
With the Authority's lower cost of credit, and with tax exemptions available to public power entities, a publicly owned Lilco could cut electric rates at least 10 percent, state officials said.
Mr.
Cuomo proposed paying $21.50 a share.
Lilco shares fell 12.5 cents yesterday, to $17.125, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Aid From a Seasoned Politician


Centex Corp.(CTX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Study Links Abortions and Increase in Breast Cancer Risk
A new federally financed study has found that women who have abortions increase their risk of breast cancer.
But the authors of the study cautioned that the overall results and specific findings should be viewed as hypotheses, because of limitations in the way the study was designed and conducted.
Other experts concurred, saying the results were far from conclusive.
Earlier studies investigating such a link have come up with inconsistent findings.


Centerior Energy Corp.(CX,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


Answering the N.R.A.
CANDIDATE Senator Bob Kerrey, a Democrat being challenged for re-election in Nebraska by Jan Stoney, a Republican, is one of several lawmakers being opposed by the National Rifle Association because of his vote for a ban on assault weapons.
This is Mr.
Kerrey's response to an association's advertisement featuring the actor Charlton Heston, who asserted: "You said you wouldn't vote for gun bans. But you went to Washington and voted for the first Federal gun ban in American history." PRODUCER Struble/Totten Communications ON THE SCREEN Opens with men on a shooting range, with red letters declaring, "A Message to Charlton Heston from Bob Kerrey." The camera zooms in on Mr.
Kerrey, dressed in hunting garb, as he fires at a clay pigeon.
As he talks into the camera, he ejects the shell from the shotgun he just used, and then, midway through, puts the gun down and picks up another weapon.
SCRIPT An announcer says, "A message for Charlton Heston from Senator Bob Kerrey." Then Mr.
Kerrey says: "I'm a hunter, and I believe in the constitutional right to bear arms. When it's time to hunt birds, you need a good gun like this Ruger Red Label. Twenty-five years ago, in the war in Vietnam, people hunted me. They needed a good weapon -- like this AK-47. But you don't need one of these to hunt birds." The announcer then says: "Bob Kerrey. The courage to lead." ACCURACY The distinction Mr.
Kerrey draws is correct.
A spokesman for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms said that the semi-automatic version of the AK-47 would be covered by the ban in the crime bill, which covers 19 types of semi-automatic weapons.
The spokesman also said that shotguns like the Ruger Red Label would be unaffected by the ban.
SCORECARD The ad is a tough response to a tough attack: Mr.
Kerrey deals head-on with the charge that his support for a ban on semi-automatic weapons was a sellout of Nebraska hunters and gun owners.
By word and message, he is trying to tell hunters that he is one of them.
And, as is often the case with Mr.
Kerrey, his background as a veteran of the Vietnam War, where he lost a leg and won the Medal of Honor, gives a political argument an emotional punch.
ROBIN TONER


Dispute Mars Rites for Slain Opposition Leader in Sri Lanka
Political skirmishing over responsibility for the killing of Sri Lanka's opposition leader marred official mourning ceremonies today for him and for more than 50 others who died with him in what was apparently a suicide bombing on Sunday.
Associates of the slain leader, Gamini Dissanayaka, said in a news conference that the Government of Prime Minister Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga, who is favored to win the presidency, was partly to blame for the bombing because it had failed to heed pleas from Mr.
Dissanayaka for enhanced security during his presidential campaign.


New Investigative Firm
James B. Mintz, a co-founder of the Investigative Group, a leading corporate investigative concern, has left the firm to form his own company.
The new firm, the James Mintz Group, will have offices In New York and Washington.
It will specialize in gathering facts for litigation, due diligence and other corporate and financial matters.


Corrections
An article yesterday about President Clinton's arrival in the Middle East included an incorrect date in some editions for the assassination of President Anwar Sadat of Egypt.
It occurred in 1981, not 1982.


The Pop Life
Cutting Ticket Prices
When the Seattle rock band Pearl Jam found itself unable to tour this summer without charging more than $20 for concert tickets (including service fees), it abandoned its plans, and a highly publicized battle with the nation's leading ticket distributor, Ticketmaster, ensued.
But Green Day, whose most recent album has been in the top 10 on the pop charts for months, has succeeded where Pearl Jam stumbled.
On Halloween, the young San Francisco punk band is to begin a tour of arenas (along with a few theaters), and ticket prices will be $7.50 to $15, with a Ticketmaster surcharge of $1.75 to $3.25.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.88
4.67
2.82
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.96
5.02
3.06
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.46
5.49
3.17
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.88
7.85
5.42
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.06
8.04
6.00
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.90
8.87
7.08
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.83
6.82
5.47
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Wealthy Ward In the Capital Talks Secession
Washington is saddled with debt, crime, and troubled schools.
Since 1980, the population has shrunk to 585,221 from 638,333, and the middle class finding the grass greener in the suburbs.
Now, one Washingtonian is suggesting a different sort of exodus: secession.
John Nelson, a longtime resident of Ward 3 in Northwest Washington, wants the largely white quadrant of the city abandon the capital in favor of neighboring Maryland.
He says about 15 other residents of the ward have joined his campaign, "Free Ward 3," and are recruiting their neighbors and friends.


Cleaning, Worrying, Rebeling
For the opening of its 25th season, Mabou Mines has returned to La Mama, where it was born, for the first time since 1972, with a spectacular staging of "Mother," written by Patricia Spears Jones and starring Ruth Maleczech, one of the troupe's founders.
The performance -- continuing on Thursdays to Sundays through Nov. 6 -- is a perfect emblem of this innovative company: a multimedia collage that is memorable, exhilarating and disorienting.
Ms.
Maleczech is some mother.
Her character says she hates her role and would rather be dancing than caring for her son, a budding revolutionary.
And her song "Is This What Every Mother Does?" could leave a listener feeling guilty for being born.
But if this mother spends much of her time cleaning and worrying, and if, like Tennyson's Lady of Shalott, she sees life only in a mirror, she turns out to be the most dedicated rebel in an age of revolution.


USF&amp;G Corp.(FG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thomas Hits a Double At the M.V.P. Plate
Frank Thomas, the big-hitting Chicago White Sox first baseman whose pursuit of the American League triple crown ended with the premature demise of the 1994 season, settled for a rare consolation double yesterday.
He was named the league's most valuable player for the second straight year, becoming the sixth American Leaguer to achieve that.
Although Thomas, who powered the White Sox to a first-place finish in the American League Central, became only the 11th major leaguer to win consecutive m.v.p. awards, and the first in the American League since Roger Maris in 1961, he came up four votes short of becoming the first to win consecutive awards as a unanimous selection.


Livable City Ponders Its Outburst of Anger and Unrest
This central Kentucky city rising out of rolling fields of horse farms, burley tobacco fields and bourbon distilleries is perennially near the top of magazine lists of the nation's most livable cities.
It is the home of the University of Kentucky, five medical centers and a score of clean manufacturing companies, and it boasts an annual per capita income of $18,142, which is 60 percent higher than the state average and about 30 percent above the national average.
Unemployment is 3.2 percent this year, and by all accounts the city is thriving.


Southern New England Telecommunications Corp.(SNG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


N.H.L. Players Plan Game for Charity
They may be locked out of 26 arenas across North America, but the Copps Coliseum in Hamilton, Ontario, is not one of them.
The National Hockey League Players Association announced yesterday that a "4-on-4 Challenge," a charity round-robin tournament featuring more than 50 out-of-work players, will be played Nov. 10-12 in Hamilton.


Victims Sue Arms Makers In Shooting On L.I.R.R.
A group of family members of those slain in the Long Island Rail Road shootings last December, along with some wounded survivors, filed a lawsuit yesterday against the companies that made the weaponry used in the attack.
Lawyers for the five plaintiffs said the suit was the first in New York State to seek to hold makers of guns and ammunition liable for damages caused by their illegal use, and was like others filed without much success in other states over the last 10 years.
But advocates of gun control who had helped to file the suit said they were hopeful the time was now right for success.


U.S. Wants to Expedite Entry of Eastern Nations Into Alliance
The Clinton Administration has begun consultations with its NATO allies about how to speed the admission of former Soviet-bloc countries into the Western alliance, senior Administration officials said today.
The new approach reflects a growing realization in the Administration that the "Partnership for Peace," which the allies created last year to extend cooperation -- but not membership -- to the countries of the former Soviet bloc, is inadequate and was oversold when it was first proposed by the Administration.


No Full-Time Tour for Olazabal
The Masters champion, JOSE MARIA OLAZABAL of Spain, said yesterday that he had decided not to join the PGA Tour full time next year.
"The 15-event minimum over there is too many," Olazabal said as he finished preparations for the Volvo Masters, which starts today in Sotogrande, Spain.
"If they reduced it to 12, it would be perfect, and you would see more Europeans over there, but there's no indication of them doing it. It would be too tight a season if I also played 11 in Europe."


Ohio Casualty Corp.(OCAS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Carroll Mealey, 64, Albany Lawyer
Carroll J. Mealey, a lawyer in Albany for nearly 40 years who served on several statewide judicial and professional panels, died on Monday at Albany Memorial Hospital in Albany.
He was 64 and lived in Loudonville, N.Y.
The cause was heart failure, said a family spokesman.


Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc.(RPR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Said to Seek Pacific Free Trade Pact
In a broad expansion of the Clinton Administration's trade agenda, White House officials said today that President Clinton planned to ask Asian leaders to commit themselves to free trade throughout the Pacific by a specific date early in the next century.
An Asian free trade pact has been discussed informally for years, but the idea of creating a zone similar in some ways to the North American free trade agreement has usually been met by a chorus of objections, led by China and Japan.
But two senior Administration officials, briefing reporters today on the condition of anonymity, said they now believed that all the members of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, were ready to set a date by which all large barriers -- from tariffs to restrictions on access to distribution systems for consumer products -- would be largely removed.
All the big economic entities in the region belong to the APEC forum.


Wang Laboratories Inc.(WANG,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Episcopal Bishop Will Join Roman Catholics
In a highly unusual move, a sitting bishop in the Episcopal Church has said he will convert to Roman Catholicism and will eventually seek a new status as a Catholic priest.
Bishop Clarence C. Pope Jr. of Fort Worth, for years a leader of the Episcopal Church's traditionalist wing, said in a letter on Tuesday that he would make his conversion after Jan. 1, when he is to retire from his present position.


Senator Decides to Fight N.R.A.'s Fire With Fire
There is a fierce advertising war over guns being fought in much of the West.
On one side is Charlton Heston and the National Rifle Association; on the other is a group of senators, like Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, which is fighting back with a vengeance.
The battle largely stems from the passage of the crime bill, which included a ban on 19 types of semi-automatic weapons.
Or, as Mr.
Heston, a spokesman for the N.R.A., puts it in the advertisement against Mr.
Kerrey: "You said you wouldn't vote for gun bans. But you went to Washington and voted for the first Federal gun ban in American history."


Foley, Behind in Polls, Plays Gingrich Card
Although the race has tightened somewhat, Speaker Thomas S. Foley is still behind in his effort to hold onto the Congressional seat he has held for 30 years, recent polls indicate.
In trying to hold off George Nethercutt, the Spokane lawyer who is running against him, Mr.
Foley has been bringing up Representative Newt Gingrich, the Georgia Republican who would succeed Mr.
Foley as Speaker should the Democrats lose control of the House.


BCE Mobile reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shooting Aboard Bus in Queens


Majkowski Gets the Call Against Jets
The Jets received unexpected news today.
They will be facing a different quarterback when they meet the Colts at Indianapolis on Sunday, but they will be facing him with a hobbled Bobby Houston at linebacker.
Insisting that he has not had any interference from the owner, Robert Irsay, Coach Ted Marchibroda named Don Majkowski the starter and benched Jim Harbaugh, the American Conference's second-ranked passer.


Race for Governor: Cuomo Gets Endorsement of 'Character'
CANDIDATE -- Mario M. Cuomo PRODUCER -- The Garth Group, New York City


COMPANY BRIEFS
GRAND CASINOS INC., Plymouth, Minn., a developer and manager of casino gaming operations for Indian tribes and non-Indian casinos, has announced that it will buy back up to two million shares of its own stock, or 9 percent of the total outstanding.
MALAN REALTY INVESTORS INC., Birmingham, Mich., a real estate investment concern, will acquire six shopping centers in Ohio, Indiana and Illinois for $47.5 million.


...While a Mathematician Calls Classic Riddle Solved
For a year and a half, mathematicians have been on tenterhooks as a proposed proof of the world's most famous mathematics problem, Fermat's last theorem, was alternately called incandescently brilliant and then fatally flawed.
But now the problems with the proof may be resolved.
Dr.
Andrew Wiles, a Princeton University mathematician, worked in isolation in an attic office for eight years before electrifying the mathematical world with an announcement on June 23, 1993, that he had proved the 350-year-old theorem.
But he was forced to concede last fall that there was a gap in the proof, and retreated once again to grapple with the problem.


Clark USA reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A U.S. Postal Service campaign promotes the new mail order: buying -- and keeping -- stamps.
AFTER years of asserting, "We deliver for you," the United States Postal Service is trying to sell the notion of stamps not being delivered anywhere.
The Postal Service is aggressively stepping up efforts to encourage the collecting of stamps among people who are not philatelists because stamps sold, but not used, produce revenue for the deficit-plagued system and reduce rate increases.
There's even a term for it, retention revenue, which grew from about $170 million in 1991 to about $250 million last year as up to 800 million of the 40 billion stamps printed last year were saved.


Cornhuskers Fear Their Title Hopes Will Go Unfulfilled Again
Football at Nebraska, like other schools where the sport has a feel of the assembly line, is about winning national championships.
Thus, rooting for the Cornhuskers has come to require an elasticity of the heart -- an unalterable faith that every season will bring a title and a stolid acceptance when every season falls just short.
Bob Devaney won consecutive national titles as coach in 1970 and 1971.
Tom Osborne, his professorial successor, has won no fewer than 9 games in each of his 21 previous seasons, but he has never won it all.
Twice Osborne has come tantalizingly, agonizingly close, but each time, Nebraska has met with some small unfulfillment.
And now the faithful are wondering if a championship will remain elusive.
Colorado is coming to town on Saturday, and Nebraska's quarterbacks have been toppling like bowling pins.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies Earnings more than doubled at Ford, helped by vigorous demand for the Windstar mini-van, Mustang sports coupe and four-wheel-drive Explorers.
The performance contrasted sharply with last week's disappointing results from General Motors.  [ Page D1. ] Lehman Brothers ousted Elaine M. Garzarelli, one of Wall Street's most prominent and flamboyant stock market forecasters.
She was widely hailed for calling the 1987 market crash.  [ D1. ]


Mr. McCain's Risky Korea Strategy
With few diplomatic or military chips at its disposal, the Clinton Administration negotiated a remarkably good agreement with North Korea.
It terminates the North's nuclear program and provides international inspections to verify compliance.
The North also agreed to special inspections of its waste sites, though not immediately, to clear up questions about possible past diversions of nuclear fuel.
But that's not good enough for Senator John McCain, who said last week that he would have insisted on special inspections immediately, and accused President Clinton of "appeasement." The Senator's outburst is premised on speculation about North Korea's nuclear program.
He is convinced that North Korea has two atomic bombs and that special inspections could help establish whether he is right by discovering how much plutonium the North extracted in the past.


Cyprus Amax Minerals Co.  (CYM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Furniture Circus Comes To Town
Mario Buatta, the New York society decorator, strolled from one cocktail party to the next with a gag toupee on his head.
In front of the La-Z-Boy showroom on Main Street, a crowd of button-down business people waiting for the light watched a bevy of suspiciously well-endowed young women promote the Tiki Club topless bar.
And across town, in the parking lot of the National Guard Armory, a 5,000-pound African elephant named Laura gently lowered her wrinkled gray flanks onto a specially built daybed to test the strength of a new laminated lumber product made from aspen saplings.
It's business as usual at the International Home Furnishings Market, equal parts theme park, trade show and Robert Altman film.


Running, These Days, Just to Keep Up
ON weekends in Central Park this time of year, you can tell who the marathoners are.
They lope determinedly, lean, machinelike, rounding the six-mile loop three times and then tacking on a few more miles to finish the longest training run.
By now the dilettantes who lined up for entry forms at Tavern on the Green in the spring have dropped away and those who are still training have nearly won their personal races.
Running the marathon isn't a few hours out of your life; it begins the moment you commit body and soul to the months of miles that end in a day of unmatched exhilaration completely public, completely private.
Never does New York City, the whole city, feel so much like home.
I did it once. I loved it.


Investors in Deal to Buy Park Communications
Park Communications Inc., a collection of television, newspaper and radio properties amassed by the late Roy H. Park, said yesterday that it had agreed to be sold to two investors for $711.4 million.
The investors, Donald Tomlin and Gary Knapp, have agreed to pay about $30.50 for each share of Park, which is based in Ithaca, N.Y., and operates 9 television stations, 22 radio stations and 106 newspapers in 22 states.


American Premier Underwriters Inc.(APZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
The About New York column yesterday, discussing numbers that have come up repeatedly in recent New York Lotto drawings, misstated the given name of the author of "The Western Canon" in some editions.
He is Harold Bloom, not Allan.


Pataki in Peekskill: Behind the Revival
George E. Pataki's tenure as Mayor of Peekskill, and the years afterward as a dominant presence there, offer insight into the politician's priorities as he seeks the governorship of New York State.
In many ways, it provides a clearer picture than his Albany record as a four-term minority-party Assemblyman and one-term Senator.
For it was in Peekskill that Mr.
Pataki tapped his pitchman's skills, luring several major developers to a shabby Hudson Valley town of barely 20,000 people, igniting a real-estate boom that built more than 1,100 new middle-class homes during the 1980's.


Mary Roebling, 89, First Woman To Head Major U.S. Bank, Dies
Mary G. Roebling, former chairwoman of the National State Bank, one of New Jersey's largest independent banks, and a former governor of the American Stock Exchange, died on Tuesday at her home in Trenton.
She was 89.
The cause was renal failure, The Associated Press reported.


Beware the Toxic Content of Political Ads
To the Editor:
In recently escalating controversy about negative political television spots, their supporters have defended them as "free speech." To equate paid political commercials with free speech is an oxymoron.
If the content of these commercials were subject to the modest truth-in-advertising requirements applied to less lethal food and drugs, most of them would be banned.


Sports of The Times; Just What Did Shell Say Or Not Say?
IN the years when Art Shell was the Raiders' offensive left tackle, quarterback Ken Stabler was once leveled by Joe (Turkey) Jones, a Cleveland Browns pass rusher.
John Madden, then the Raider coach, hurried onto the field to check his quarterback's condition and now he was growling at the Browns for what the coach considered a late hit.
Suddenly, one of the Browns' linemen moved toward Madden, but Shell stepped between them.


California Governor Suggests Requiring Citizenship Cards
Injecting a new element into the already raging debate over controlling immigration in California, Gov.
Pete Wilson suggested today that every Californian be required to obtain an official identity card to present when seeking a job, entering school or applying for nonemergency health care.
The Governor, who has made immigration control a theme of in his re-election battle this fall with State Treasurer Kathleen Brown, argued in interviews, news conferences and statements that such a card would discourage immigration but would not impinge on individual freedom.


Sex, Drugs, And Police: Jury Urges End to Force
For more than a year, a Suffolk County grand jury has been investigating the police department in this small waterfront village, a force that some residents said made the Keystone Kops look like polished professionals.
From a parade of more than 50 witnesses, the grand jury heard testimony about one officer who was often drunk on duty, used marijuana and cocaine, hung out at local bars with drug abusers and tipped off targets of drug raids.


Harleysville Group (HGIC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Use Crime Bill Funds to Assist Rape Victims
To the Editor:
In Anna Quindlen's column "After the Rape" (Op-Ed, Oct. 19), she contrasts the Sexual Assault Nurse Examiners program with the humiliating experience of a rape victim who was taken to a barren and dirty Brooklyn emergency room.


Hanover Direct Inc.(HNV,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


James J. Norwood Union Official, 63
James J. Norwood, the general secretary-treasurer of the Laborers' International Union of North America, died on Monday at St.
Louis University Hospital.
He was 63 and lived in St.
Louis.
The cause was complications from leukemia, a union spokesman said.


Arcadian Partners L.P.  (UAN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Destec Energy (ENG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


W. K. Frankena, 86, Philosophy Professor
William K. Frankena, a philosophy professor at the University of Michigan who compiled a widely read book on the theory and history of ethics, died on Saturday at St.
Joseph Mercy Hospital in Ypsilanti, Mich.
He was 86 and lived in Ann Arbor.
He died of a heart attack, said his son Karl, also of Ann Arbor.


Y.&amp; R. Chairman To Retire Dec. 31
Alex Kroll, the chairman of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York, said yesterday that he would retire, effective Dec. 31.
Peter A. Georgescu, 55, the agency's president and chief executive, will succeed him, as expected, on that date.


Corrections
A listing on Oct. 9 with a map showing growth in the Hispanic population in a group of American cities specified the states incorrectly for two entries in some editions.
As the map showed, the cities -- in which the Hispanic population surpassed the non-Hispanic black population by 1990 -- were Oak Ridge, Fla., and Pittsburg, Calif.


Minority Home Loans Rise, But Many Are Still Rejected
Financial institutions in New York City and its suburbs sharply increased their home mortgage lending to minorities last year but continued to reject black applicants more often than whites, according to figures released today by a group of Federal regulators.
The group, the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, found that the number of home mortgages issued to blacks in the New York area soared 44.8 percent last year over 1992 and the number issued to whites climbed 19.9 percent.
Loans to Asian-Americans and Hispanics increased at roughly the same rate as loans to whites.


Wall St. Story: Jumbled Fact
Short-sellers are frequently a much-needed balance in the markets, debunking some of the hype on public companies.
But sometimes they go too far.
One short-seller promoting the story on Wall Street that Robert Howard is Howard Finkelstein, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said he had a copy of S.E.C. testimony in which Mr.
Howard, the Presstek chairman, admitted to going by the last name of Finkelstein. (In fact, Mr. Howard told the S.E.C. his original last name was Horowitz.)


Keystone International Inc.(KII,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


POP
Folk Singer Who Strives For 'a Melancholy Limbo'  Carnegie Hall
In a program note to her concert on Monday evening, the folk-pop singer and songwriter Shawn Colvin describes the emotional atmosphere she strives for as "a melancholy limbo." That feeling of suspension, a sense of exhilarated wistfulness, is precisely the mood she conjured through much of the concert.


One Thing's Sure With Bob Grant: It's Not Chicken Talk
The microphone light went dim for a few minutes chock full of commercial messages while Bob Grant, seated calmly at the center of a storm of charges that he is the city's leading radio bigot, picked up the thread of an interrupted conversation with a visitor in the broadcast booth.
"We have a phrase in this business: There's chicken talk, and there's honest talk," he said as 20 phone buttons of waiting call-in fans blinked silently at his elbow, lined up in his defense.
"Chicken talk is, 'Kind of windy out, let's talk about the weather.' When I broke in everything was kind of, sort of. 'I'm kind of mad, I'm sort of disappointed.' We always had to put a euphemism there."


INSIDE
Fishing Moratorium Urged
Acknowledging ominous depletions of some species, a council heavily influenced by the fishing industry recommended rules that could stop fishing off Cape Cod.
Page B14.
Agreement on DNA Evidence
Two opposing experts on the forensic use of DNA analysis have resolved their disputes and agree on the technique's use.
Page B14.
And The Winners Are...
Tickets for the $40 million Lotto jackpot in New York sold at the rate of 20,000 a minute.
Other lottery results, page B8.


DANCE
Sleigh Bells, Horses' Hoofs And a Devotion to Song  Alice Tully Hall
One great pleasure of the Don Cossack Chorus and Dancers of America, who performed on Saturday night, is the sense that this male a cappella group gives of a living past.
The genesis of the chorus, now based in Montclair, N.J., lies in the imprisonment and later exile of Cossack troops from the Don region of Russia early in the 20th century.
Throughout it all, they sang.
And clearly music continues to be an artistic avocation followed as devoutly as any religion or profession.
To watch George Margitich, the conductor, move quietly behind the singers giving them their pitch at the start of each song is to see ritual pure and simple.


Yang Dezhi, 83; a Leader Of Red Army
Gen.
Yang Dezhi, a Chinese military leader for more than half a century and a former Army Chief of Staff who opposed the Tiananmen Square crackdown, died on Tuesday, the official New China News Agency reported yesterday.
He was 83.
The cause of death was not given.
Mr.
Yang's career in warfare stretched from the creation of the Communist Army in 1927 to China's invasion of Vietnam in 1979.
He made his name as a daring military leader during the fabled Long March and was a top commander of Chinese forces during the Korean War.


Kaiser Aluminum Corp.(KLU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Calendar: Exhibitions And Crafts
An Architect's Work  Buell Hall, Columbia University, Broadway at 116th Street; (212) 854-3414.
Photographs and drawings of buildings by the architect Morris Lapidus will be on display through Nov. 19.
Open Tuesday through Saturday, noon to 6 P.M.
No charge.


Could It Be? Does 1+1=1 In Math's Grand Scheme?
Although Fermat's last theorem is a daunting and longstanding challenge, mathematicians say they are interested in Dr.
Andrew Wiles's work because it points the way to a grand linkage between two major branches of mathematics: algebra and analysis (also known as calculus).
Linking these two branches would be an extraordinary achievement because it might be possible to transform unsolved problems in one field into the other, where a solution might be easier to obtain.


Washington Post Co.(WPO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Borden Reports a Net Loss of $130.5 Million
Borden Inc. announced a third-quarter loss of $130.5 million yesterday, citing one-time charges and disappointing performance of its dairy, pasta and food businesses.
In addition, Borden slashed its quarterly dividend on common stock from 7.5 cents to a penny, in accordance with a dividend-cap provision in the merger agreement last month between Borden and Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company.


Last of the 14-Year-Olds Will Take a First Step
Venus Williams doesn't talk much, but it wasn't so long ago that her coach, Rick Macci, heard her carrying on an animated chat in the back seat of the van that was taking her home after an exhibition doubles appearance with Billie Jean King.
When Macci, curious about the conversation, took his eyes off the road long enough to glance in the rear-view mirror, he realized she was talking to her doll.


Administration Moves Against Tax Credit
Mindful of next month's elections, in which immigration has been a hot issue in California and other states, the Clinton Administration took a stand today against illegal aliens' collecting a widely used tax credit that is intended to benefit working poor people but has been a major instrument of fraud.
In making the move, the Administration appeared to depart from a long-standing Government policy that makes illegal aliens eligible for benefits in the tax laws, since they are also subject to its burdens.


Is Howard Really Finkelstein? Money Rides on It
Is Robert Howard really Howard Finkelstein?
A lot of investors in Mr.
Howard's Presstek Inc., would like to know.
But not even the Securities and Exchange Commission can say for sure.
And the lingering mystery has roiled a hot stock and left the S.E.C. blushing.
Investors count on the S.E.C. to weed out rogues in the universe of publicly traded companies, paying particular attention to repeat offenders.
Sometimes, though, the agency slips up through bad record-keeping or incomplete research, inadvertently setting the backdrop for confusion in the markets.


The Knicks Close With A Flourish, But Fall
In a possible preview of the Eastern Conference finals, the Knicks, for the longest time, played like misfits.
But just when it appeared they were doomed to a double-digit defeat, they put a pulsating fourth-quarter scare into the Orlando Magic before losing, 105-103, before 15,951 tonight at Orlando Arena.


Giants' Foes Have Figured Meggett Fade
The question is a simple one: What has happened to running back David Meggett?
The question may be simple but the answer is not.
In fact, the disappearance of Meggett is a problem that has many layers and one the Giants are scrambling to solve.
If anyone wanted to incorporate a weapon like Meggett back into the offense it is Dan Reeves, one of the more ingenious and creative coaches in the National Football League.
So when the news media and fans buzz about why the Giants don't get Meggett back into the flow, as if it's as easy as putting a carton of milk back into the refrigerator, Reeves can only shake his head.
The coach, of course, wants to get him back in the mix.


Drifting Market Has a 5th Day of Losses
The stock market drifted inconclusively yesterday as the Government reported that orders for durable goods increased moderately last month, and the yield on the 30-year bond moved up slightly, to 8.06 percent, its highest level since April 1992.
"It was basically an earnings-driven market with continued weakness in the transportation and utility sectors," said Lawrence R. Rice, chief investment strategist of Josephthal, Lyon &amp; Ross.
"The market continues to be slightly oversold in breadth."


66% of Fines Still Owed To the F.T.C.
The Federal Trade Commission has collected only about a third of the fines it has imposed since 1980, Representative John Conyers said today.
A commission document dated May 4, 1994, and made available to The New York Times by Mr.
Conyers, states that the Bureau of Consumer Protection, an arm of the F.T.C., was owed $362,741,253 from judgments against 187 companies for advertising or marketing fraud but that it had collected only $126 million.
It is still owed $236 million, or 65 percent of the total.


The Simple Touch
SCOTT WILLENS'S Wonderland line of chairs and tables seems to come from a minimalist wonderland.
Mr.
Willens, a designer in San Francisco, has kept his children's furniture free of distracting details.
His designs are simple; in fact, he needed just a few hours to sketch them.
"My aim was to do more with less work," said Mr.
Willens, who until recently made expensive custom furniture.


Yonkers Mayor's Wife Challenged on Fund-Raising Tactics
In an unusual letter sent today to Yonkers city officials, the Westchester County District Attorney charged that someone in the re-election campaign of Mayor Terence M. Zaleski engaged in illegal campaign fund-raising out of City Hall.
The District Attorney said that the Mayor's wife, who is his campaign treasurer, had sole responsibility for the fund-raising, but had stymied the investigation of the matter.
But the District Attorney, Jeanine Pirro, said no criminal charges had been filed against the Mayor's wife, Lynn, because a preliminary investigation had failed to tie anyone directly to the campaign improprieties.
Mrs.
Pirro said Mrs.
Zaleski had "effectively blocked our inquiry" by refusing to be interviewed by investigators about the March 9 fund-raiser.


A Jury System for Jurors
It is no secret that the jury selection system in New York is a disgrace.
For years it has operated mainly for the convenience of lawyers, judges and court personnel, in roughly that order.
For jurors -- that is to say, the ordinary citizens summoned to decide cases and dispense justice -- it has been a monumental inconvenience.
A special commission appointed by Chief Judge Judith Kaye now recommends comprehensive jury reform.


Cray Research (CYR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tomorrow's Interactive Home
Information Superhighway.
For most Americans, the term is a fuzzy, bewildering abstraction.
But the announcement this week that Sprint, the large long-distance carrier, will join forces with T.C.I., the nation's largest cable company, and two other cable operators should bring the idea into sharp focus.
The resulting communications behemoth plans to provide wireless phone service to homes across the country -- thereby breaking the local phone company's choke hold over its customers.
Competition should pave the way for substantial price cuts and an explosive array of new services.


Suit by Drug Agent Says U.S. Subverted His Burmese Efforts
The former top United States drug-enforcement official in Myanmar has sued the former top State Department and Central Intelligence Agency officials based in the Asian nation, saying they tapped his telephone, subverted his anti-drug efforts and expelled him from the country.
The unusual lawsuit by Richard A. Horn, a Drug Enforcement Administration special agent, is the latest of a series of embarrassing clashes between United States drug-enforcement officials and their counterparts in the intelligence and diplomatic services.


Cilcorp Inc.(CER,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


4 Awards for Latin American Coverage
Four journalists who report on Latin America have won the 1994 Maria Moors Cabot Prizes from Columbia University for promoting press freedom and inter-American understanding.
The journalists, two from the United States and one each from El Salvador and Argentina, will each receive $1,000 and a gold medal at a ceremony tonight at Columbia University.
These are the four:


Bethlehem Steel Corp.(BS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Devendra Varma, 71, Scholar Of the Gothic and the Macabre
Devendra P. Varma, a scholar of English Gothic tales and a connoisseur of vampire lore, died on Monday at South Nassau Community Hospital in Oceanside, L.I., while visiting friends in Merrick.
He was 71 and lived in Halifax, Nova Scotia.
The cause was a stroke, said a spokesman for Dalhousie University in Halifax, where Professor Varma taught for 31 years.


33d Street? Just Look For an Eagle
IMAGINE how dreary the subway would be without its ceramic murals and mosaics -- the steamboats at Fulton Street, the beaver at Astor Place, the eagle at East 33d Street.
Today, the 90th anniversary of the opening of the New York City subway system, also celebrates the reissue of "Subway Ceramics: A History and Iconography," by Lee Stookey.
Over the last 24 years she has photographed 38 stations that have ceramic picture plaques.
The murals were the idea of William Barclay Parsons, the chief engineer of the city's Rapid Transit Commission in 1900.
The mosaics and ceramics were supposed to identify the stations in a decorative way.
But did they?


Race for Governor: Cuomo Attacks D'Amato-Pataki Link
CANDIDATE -- Mario M. Cuomo (paid for by the New York State Democratic Committee) PRODUCER -- Axelrod and Associates, Chicago and Washington


Pulte Corp.(PHM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Excerpts From Letter
Following are excerpts from a letter by the Westchester County District Attorney, Jeanine Pirro, to Yonkers officials:
On May 6, 1994, I received a letter from Councilman Gordon Burrows requesting an investigation into alleged improper fund-raising practices in Yonkers.
Specifically, he expressed concerns about the manner in which fund-raising occurred in connection with a March 1994 event sponsored by Mayor Zaleski's political committee, "Friends of Terence Zaleski." . . .


USLife Corp.(USH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


School Days May Shorten, Cortines Says
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday that continuing budget cuts from City Hall could force "radical" changes in the school system, including a shorter classroom day in coming years.
One day after City Hall ordered the New York City Board of Education to absorb $190 million in budget reductions on top of $360 million mandated last summer, Mr.
Cortines said the system could not absorb further cuts without disruption.


Senator Decides to Fight N.R.A.'s Fire With Fire
There is a fierce advertising war over guns being fought in much of the West.
On one side is Charlton Heston and the National Rifle Association; on the other is a group of senators, like Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, which is fighting back with a vengeance.
The battle largely stems from the passage of the crime bill, which included a ban on 19 types of semi-automatic weapons.
Or, as Mr.
Heston, a spokesman for the N.R.A., puts it in the advertisement against Mr.
Kerrey: "You said you wouldn't vote for gun bans. But you went to Washington and voted for the first Federal gun ban in American history."


Stone Container Corp.(STO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


POP
A Blend of Dependency And Determination  Town Hall
"My producer and I wrote this song in 20 minutes, and we've defended it for 26 years," Tammy Wynette announced near the end of her concert on Tuesday evening.


Last Ziff Bids Due Today
Final bids are due today for the Ziff Communications Company, and some industry executives predict a buyer for at least part of the computer publishing company may be announced as soon as tomorrow.
Although Ziff had originally hoped to sell the entire company to a single buyer, executives familiar with the negotiations said yesterday that it appeared the company would be sold in as many as four pieces.


With Fiery Words, Gingrich Builds His Kingdom
Already, they call him Mr. Speaker.
And he answers.


Health Management Associates (HMA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about microbreweries referred incorrectly to the location of one in which Anheuser-Busch has become an investor.
The company, Red Hook Brewing, is in Seattle, not Portland.


Pennsylvania Power &amp; Light Co.(PPL,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Dividing and Multiplying
Q.
My perennials are getting quite crowded, but I'm not sure just what to do.
I've heard about dividing.
Can you give any general guidelines? -- Francine Ambrose, Quincy, Mass.


U.S. Filing Expected on Prudential
After more than a year of investigation, Federal prosecutors are expected to file a criminal complaint today against Prudential Securities, contending that the brokerage house engaged in large-scale fraud in its sale of limited partnerships in the 1980's, people with knowledge of the inquiry said yesterday.
While little seems to stand in the way of bringing the complaint, people involved in the situation cautioned that unanticipated events could create last-minute snags, delaying the filing in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Still, these people said that as of yesterday there appeared to be no hitches.


Mozambique Voting Today in First Free Election
Six months to the day after neighboring South Africa, Mozambique will vote Thursday in its first free elections, becoming democracy's latest beachhead in a region that defies the African trend toward war and collapse.
After centuries of Portuguese hegemony and 19 years of war-ravaged, one-party rule, the election will leave only one country at the southern end of the continent -- the minuscule Kingdom of Swaziland -- that has not passed through the rite of contested elections.
If Mozambique succeeds, it could help reverse the Western fatalism about Africa created by recent calamities like Rwanda's and Somalia's.
But Mozambique is not South Africa, and there is no liberation euphoria here.


The Agreement: Establishing Principles for a Lasting Peace
Following are excerpts from the official English text of the Israel-Jordan peace treaty:
The Government of the State of Israel and the Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan: BEARING IN MIND the Washington Declaration, signed by them on 25th July, 1994, and which they are both committed to honor;


Washington Gas Light Co.(WGL,N) reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Sheldon B. Liss; Historian, 57
Sheldon B. Liss, a historian who specialized in 20th-century radical political movements in Latin America, died on Oct. 19 at MetroHealth Medical Center in Cleveland.
He was 57 and lived in Brecksville, Ohio.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Dr. C. Susan Chester.


Study Disputes Subway On-Time Claims
A new study has confirmed what many subway riders have long suspected: The on-time performance of trains in the city's subway system is far below the 91 percent rate the transit authority has claimed in the last two years.
The report released yesterday by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's inspector general concluded that train dispatchers who keep handwritten logs of train performance often report trains that break down or are canceled as being on time.
Dispatchers were also discovered to have recorded false arrival times for tardy trains and to have adjusted schedules during the day so that delayed trains appear to be on time, the report said.


Israel and Jordan Sign a Peace Accord
At this desert outpost along their border, desolate except for their hopes, Israel and Jordan signed a peace treaty today to put behind them 46 years of war, mistrust and fear for tomorrow.
Israel's second full peace with an Arab country, coming 15 years after its treaty with Egypt, was witnessed under a lacerating midday sun by more than 4,500 guests and by President Clinton, who added his signature to documents signed by the two countries' Prime Ministers.


Bridge
The annual Expert Night at the Harmonie Club, 4 East 60th Street, where members mingle with New York stars, produced a predictable result on Tuesday evening.
Michael Rosenberg, who won a world title in Albuquerque, N.M., last month and almost won another, headed the standings, scoring 68.3 percent with Debbie Zuckerberg.
The second-best score, 62.7 percent, was recorded by Rita Rand and Jim Linhart.
The member-guest winners, with 59.1 percent, were Doris Frank of Manhattan and Hazel Beringer of Scarsdale, N.Y.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
The Unexpectedness Of Live Chamber Music  Avery Fisher Hall
The English Chamber Orchestra, ubiquitous on recordings, offered a reminder on Sunday evening that concert performances can have a spark of magic that eludes the microphones.
This sense of hearing the abstractions of the printed score coming to life and sometimes taking unexpected turns was clearest in the work that closed the program, Mozart's "Haffner" Symphony.
Pinchas Zukerman conducted, playing up the score's contrasting passages of exuberance and delicacy, keeping textures transparent and taking the finale at a pace that exploited its electricity without seeming gratuitously speedy.


Libbey Inc.(LBY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bankers Life Holding Corp.(BLH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tom Thomas Moves To Lowe &amp; Partners
Tom Thomas, co-founder and creative director at Angotti, Thomas, Hedge in New York, has joined Lowe &amp; Partners/SMS in New York in the new position of executive vice president and creative director.
Mr.
Thomas, 51, will join Earl Cavanah, also an executive vice president and creative director, in managing one of the agency's two creative groups.


Agriculture Dept. Scraps Poultry Bacteria Plan
The Department of Agriculture said yesterday that it would scrap the much-criticized rules it proposed this summer to control bacterial contamination of poultry.
Instead, in regulations to be announced later this fall, the agency will introduce new rules for inspecting meat and poultry, intended to modernize the antiquated system of inspection.


Retaliation Won't Deter Islamic Terrorists
To the Editor:
Re A. M. Rosenthal's "Terror and the West" (column, Oct. 21): While he makes a very significant and frightening point that the bus on Madison Avenue may be traveling just one stop behind the one on Tel Aviv's Dizengoff Street that was blown up by a Hamas terrorist, Mr.
Rosenthal is moving in only one direction with regard to detouring or canceling the trip.


Kemp Says Trust Is the Key
A panel of former National Football League players and management officials said last night that the keys to their league's labor agreement were open financial records and trust, and urged baseball and hockey to try the same formula.


Ultramar Corp.(ULR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pataki and Peekskill: Reviving a City, Then Profiting in a Realty Boom
When George E. Pataki describes his tenure as Mayor here in the early 1980's, he emphasizes his role in resuscitating a shabby Hudson Valley river town with a dwindling tax base.
Using his pitchman's skills and government subsidies, Mr.
Pataki lured several major developers to this city of barely 20,000 people, igniting a real-estate boom that built more than 1,100 new middle-class homes during the decade.
There is a second chapter to the story of Peekskill's boom.
In 1984, after he resigned as Mayor to become a State Assemblyman, Mr.
Pataki, the most powerful politician in this Republican-controlled town, began seeking the financial benefits of the real-estate boom he helped create.
He set up a law office in Peekskill with his brother and attracted at least $160,000 in work from developers, including some of the same people he brought to the city as Mayor.


Johnstown America Industries (JAII,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Post-Debate: Candidates On the Road, Stars in Tow
The two candidates for United States Senate took their campaigns back on the road today, both accompanied by celebrity guest stars and both claiming to be refreshed from a "victory" in their debate the night before.
Vice President Al Gore joined the incumbent Democrat, Frank R. Lautenberg, at ceremonies marking the designation of the Maurice River in Cumberland County as a Wild and Scenic River and then campaigned for Democratic congressional candidates.


Data General Corp.(DGN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Harsco Corp.(HSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


4 Removed From Simpson Jury Pool After Watching TV
The process of finding the jurors who will decide O. J. Simpson's fate has slowed to a crawl with several candidates falling by the wayside after failing to follow Judge Lance A. Ito's ban on watching television.
Now, with the holidays approaching and prolonged haggling over DNA evidence still to come, opening arguments may not begin until after New Year's Day.
By the close of business this afternoon, only 13 additional candidates had been interrogated, and of them only 5 survived until the next round of questioning, set for Nov. 2.
Among those dismissed were four people who confessed to watching, respectively, some Spanish soap operas, some Spanish-language cartoons, a financial news station and a Barbara Stanwyck film.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A String Quartet Of True Fraternity  Alice Tully Hall
String quartet players need not be siblings to produce a perfectly blended sound or to perform with complete unity of interpretive purpose, but fraternity seems not to hurt.
The Ying String Quartet -- Timothy, Janet, Philip and David Ying -- produces a dark, sumptuous sound and moves as one.
Those qualities undoubtedly helped it win the Naumburg Chamber Music Competition last year, and they made the quartet's concert on Tuesday evening both riveting and uplifting.


Corrections
An article in the Metro Section on Oct. 12 about the possibility that Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company would open a department store at Herald Square referred incorrectly to the company's previous operations in New York.
They have indeed included some in Manhattan; periodically since 1928, Sears has operated stores there with limited offerings like appliances and home furnishings.
All of those stores have since closed.


Give Rivers No. 1 Spot As No. 2 Point Guard
The courtside scout was given a choice.
One season, one championship to win, all health and age factors considered, who do you like as your backup point guard, Greg Anthony or Doc Rivers?
This, I admit, is not exactly one for the ages, like who do you think has a better chance to become a functional pro center, Shawn Bradley or Gheorghe Muresan?
But as the Knicks otherwise have a set roster, and the Nets are holding their annual autumn talent nights in a brave attempt to merely fill theirs, Rivers versus Anthony will have to do as the basketball rage of late October.


Not Party, But Need Led Mayor
IT was dramatic, all right, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's endorsement of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
His news conference this week drew nine television cameras (two short of the unofficial City Hall record), what seemed like the entire mayoral staff and reporters so caught up in the moment that some lost all pretext of objectivity.
"This is exciting, it's HUGE," enthused one, almost dropping her microphone.
But the most surprising thing about the Mayor's break with his party is that he got around to it so quickly, not that he did it.
All New York mayors cross party lines.
They have to if the other party holds sway in Washington or Albany.
The City needs friends in both places.


Tenneco Net Rose by 36% In 3d Quarter
Tenneco Inc. reported today that its third-quarter earnings jumped 36 percent, driven by sharply higher income at its Case farm and construction equipment division and its packaging unit.
Tenneco, which is based in Houston, said third-quarter net income rose to $151 million, or 82 cents a share, compared with $111 million, or 61 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year ago.
Revenues rose 5 percent, to $3.29 billion, from $3.14 billion in the comparable period a year earlier.


President Offers Economic Plan for Mideast
Just hours after celebrating the formal peace between Israel and Jordan, President Clinton outlined a plan tonight to promote economic development across the Middle East.
But he coupled it with a warning that violence could still tear the region asunder.
Appearing before a joint session of the Jordanian Parliament, Mr.
Clinton served notice of the mixed optimism and apprehension with which his Administration is looking beyond the accord.
As he prepared to travel on Thursday to Syria, which has not yet agreed to peace terms with Israel, the President spoke of the stark choices he said the region still faces.


Accounts
*
Louise's Inc., Louisville, Ky., to Ground Zero, Venice, Calif., as the first agency to handle advertising for the maker of Louise's fat-free and low-fat snacks, including potato chips, tortilla chips and popcorn.
Billings were not disclosed. *
United Distillers P.L.C., London, to Leo Burnett/San Juan, to handle advertising for five brands -- Gordon's gin, Gordon's vodka, Tanqueray gin and Johnnie Walker Black and Red Labels Scotch whiskies -- in Puerto Rico, previously at BBDO Puerto Rico, San Juan.
Burnett already handles United Distillers brands in 25 other markets including the United States and Britain.
Billings were not disclosed.


Interpublic Responds To WPP Lawsuit
The Interpublic Group of Companies has responded to a suit filed in New York Supreme Court by the WPP Group USA that accused Interpublic of violating an agreement not to hire certain executives from two WPP agencies, J. Walter Thompson and Ogilvy &amp; Mather.


Anheuser-Busch Cos.  (BUD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kennedy and Romney Look to Round 2
After one widely watched debate with Senator Edward M. Kennedy that did not appear to have significantly helped the challenger, Mitt Romney, who spent most of today preparing for a second debate on Thursday that may be his last chance.
Linda Divall, Mr.
Romney's poll taker, said her candidate's goal for Thursday was "to be as effective as Senator Kennedy in terms of personalizing problems" and explaining that the 32-year incumbent's "policies have failed" in areas like crime and welfare.
She said Tuesday's debate showed that Mr.
Romney, a Republican businessman, "was very tenacious and capable of fighting back."


No-Lockout, No-Strike Accord Is Near for N.B.A.
Just when the start of the National Basketball Association season seemed to be teetering on the brink of a lockout that Commissioner David Stern had said wouldn't happen, negotiators for the league and the union reversed direction late yesterday afternoon as they continued secret talks on a new collective bargaining agreement.
Shortly after Charles Grantham, the head of the union, notified agents that the league was prepared to lock out the players next Monday if no agreement was reached by then, the two sides came close to agreeing that they would begin the season on time next Friday and play it under a no-lockout, no-strike pledge.


Victory Is Seen Only for U.S. and Israel
Many Arabs are greeting the peace treaty between Jordan and Israel without much joy.
It may be a turning point in the 46-year-old Arab-Israeli conflict, but Arabs tend to regard the treaty as an admission of an Arab defeat in a long struggle rather than an honorable end that deserves rejoicing.
Unlike the anticipation that surrounded the Madrid peace talks of 1991, when hopes were high that a new era might be about to begin in the Middle East, the feeling this time is that an uneven peace treaty is taking shape in which Israel, and its strategic ally the United States, are reaping the fruits of a victory while Arabs are simply hitching themselves to an inevitable but not particularly rewarding venture.


Eating in Style
NOTHING is too luxurious for a young child.
This sterling silver Victorian repousse set is made by Kirk Stieff, a Baltimore-based silversmith firm.
As some children's silverware designs slip more and more toward minimalism and others bend toward an overly babyish style, the fork and spoon at right are reassuringly old-fashioned.


Smoking Out California's Proposition 188
To the Editor:
Philip Morris placed a full-page ad in The Times of Oct. 20, proclaiming its disdain for youth as potential customers.
"No one should be allowed to sell cigarettes to minors," said the ad.
But Philip Morris is sponsoring a California state ballot initiative, Proposition 188, that is a wolf in sheep's clothing on this issue.


The Spoken Word
INSIDE BASEBALL WITH MARVIN MILLER, Marymount Manhattan College, 221 East 71st Street, Manhattan.
A lecture by the founder and former head of the Major League Baseball Players Association.
Tonight at 7:15.
Admission: $1.
Information: (212) 517-0564.
MURIEL RUKEYSER EVENING, New York University, Tishman Auditorium, 40 Washington Square South, Greenwich Village.
Works by the poet will be read by Jane Cooper, Galway Kinnell, Marilyn Hacker, Sharon Olds and Minnie Bruce Pratt.
Tonight at 7.
Free.
Information: (212) 998-8800.
LARRY KING, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue, Manhattan.
The broadcaster will speak about his show and his book "How to Talk to Anyone, Anytime, Anywhere." Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
ART TALK, Fulcrum Gallery, 144 Mercer Street, SoHo.
Leon Golub, the artist, will speak with Robert C. Morgan, a historian and writer.
Tonight at 8.
Admission: $6; $5 for students and the elderly.
Part of the Artists Talk on Art panel series.
Information: (212) 385-2862.
POETRY READING AND SLAM, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
Reading by Carl Hancock Rux, to be followed by a poetry slam, or competition.
Tonight at 10.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.


New Jersey Parents of Disabled Battle for a $160 Million Plan
Eileen Stuart is a rookie at campaigning, but she's been out most days lately trying to persuade New Jersey voters to approve a $160 million bond issue for housing for the disabled.
Today, she put a stack of fliers at the local bakery.
Before that, she left some at her hairdresser's and at a supermarket, a restaurant, a school, a doctor's office and with her rabbi.
"The point is to keep spreading the word," Mrs.
Stuart said.
"You just keep telling everyone you see. Wherever I go, wherever I stop, I ask if I can put the fliers out."


Hollywood Casino Corp.(HWCC,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Allston Jenkins; Conservationist, 91
Allston Jenkins, a founder and past president of the Philadelphia Conservationists, died on Monday at his home in the Chestnut Hill section of Philadelphia.
He was 91.
He suffered a brief illness, his family said.
Mr.
Jenkins, a certified public accountant, started a campaign in 1952 to set aside a portion of the Tinicum Marshes in southwest Philadelphia as a wildlife refuge.
That led to the formation of the Philadelphia Conservationists, which since then has preserved more than 45,000 acres of marsh, beach, forest and other land, turning the properties over to public agencies.


Grace (W.R.) &amp; Co. (GRA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Creative Changes At 2 Agencies
Two agencies in New York made changes yesterday in their creative leadership.
Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York named Rick Boyko, its executive creative director, and Bill Hamilton, its creative head, as co-creative heads.
Mr.
Boyko, 45, who previously reported to Mr.
Hamilton, 51, will join with him in supervising the creative department and its three other executive creative directors.


The Artistry of Those Who've Lived
There's no other company quite like Netherlands Dance Theater 3, which appeared on Wednesday night at the Majestic Theater as part of the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave Festival.
At a time when the choreographic accent tends to be on youth, this group is proud of the fact that all its dancers are over 40.
The troupe, which Jiri Kylian founded in 1991, isn't even a company in the usual sense.
Rather, it serves as a meeting-place for dancers to gather for longer or shorter periods of time and display their talents in works by several choreographers.


Time Warner and BellSouth Cool to License Bids
Two of the largest companies aspiring to offer wireless telephone services plan to hold off bidding during part or all of the forthcoming high-stakes auctions for radio licenses.
Time Warner Inc., the nation's second-largest cable operator, is set to disclose on Friday that it will not bid for any licenses being auctioned by the Federal Communications Commission on Dec. 5.
Those licenses, for wireless "personal communication services," are expected to draw billions of dollars in bids.


INSIDE
Race and Simpson's Jury
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson accused prosecutors of trying to keep blacks off the jury, bringing race to the surface of the case.
Page A29.
A Case of Lottery Fever
With a $60 million prize, the second largest jackpot ever in New York State, Lotto is the hottest ticket in town.
Page B1.
Minority Scholarships
A Federal appeals court ruled that the University of Maryland may not award certain scholarships exclusively to black students.
Page A24.
The Minds of Murderers
Who is to blame if a patient on a psychotherapeutic drug commits violence?
The answer is being sought in several courtrooms.
Page A29.


California G.O.P. Candidate Admits Hiring Illegal Alien
Confronted with a disclosure that for five years his family had employed an undocumented alien as a nanny, Representative Michael Huffington scrambled today to salvage a once-soaring political campaign that had been based in good part on a call for stricter immigration controls.
The Republican from Santa Barbara, who has spent almost $20 million of his oil fortune in an effort to unseat Senator Dianne Feinstein, faced the most daunting obstacle yet in his costly quest: a contradiction between talk and action on illegal immigration, the hottest political issue in California this fall.


Self-Mockery, Sincere Kind Of Flattery
As award shows go, George Schlatter's "Comedy Hall of Fame" has the distinct advantage of not daring to take itself too seriously.
Jonathan Winters, one of last year's inductees, insists the somewhat clunky-looking award makes a great doorstop.
George Carlin, in this year's charmed circle, uneasily notes that the event is "the kind of thing comedians should make fun of." They do, albeit gently and sometimes sentimentally, on tomorrow's "Second Annual Comedy Hall of Fame" on NBC.
Joining Mr.
Carlin on the list of inductees are Sid Caesar, Bob Hope, Shirley MacLaine, Mary Tyler Moore and Richard Pryor.
The presenters include Brett Butler, Bob Newhart, the Smothers Brothers and Phil Hartman, formerly of "Saturday Night Live" but still doing his best-of-the-lot Clinton impersonation.
Opening the show, Kelsey Grammer, who plays a psychiatrist on "Frasier," pointedly notes that "even a bad psychiatrist could make a fortune in this room."


Imo Industries Inc.(IMD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Attack by G.O.P. Lifts Democrats' Spirits
With little more than a week to go until Election Day, the national parties stepped up the volume today.
The Republicans introduced a series of sharply negative television advertisements, and the Democrats said that was a sign of panic over late-surging support for Democratic candidates and for President Clinton.
Seemingly frustrated by the criticism generated by their campaign device of having Republican Congressional candidates sign a "contract with America," Republican Party officials unveiled the three new television advertisements to be broadcast in the final days of the campaign.


Sounding the Alarm On Multiculturalism
DICTATORSHIP OF VIRTUE Multiculturalism and the Battle for America's Future
By Richard Bernstein
367 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
In the prologue where he sets out his purpose, which is to excoriate the Left (mostly educational) for the sins it commits in the name of fighting racism and sexism, Richard Bernstein demonstrates that the phenomenon he deplores is on the rise by doing a Nexis search for the words "multicultural" and "multiculturalism." There are 40 appearances in 1981, more than 2,000 in 1992: "a 50-fold increase in just 11 years."





CHRONICLE
That was not the only news out of Oxford yesterday.
ARTHUR MILLER, the American playwright, has been appointed the professor of contemporary theater at the university, Reuters reported.
Mr.
Miller, the author of "Death of a Salesman," "The Crucible" and other plays, will fill the academic post for one year, during which he is expected to deliver a minimum of three lectures.
A spokeswoman said he would begin in January.


Reno Attacks Proposal on Aliens, and Aide Questions Its Legality
Attorney General Janet Reno said today that she opposed a bitterly debated California ballot measure that would deny illegal immigrants educational and other social services, and one of her chief legal advisers said the proposal was open to constitutional challenge.
That adviser, Walter Dellinger, head of the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel, reported to Ms.
Reno in a memorandum that one of the measure's major provisions, which would deny illegal aliens access to public education, was in most respects "indistinguishable" from a Texas law struck down by the United States Supreme Court in 1982.


Symposium to Focus On Mahler in New York
"Mahler in America, 1907-1911," an educational symposium, is to take place on Nov. 19 and 20 at Weill Recital Hall.
Starting the second year of Carnegie Hall's presentation of Mahler's complete orchestral works, the symposium will focus on the composer's New York years, and will coincide with a performance of the Third Symphony by the St.
Louis Symphony on Nov. 19 and the opening, on Nov. 16, of a Mahler exhibit in the Rose Museum at Carnegie Hall.


Conseco Inc.(CNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Omnicom Group Inc.(OMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinic Trials of French Abortion Pill Begin in U.S.
Trials of the French abortion pill RU-486 have begun in the United States, the Population Council said yesterday.
But the organization said it would make no general announcement of the sites where women could obtain the drug because of concerns about potential violence.
A French company, Roussel Uclaf, which makes and distributes the abortion pill in Europe, has turned over to the council the United States rights to the drug mifepristone, the chemical name for RU-486.
In a telephone press conference from New York, council officials said that they knew of no threats against the council or against the 12 to 20 clinics that will be giving the drug on an experimental basis but that they were still concerned about possible violence.
Each clinic will decide whether to announce its own participation in the trials, which began within the last month.


Nynex Plan Intends Stringent Regulation
To the Editor:
"Phone Deregulation Won't Help Consumers" (letter, Oct. 20) leaves the impression that the incentive regulation plan now before the New York Public Service Commission is an effort to deregulate Nynex.
As a signer of the plan, I believe that it intends stringent regulation.


Give President Credit for Restoring Tax Equity; Official Jobless Policy
To the Editor:
Answering a news conference question on Oct. 21, President Clinton outlined his efforts to overcome the "loss of economic opportunity" by many citizens, according to your Oct. 22 transcript.
He included moving people "from welfare to work," "bringing this economy back," creating jobs and establishing "community development banks and empowerment zones in our inner cities."


Assad and Clinton Speak: Shared Quest for Peace
Following are excerpts from remarks by President Clinton and President Hafez el-Assad of Syria at a joint news conference after they met at the Presidential Palace in Damascus, as transcribed for Reuters by the Federal News Service, a private transcription company.
President Assad's remarks were made through an interpreter.
OPENING STATEMENTS
PRESIDENT ASSAD: I would like to express my deep satisfaction with the fact that our views were identical regarding the importance of achieving a comprehensive peace on the basis of Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338 and the principle of land for peace and that the solution we seek has to be just in order to be stable and lasting.


Knicks' Injuries Don't Faze Riley, Now
After another game of "mixing and matching," as Pat Riley called it, the Knicks' coach was asked today whether his team's plethora of injuries has retarded its progress this preseason.
Riley looked directly at his questioner and said, with feeling: "Not really. We know who we are. When we get our guys back, we're gonna be a solid team."


Coca-Cola Bottling Co.  (COKE,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


MGM Grand Inc.(MGG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Publisher Named at Elle
Hachette Filipacchi named Carl Portale publisher of Elle magazine yesterday.
The appointment is effective on Monday.
Mr.
Portale, publisher of Harper's Bazaar since 1991, replaces Diane Wichard Silberstein, who was named publisher of The New Yorker earlier this month.


Cuomo Relies on the Loyal For Campaign's Inner Circle
Above all, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo values loyalty, according to many of those who have worked for him during his 12 years in Albany.
It comes as no surprise then that most of his top campaign operatives this year are longtime Cuomo aides and friends who have played significant roles in the Governor's political life.
There is little new blood within the inner circle of the Cuomo campaign.
In fact, particularly in the latter years of his tenure, Mr.
Cuomo has been criticized for surrounding himself with aides who are reluctant to challenge him on issues.
Mr.
Cuomo rejects that criticism and argues that his staff is as strong as ever.


Proof of Punk's Currency
How fast can a band play without sacrificing melody?
How loud can a singer scream while still carrying a tune?
How can a band stay on the edge without going over the top?
These are questions today's aspiring punk-rockers seem to be asking themselves.
The result has been success for bands like the Offspring and Rancid, which performed on Tuesday night at Roseland.
The Offspring's newest album, "Smash" (Epitaph), recently became the first independently released and distributed album to break into the top five on the pop charts in several years.
And surveying Rancid from the audience on Tuesday was Madonna, who is said to be interested in signing the band to her record label.


SCEcorp (SCE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Divisiveness of Shrine Issue Forces Clinton to Drop Tour
A nonevent today on President Clinton's Jerusalem schedule rekindled the long conflict between Arabs and Jews over who has sovereignty of this holy but eternally difficult city.
By having his schedulers look into a possible late-night tour of Jewish, Muslim and Christian shrines in the walled Old City, Mr.
Clinton stepped into a political and religious minefield that threatened explosions until he backed off and canceled his tentative plans.


Market Bounces Back as Dow Jumps 26.92
Blue-chip stocks advanced yesterday, after five sessions of losses in which the Dow Jones industrial average fell 88 points, or 2.2 percent.
The Dow jumped 26.92 points yesterday, or seven-tenths of 1 percent, to 3,875.15.
The increase in prices, moreover, was spread across the board, with the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index up 3.23 points, to 465.85, the Nasdaq composite index up 4.23 points, to 767.47, and the American Stock Exchange market value index up 1.56 points, to 455.09.


American International Group Inc.(AIG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SCI Systems Inc.(SCIS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Giuliani Cuts In Spending To Start Now
In blunt defiance of the City Council, the administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is already moving to impose some of the $800 million in new spending cuts announced three days ago, a move the Council's leaders said yesterday could violate the City Charter.
The Mayor's senior aide, Deputy Mayor Peter J. Powers, said the administration had to move ahead with the spending cuts in the city's agencies to avert even deeper ones.
"If you delay putting any cuts in, it means you have to cut deeper later," Mr.
Powers said in an interview yesterday.
"What we're trying to do is start now."


Charles H. Waeckerle 3d, 46, Fashion Executive
Charles Henry Waeckerle 3d, a vice president of Oscar de la Renta Ltd., the New York fashion company, died on Wednesday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 46 and lived in Stone Ridge, N.Y., and the Gramercy Park section of Manhattan.
The cause was complications from liver failure due to hepatitis B, said Timothy Pope, a family spokesman.


Astral Communication reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Allied Signal Inc.(ALD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brantley the First Free Agent to Sign
The business of baseball went on yesterday as if the strike did not exist.
Three more players filed for free agency and reliever JEFF BRANTLEY became the first free agent to sign this off season, returning to the Cincinnati Reds for a two-year, $2.5 million deal.
Brantley, who filed for free agency on Oct. 17, can make $3.5 million over two years if he pitches in 50 games per season.
The reliever, who had a $500,000 base salary last season, earned an additional $1 million in performance bonuses.
Brantley became the fourth player to sign a major contract since the strike began Aug. 12.


America's Cup Racers Get Taste of Real Thing
The world championship for America's Cup yachts will bring top players to the field when it begins here Friday.
But for participants, the series is like preseason football: being there is more important than winning, and watching others is more valuable than being seen.
For the America
all-women's team, the regatta brings the first opportunity to race without male coaches on board.
For John Bertrand of Australia, it is a chance to compete for the first time since winning the America's Cup in 1983.
And for the PACT 95 syndicate from Maine, it's the first chance to compete at all.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Forstmann Little bid $1.4 billion to buy Ziff-Davis, the leading publisher of computer magazines.
The deal would include PC Magazine and Computer Shopper.
The investment firm's cash offer surprised many in the media industry.  [ Page D1. ]


Airgas Inc.(ARG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Williams Talks at Schools in Poor Areas
VENUS WILLIAMS, the newest 14-year-old phenom to turn pro, made a whistle-stop tour of two schools and a tennis center yesterday in the heart of the inner city in Oakland, Calif.
The draw for the Bank of the West Classic in Oakland, where Williams will make her professional debut next week, will be announced today.
To coincide with her debut, her father requested that clinics be set up in schools in poor areas and that Williams give motivational speeches to the students.


In Africa, the U.S. Takes a Back Seat
When the Deputy Secretary of State, Strobe Talbott, set out for Africa last week on his first diplomatic mission here, he openly acknowledged that for him, as for much of the American foreign policy establishment, this continent was "terra incognita."
And from the very first stop, Bujumbura, Burundi's capital, the trip was full of reminders that for much of Africa visits by high-level American officials are just as unfamiliar an experience.


Bagwell's Latest Stat: All the M.V.P. Votes
Jeff Bagwell, the Red Sox reject who led the National League in four key batting categories as a first baseman for the Houston Astros, was the unanimous choice as the league's most valuable player yesterday, strengthening his reputation in Boston as the second going of Babe Ruth.
Bagwell, a .368 hitter who led the league with 116 runs batted in, 104 runs scored, 301 total bases and a .750 slugging average in a strike-attenuated 115-game season, swept all 28 votes in balloting by the Baseball Writers Association of America.


Editors' Note
An article in Business Day yesterday discussed rumors affecting the stock of Presstek, an imaging technology company.
The rumors suggested that Presstek's chairman, Robert Howard, might actually be Howard Finkelstein, a convicted felon.


LG&amp;E Energy (LGE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Two Masters of a Medium in Their Early Years
The early works of well-known photographers often reveal stylistic roots that are hidden in later, more polished images.
Two very different but equally fascinating shows in Manhattan, photographs by Robert Frank at the Pace/MacGill Gallery and by Garry Winogrand at the Bonni Benrubi Gallery, offer a chance to examine early pictures by leading figures in recent American photography.
Both Winogrand, who died in 1984, and Mr.
Frank came into their own as magazine photographers in New York City in the 1950's, and both took the American social scene as a major theme in their art.
But the differences between their approaches and careers are as striking as their similarities.


Whose Fault When the Medicated Run Amok?
A patient goes to the doctor complaining of persistent depression or overwhelming anxiety or some other malady of the mind.
The solution, typically, comes in a capsule.
But suppose the patient on medication commits suicide or a violent crime.
Who, if anyone, is to blame?
With millions of people using antidepressants, sedatives and other psychotherapeutic drugs, that question is by no means hypothetical: Patients, their families, even their victims are asking it a lot these days, and they are asking it in court.


Diner's Journal
Lutece, as Always
Lutece may have a new owner, Michael Weinstein, but you would never know it from eating there.
The restaurant seems exactly the same today as it was yesterday and last week and last year and the year before that.
No American restaurant has ever succeeded in aging quite so gracefully.
Simone Soltner is at her post by the door and Andre Soltner, her husband, his white toque slightly askew, is still perambulating between the dining room and the kitchen, stopping graciously at each table.


D.M.B.&amp; B. Gets T.W.A. Account
Trans World Airlines Inc. named its third agency in five years yesterday by selecting D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in St.
Louis to handle its account, with billings estimated at more than $40 million.
The assignment had been expected since the airline and Bates Worldwide in New York agreed earlier this month not to renew their yearlong contract when it expires at the end of December.


Interim ServicesInc.(INTM,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 23


Florida to Try Early Deportation
Some illegal immigrants suspected of crimes in Florida may now be deported even before they go to trial under a pilot program announced here today by the Immigration and Naturalization Service and the state.
Under the three-month program, immigrants accused of misdemeanors and nonviolent felonies for which they would have served little or no prison time could avoid trial by agreeing to be deported, said Doris M. Meissner, the Commissioner of the immigration service.
Immigrants accepting the arrangement would have to agree not to return to the United States.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-21  CLINTON SEES GAINS IN SYRIA  President Clinton said had he won some private assurances from Syria's President that could speed the peace talks but did not get a message that aides had hoped might reassure the Israelis.
A1  President Clinton's plans for a tour in Jerusalem were thwarted.
A20


Corrections
A "Campaign Snapshot" chart on Oct. 20, about the Pennsylvania Senate race, misstated voter registration figures in some editions.
The figures for registered voters are: Democrats, 2,946,266; Republicans, 2,476,977; Others, 369,038.


Lawyers Title Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; The selloff in municipal bond mutual funds picks up speed.
THERE are worse things in life than taxes.
That, in any case, seems to be a belief taking hold with more investors in mutual funds.
With interest rates heading up, enough losses have accumulated in funds that invest in municipal bonds that investors are beginning to flee in larger numbers than before.
"Munis and governments are taking a pretty significant beating," said Bruce Speca, an official of the New England Funds, speaking of cash flows this month.


Two Parents, Two Murders, Two Children, Too Much
In "Silent Fall," Richard Dreyfuss plays a psychiatrist who solves a double murder witnessed by the victims' 9-year-old autistic son.
As the final credits roll, the singers Wynonna and Michael English wail the movie's theme song: "Healin', I'm healin.' " It's the last ludicrous touch in a film that starts out offering the depth and suspense of a mediocre made-for-television movie and ends up as something much worse.
As Jake Rainer, Mr.
Dreyfuss is overwrought even before he is called by the sheriff to the house of a wealthy couple.
In an example of the film's wincingly bad dialogue, the sheriff says, "Meet the Wardens," pointing to two extremely bloody sheets not entirely covering the corpses.
Their son, Tim (Ben Faulkner), is downstairs holding a knife and making stabbing motions.
Tim's beautiful 18-year-old sister, Sylvie, is cowering in a closet.


ABM Treaty Failed To Cool Arms Race
To the Editor:
"Back to the Arms Race?" (Op-Ed, Oct. 25), by John D. Holum and John Pike, is distinguished for being twice wrong, and illustrative of how the mantras of arms control have been repeated since 1972.


Ukraine Wins Pledges of Support at Canadian Finance Meeting
Ukraine, whose economy has nosedived since independence three years ago, won pledges for hundreds of millions of dollars in international financial support today to prop up the market-oriented reforms of its new President, Leonid D. Kuchma.
Mr.
Kuchma, the 55-year-old former head of a missile factory who is making his first foreign trip since his election in July, said that as a result of the pledges, he sees a "stable, economically powerful, democratic and independent Ukraine, which will be integrated into the world's political and economic system."


N.B.A. and Players Agree to Play Ball This Season
Breaking the chains of labor strife that have linked baseball and hockey in unprecedented shutdowns, the National Basketball Association and its players proclaimed eight months of labor peace yesterday and pledged to play their season while trying to forge a lasting agreement.
Commissioner David Stern and Charles Grantham, the union chief, acknowledged the difficult task ahead, but they said they hoped their no-lockout, no-strike agreement would create an atmosphere conducive to productive talks and long-term peace.


Citgo Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Niagara Mohawk Power Corp.(NMK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Interest Seen In Another Ziff Holding
The $1.4 billion sale of the Ziff-Davis Publishing Company to Forstmann Little &amp; Company yesterday still leaves three of the Ziff family's operations on the block, including the much-anticipated Interchange Online Network, an electronic publishing system.
Interchange, scheduled to begin final testing next week with more than 12,000 users nationwide, has been characterized as a new type of on-line information network whose technological capabilities go beyond those of America Online, Compuserve and Prodigy.
Unlike those older services, Interchange was designed to take advantage of powerful, multimedia computers now available at relatively low cost.


N.B.A. Truce Is Good, But Accord Is a Must
The National Basketball Association and its players, in a fit of wisdom, have vowed to preserve their coming season.
That wins them points, whereas major league baseball and professional hockey managed to win none this year.
But it is very important to remember that what the N.B.A. accomplished when it declared a no-strike, no-lockout ceasefire yesterday is a step -- a big step -- but not the most important step.
Only a new basic agreement will prevent what too often this year has been the inevitable and damaging work stoppage for a professional sport.


Dole Food Co. (DOL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 8


Northern States Power Co.(NSP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Prime Time, the N.Y.P.D. Rules; 8 Million Stories About Police? It Just Seems That Many
A vengeful cop guns down a drug dealer for selling coma-inducing heroin to his cousin.
It turns out, however, that the cousin got the drugs from someone else, and the police officer had killed the wrong person.
Facing arrest, the cop shoots himself.
Drugs, violence, sidestepping the law, suicide.
Given headlines this year, you might think this is another horror story from the New York City Police Department.
Actually, it is taken from a recent episode of a new Fox show, "New York Undercover," one of three network series focusing on New York City police.
The other two are NBC's "Law and Order," in its fifth season, and ABC's "N.Y.P.D. Blue," which made its debut a year ago.


Legal Aid Strike Left Unresolved Issues
To the Editor:
As an Assigned Counsel (18B) lawyer, I am concerned about the ramifications of the recent strike by Legal Aid lawyers in New York.


Investigating Beethoven's Modernity
Two celebrations -- one sober, the other happier -- converged at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday night.
The Tokyo String Quartet is observing its 25th birthday with an extended act of generosity, the Beethoven cycle in six concerts given in behalf of Classical Action: Performing Arts Against AIDS.
Alternating between Carnegie and Avery Fisher Halls, the series is to stretch over the season and end on May 10.
The writer has a bewildering job in circumstances like this.
Beethoven must be protected, and yet one hesitates to look gift horses in the mouth, especially when the horse is a thoroughbred like the Tokyo and the race is of such deadly seriousness.
The program was Opus 18, No.2; the "Serioso" (Op. 95), and the great A minor (Op. 132).
All three spoke about Beethoven's nature and about the peculiar qualities of its interpreters on Wednesday.


CHRONICLE
Resolve, a national advocacy and support organization for people coping with infertility, will present the Barbara Eck Menning Award, named for its founder, to JOBETH WILLIAMS, the film and television actress, tomorrow at the Miramar Sheraton Hotel in Santa Monica, Calif.
The New York chapter of Resolve presented its President's Award to AL ROKER, the WNBC-TV weather forecaster, last night at the Puck Building in Manhattan.
Both award recipients have been outspoken on the issue.


Salomon Plans Big Pay Cuts If Business Doesn't Improve
Losing money on much of its operations this year, Salomon Brothers yesterday announced a new compensation plan for next year that would sharply cut the pay of many of its highest-paid executives if business did not improve.
The plan calls for the more than 100 managing directors in Salomon's "client-driven business" to receive base compensation equivalent to about 35 percent of their total compensation for 1994.
And if those businesses do not make money, that is all they will get.


Warner Music Officials Settle a Power Struggle
A power struggle that broke out this week in the executive ranks of the Warner Music Group seemed to abate late today, with Doug Morris emerging as a winner over his boss, Robert J. Morgado, the chairman and chief executive of the group, the world's biggest record distributor and the most profitable arm of Time Warner Inc.
Company executives said that Mr.
Morris, who in July was put in charge of the company's three record groups, Warner Brothers, Elektra and Atlantic Records, had a showdown with Mr.
Morgado this week because he was not allowed to run the labels as he saw fit.
At a meeting on Wednesday with Time Warner's chairman, Gerald M. Levin, Mr.
Morris was said by executives to have threatened to quit if he had to continue reporting to Mr.
Morgado.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Announced they will not exercise their 1995 option on Gary Gaetti, third baeman.


Union Texas Petroleum Holdings Inc.(UTH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Serenity Becomes Dramatic
Weslia Whitfield, the cabaret singer from San Francisco who has become a regular visitor to New York, smooths out the rougher psychological edges of everything she performs to create a mood of calm, homey gentility.
The singer, who has settled into the Oak Room at the Algonquin Hotel (59 West 44th Street, Manhattan) for an engagement that extends through New Year's Eve, is performing a program of songs written mostly by Richard Rodgers in her new show, "I Have Dreamed." Rodgers's songs, especially the upbeat tunes he wrote with Oscar Hammerstein 2d, suit her unfussy, jazz-inflected approach.
Accompanied by Mike Greensill on piano and Michael Moore on bass, she spins out one standard after another in a voice that rarely rises above a pleasant conversational tone.


Integon Corp.(IN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
'Every Picture Tells a Story' 'Word and Image in American Folk Art'
Museum of American Folk Art  2 Lincoln Square (at 65th Street)  Through Jan. 15
This low-key exhibition of mostly 19th-century objects incorporating words suggests interesting if oblique connections to the overwhelming reliance on texts in contemporary art.
And it confirms the historically loquacious, self-recording, commentarial nature of Americans as a people, which is as apparent in the samplers, shop signs and manuscripts on view here as in the recent work of a Mike Kelley or a Barbara Kruger.


Film Plans for Buttafuoco Upset Officials in Village
The Westchester County village of Croton-on-Hudson is four square miles of tree-lined streets, village shops and manicured lawns.
It is no place for the likes of Joey Buttafuoco, village officials here said yesterday.


No Headline
"I gotta be out of my head. I never win anything. Sometimes I think people ought to just take the money, buy a new tie and look for a better job." RICK CONIGLIO, a Buffalo optician, buying five lottery tickets.  [ B3:1. ]


At the Bar
Forget Darrow-Bryan. This was Ali-Frazier . . . and Foreman.
The scene: The 92d Street Y, last Sunday night, a packed house for one in a series of public forums.
The referee: Charlie Rose, himself no lightweight.
In this corner: William M. Kunstler, prince of the poor and politically persecuted, defender of the reviled or oppressed, from Lenny Bruce to the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. to Colin Ferguson.


Genzyme Corp.(GENZ,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Editorial Notebook; The 'Scientific' War on the Poor
Everyone knows the stereotype of the fair-haired executive who owes the office with the view and the six-figure salary to an accident of birth -- like relatives in the halls of power.
What about merit, for heaven's sake?
Why not give I.Q. tests, grant the best jobs to those who score well and send the laggards to the mailroom?
That would never happen, nor should it.
I.Q. scores in themselves tell you almost nothing.
This was clearly explained by the Frenchmen Alfred Binet, who invented the first usable I.Q. test in 1905.
The test had one purpose: to help identify learning-disabled children who needed special schools.
Binet warned that a "brutal pessimism" would follow if his test was ever mistaken as a measure of a fixed, unchangeable intelligence.


The Phony Use of Genuine Grief
Families of murder victims have heartbreaking stories to tell.
But candidates for political office all over the country are displaying a distasteful tendency to exploit these stories for their own benefit.
This is a shameful new form of victim abuse.
The shame is compounded when the politician fraudulently uses a family's bereavement to argue for the death penalty and to depict an opponent as soft on crime.
Take the Florida commercial in which Jeb Bush, running for governor, attacks the incumbent, Lawton Chiles.
It shows the mother of a 10-year-old murder victim, Elisa Nelson, saying that Larry Mann, convicted of Elisa's killing 14 years ago, "is still on death row and we're still waiting for justice." She adds: "We won't get it from Lawton Chiles because he's too liberal on crime."


Without Hearing Word,Proof Is Inconclusive
Lip readers, send out your resumes.
America's network sports divisions need you to help their personnel who are gathered around tapes of the Oct. 16 Dolphins-Raiders game trying to discern whether Los Angeles Coach Art Shell uttered "white" while ripping his quarterback Jeff Hostetler.
The charge was made last Sunday by ESPN's Chris Mortensen and the furor it created has not died down yet.
So far, the epithet-by-epithet analysis has not turned up the word "white." A person who watched the tape at ESPN said, "You can't literally know every word." He said Shell said one word before uttering a nasty curse.
But was it "white"?
The tape is inconclusive.


Kuwait Journal; G.I.'s in the Gulf Meet the Enemy: Sand Flies
By now the young soldiers of Company C have learned a lesson every veteran knows: that soldiering brings with it brief moments of anxiety and excitement and long droughts of boredom and routine.
Early this month, with Iraqi forces poised to attack Kuwait, these Americans scrambled with little sleep and pounding hearts to ready their vehicles and their weapons in what could have meant heavy fighting.
Now, in the searing desert heat, they swat at sand flies, guzzle plastic bottles of water and banter away the afternoons, trying to make sense of a conflict few say they really understand.


Imasco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article and a picture caption on Oct. 16 about famous people buried at Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn misstated the location of a railroad executive, T. C. Durant, in an 1869 photograph commemorating the joining of the Central Pacific and the Union Pacific.
Durant is in the crowd; the two men shaking hands are Samuel Montague and Grenville Dodge.


Kerr-McGee Corp.(KMG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. and Cuba Seem to Make Little Headway on Refugee Issue
The United States and Cuba have wrapped up talks here on immigration issues, making little apparent headway on the status of thousands of Cuban refugees being held in American internment camps.
Officials of both countries described the three days of talks that ended Wednesday night as a largely satisfactory review of issues raised on carrying out the agreement they signed on Sept. 9 to end a monthlong flood of Cubans from the island.


A Daughter and a Father Who's Become a Woman
In "The Sex of the Stars," a French Canadian film awash in sudsy histrionics, Denis Mercier portrays an astronomer who returns to Montreal after a sex-change operation to visit his 12-year-old daughter, Camille (Marianne-Coquelicot Mercier, who is not related to Mr. Mercier).
When Henri-Pierre, who left Canada seven years earlier to live in New York, reappears as Marie-Pierre, his former wife, Michele (Sylvie Drapeau), goes ballistic and his former employer tells him flatly that he looks ridiculous.
In fact, he does.
Mr.
Mercier's Marie-Pierre looks and acts like a manly man doing an unsophisticated drag act that could fool no one.
Batting his eyes and anxiously clutching his breast while wearing an insipid little smile, the actor is far less believable as a dowdy matronly type than Dustin Hoffman was in "Tootsie." "Tootsie," of course, was a comedy.
"The Sex of the Stars," which opens today at the Quad Cinema, doesn't crack a smile.


Ionics Inc.(ION,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RANKS OF INMATES REACH ONE MILLION IN A 2-DECADE RISE
This summer, the number of inmates in America's prisons topped one million for the first time, the Justice Department said today, releasing a survey that reflected decades of demands for tougher punishments.
The survey, conducted by the Bureau of Justice Statistics, found that 1,012,851 men and women were in state and Federal prisons on June 30.
The bureau said the country's prison population grew by nearly 40,000 inmates in the first six months of this year, equivalent to 1,500 new prisoners a week.
This figure does not include inmates in local jails, like Rikers Island in New York.
In 1992, the last time they were counted, 445,000 people were in local jails.


COMPANY BRIEFS
HASBRO INC., Pawtucket, R.I., a toy maker, agreed to manufacture and market several lines of toys under the name of Nickelodeon, the children's cable television network, a registered trademark of MTV Networks, a division of Viacom Inc., Dedham, Mass.
HEWLETT-PACKARD CO., Palo Alto, Calif., has agreed to acquire Versatest Inc., a privately held maker of test equipment for computer chips, including flash memory devices, on Oct. 31.
The terms of the deal were not disclosed.


Gen. Yang Dezhi, 83, Dies; Was Chinese Army Chief
Gen.
Yang Dezhi, a Chinese military leader for more than half a century and a former Army Chief of Staff who opposed the Tiananmen Square crackdown, died on Tuesday, the official New China News Agency reported.
He was 83.
The cause of death was not given.
General Yang's military career stretched from the creation of the Communist army in 1927 to China's invasion of Vietnam in 1979.
He made his name as a daring military leader during the fabled Long March and was a top commander of Chinese forces during the Korean War.


Noe Says Five Days Of Racing Are Enough
Kenneth Noe Jr. took the reins as president and general manager of New York's race tracks yesterday and promptly said: "We've got too much racing in this country, and I intend to do something real quick."
He was asked if he meant something like the five-day week, and he replied: "Absolutely. You won't get a four-horse field in the opening race that way."


N.B.A. Truce Snaps Fans' Losing Streak
Eight days before the regular season is scheduled to open, the National Basketball Association and its players' union averted the kind of labor strife that has shut down baseball for the last 11 weeks and hockey for the last four.
Under the condition that the league would not lock out players and the union would not strike, both sides agreed to play the season to completion while trying to reach a new collective bargaining agreement.


A Down-to-Earth View at United
Gerald Greenwald, chairman of United Airlines, observed recently that the airline is a business of a million details.
But in the three months since he took over the employee-owned company, he has subtracted a few items from that list.
The toe-cleavage rule was one of the first.
Toe cleavage refers to the spaces between the toes that were once fashionable to display with low-cut shoes.
Former management thought it was inappropriate and flight attendants were not allowed to wear shoes that revealed it.


Leggett &amp; Platt (LEG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Intestinal Distress as a Raison d'Etre
In the process of lampooning turn-of-the-century health food faddists, "The Road to Wellville" displays lunacy of its own.
Here is a lavish, overproduced satire that finds its hilarity in bowel jokes, bowel-touting slogans and bowel-related dinnertime conversation. ("Sore rectum?" "Yes, somewhat.") Don't count on being amused if you don't think the best place for a high colonic is the movie screen.
Don't be surprised when one scene unfolds in a sanitarium's Fecal Analysis Room, where an exam is under way.
"The Road to Wellville" may be loaded with intestine-invading contraptions, but heads were what needed to be examined.
Based on a wildly unfilmable novel by T. Coraghessan Boyle, it has only the faintest satirical potential, which has been squashed by too many sets, costumes, extras and woebegone stars.
The film was grandly shot at Mohonk Mountain House in New Paltz, N.Y., which is undoubtedly a nicer place to visit without the signs that read "Clean Bowels Make for Clean Thoughts," and so on.


THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: MASSACHUSETTS
Senator Edward M. Kennedy and his Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, met in debate tonight and staged a generally pallid battle of policy details rather than the dramatics of their encounter two nights earlier.
The only heated confrontation was over crime, after Mr.
Romney said Mr.
Kennedy was too soft because he had opposed some provisions for mandatory fixed sentences, especially in cases where guns were used.
Mr.
Kennedy then demanded to know where Mr.
Romney stood on banning cheap handguns.


There's No Escape, So Brown Just Copes
He has tried to block out the criticism.
And Dave Brown has done a pretty good job of it.
But he is in New York, after all, the media capital of the universe where a person would have to stick themselves in a refrigerator to avoid the spotlight.
Brown shouldn't have been surprised when he woke up Monday morning after the Giants had lost their fourth consecutive game and his alarm went off to a preset radio station.
On it was -- what else -- a discussion about him.


On Stage, and Off
The Drought of Leading Men
Lincoln Center Theater has dropped "Tonight at 8:30," a two-night cycle of seven Noel Coward one-act plays, from its Broadway plans this year.
And why?
Because New York isn't a big enough town to produce the right leading man.
At least, not one who isn't committed to a bigger town called Hollywood.
"A handsome leading man over 40 -- that's the toughest assignment in the theater," said Andre Bishop, the theater's artistic director.
"We already had Blythe Danner, Nancy Marchand and Simon Jones. But this needed someone in his mid-40's or older, attractive, who sings well, who dances, who can do English for real -- not a phony-baloney accent -- who can partner an actress as wonderful as Blythe Danner, and has a certain . . . um . . . Cowardian insouciance."


Cuomo Remains Strong With Gay Supporters
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo stood before 550 homosexual New Yorkers at a fund-raising dinner earlier this month and said he sought their support "for the good of all the gay and lesbian people." They gave him a standing ovation.
A week earlier, State Senator George E. Pataki met quietly and inconclusively with four gay Republican and Conservative leaders at his Manhattan campaign office.


Agco Corp.(AG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A 16-Year-Old Turns Professional, Too
MEILEN TU, the 16-year-old United States Open junior singles champion, also chose next week in Oakland, Calif., for her professional debut on Monday.
"Her future is going ahead, improving her game," said MEI TU, Meilen's mother and coach.
"There is no reason to play juniors. I think this is a process. Nothing too exciting. Being pro is no different for Meilen. It's just a high level." Tu beat MARTINA HINGIS, widely acknowledged as the world's best junior, for the Open junior singles title in September.


Shell Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI FOCUSES ON ENDORSEMENT'S PRICE
State Senator George E. Pataki's campaign allies suggested that they would use Mayor Guiliani's endorsement of Governor Cuomo to their advantage by telling voters outside the city that Mr.
Cuomo would have to pay Mr.
Giuliani back with fiscal help to the city.
A1.
Most of the Cuomo campaign operatives are longtime Cuomo aides and friends. B5.


Journalist as Reporter for Prosecution
When Connecticut magazine ran an article in August in which William F. Meyer 3d detailed how he had helped his terminally ill father commit suicide three years ago in West Hartford, Conn., officials decided to reopen their investigation of the death.
When they asked Karon Haller, the freelance journalist who wrote the article, to discuss the case, she agreed without hesitation.
And she willingly gave them all her notes and tape recordings of her conversations with the younger Mr.
Meyer.


AST Research (ASTA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Alberto-Culver Co. (ACV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Announcer Ousted for Insulting Visitors
The University of Pittsburgh's football public address announcer, DON IRELAND, has resigned after the university apologized for jokes he made at the expense of rival West Virginia during the West Virginia-Pitt game on Oct. 15.
Ireland made several fictitious announcements over the public address system poking fun at the Mountaineers.
He said there was a tractor in the parking lot with its lights on bearing the West Virginia license plate "EIEIO." He also said the stadium's smoking ban included corncob pipes, and he paged a fictitious doctor to call home in Morgantown.


One Little Word Pervades Robb-North Race: Liar
As the Senate race winds down in Virginia, accusations of lying continue to cloud many of the issues that separate the Democratic incumbent, Charles S. Robb, and his Republican challenger, Oliver L. North.
No need using euphemisms like "credibility factor" or "character issue." The candidates don't.
Most days, one calls the other a liar, and surrogates chime in, reflecting a style of jugular politics rare in Virginia though long familiar in other Southern states through campaigners like Lester Maddox, George Wallace, Edwin Edwards and Jesse Helms.


Race for Governor: Cuomo Rebuts Pataki on Crime
CANDIDATE Mario M. Cuomo PRODUCER The Garth Group, New York City


Ryland Group Inc.(RYL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Judge Halts Shift of Welfare Supervisors
A Federal District Court judge ruled yesterday that New York City cannot go forward with its plans to slash the number of supervisors in its welfare centers until it convinces him it will do a better job of providing poor people with benefits in a timely fashion.
The city had intended to begin redeploying about 30 percent of the 583 supervisors on Tuesday, city officials said.
But Judge Charles P. Sifton, of the Eastern District in Brooklyn, called a halt to the redeployment yesterday and ordered the city to submit a plan to him specifying how it will meet Federal and state mandates to provide welfare recipients with their benefits.


Kathleen L. Schwaninger, 50, An Advocate for the Disabled
Kathleen L. Schwaninger, an advocate for the disabled who played a critical role in the decade-long effort to close down the Willowbrook State School for the mentally retarded on Staten Island and who went on to help found an agency to aid seriously ill children, died Sunday in a plane crash in Hyannis, Mass.
She was 50 and lived in Brooklyn and East Falmouth, Mass.
Ms.
Schwaninger became executive director of the Willowbrook Review Panel in 1978, three years after it was created under a Federal court order to monitor the release of residents of Willowbrook into community settings.
Willowbrook was then the state's largest treatment center for the mentally retarded, and the panel was criticized for its oversight of the process, which included placing residents in smaller institutions within the community.
The seven-member panel was dissolved in 1980 after Albany cut off its financing.


AMP Inc.(AMP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jefferson-Pilot Corp.(JP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Great Debate Debate: Hopefuls Clash on Oratory
Continuing one of the most grueling debate schedules in the nation, the four candidates for governor of Connecticut took one another on twice today -- a sort of day-night double-header -- staking out opposing positions on whether to eliminate the central legacy of Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s administration -- the state income tax.
The debate this afternoon again drew attention to a domestic dispute in April between the front-runner, John G. Rowland, the Republican candidate, and his former wife.


Homeless Man Arrested In Rape of Jogger in Park
A homeless immigrant was arrested yesterday in the rape at knifepoint earlier this month of a woman who was jogging in Central Park late at night, the police said yesterday.
The police said the suspect, Salif Diop, an immigrant from Senegal in his 20's, lived in a cardboard box behind the Central Park Conservatory at 102d Street and Fifth Avenue.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
YOUNG PLAYWRIGHTS FESTIVAL, Joseph Papp Public Theater/LuEsther Hall, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village.
Plays by three writers under 19 years old: "The Basement at the Bottom at the End of the World," by Nadine Graham; "The Most Massive Woman Wins," by Madeleine George, and "The Love of Bullets," by Jerome D. Hairston.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25; $9 for students.
Information: (212) 307-1140.
"BLAMING MOM," Ohio Theater Space, 66 Wooster Street, SoHo.
A one-act comedy by David Edelstein; directed by Nela Wagman.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M.
Tickets, $12.
Information: (212) 966-9290.
"BAROQUE SPLENDOR: THE ART OF THE HUNGARIAN GOLDSMITH," Bard Center for Studies in the Decorative Arts, 18 West 86th Street, Manhattan.
A display of 200 objects, including platters, jewelry, textiles, engravings and other items, on loan from the Hungarian National Museum in Budapest.
Through Sunday.
Hours: today through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $2; $1 for students and the elderly; free under age 12.
Information: (212) 721-4245.
NETHERLANDS DANCE THEATER, Brooklyn Academy of Music, Majestic Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $10 to $35.
Information: (718) 636-4100.


Corrections
A portrait of Nathan Cummings, founder of the Sara Lee Corporation, published on Aug. 13 with an article about family philanthropic foundations, lacked a credit.
It was painted by Daniel Greene.
The omission was pointed out in a letter dated Sept. 20 from Portraits Inc., through which the painting was commissioned.
This correction was delayed by an editing oversight.


Kelly Services (KELYA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


A Cut in Price By The Post Could Signal Tabloid War
The New York Post is cutting its newsstand price in half to 25 cents in New York City from Monday until the day after after Election Day, a move that could signal the start of new hardball newspaper competition in the city.
The nine-day price cut comes after months of hints by The Post's publisher, Martin Singerman, that the paper might slash its citywide price, which could draw the other city tabloids into a price war and costly battle for circulation.


Granting Father's Wish, or Manslaughter?
William F. Meyer Jr. drew his last breaths with his head encased in a plastic bag.
It was an inelegant but expedient way to end his life instead of succumbing slowly to the cancer that had begun in his colon and spread to his lungs.
"I happily decided that it was more kind and thoughtful of me to terminate my life before I reached a decadent condition of helplessness," the 88-year-old Mr.
Meyer wrote in a letter that he had photocopied, addressed, stamped and left to be mailed to some 80 friends and relatives.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief report in the Company News column in some editions of Business Day on Tuesday about a new arthritis drug from Pfizer Inc. misstated the price for which the drug is expected to be offered in Europe.
Neil B. Sweig, an analyst with Ladenburg, Thalmann &amp; Company, expects the price to be $1,000 to $1,500 a year.


Tight End Is B.C.'s Go-To Receiver
Third down for Boston College at the Rutgers 46-yard line, 3 yards needed for a first down, the score tied, 7-7, late in the fourth quarter.
Mark Hartsell passes to Pete Mitchell for an 8-yard gain.
First down.
Four plays later it is fourth-and-2 for B.C., and Hartsell again passes to Mitchell for a first down.
These two plays, better than any others, explain the value of Pete Mitchell, one of the premier tight ends in college football.


Home Video
New Kind of Videos
Before full video on demand via telephone and cable is established, some leaders of the current video trade would like to fit in another generation of store-bought items to replace tape eventually and even carry over into the new era.


Upstate, Pataki's New Message: Giuliani Endorsement Has Price
State Senator George E. Pataki's campaign allies suggested today that they would use Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's endorsement of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to their advantage, telling voters outside the city that Mr.
Cuomo would have to pay Mr.
Giuliani back with fiscal help to the city after the election.
As the governor's race focused on the split between New York City and upstate, Mr.
Pataki campaigned from Albany to Syracuse to Binghamton, and Mr.
Cuomo debated everyone except Mr.
Pataki in Buffalo.


Spiegel Inc.(SPGLA,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Browning-Ferris Industries Inc.(BFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Children
Halloween is no longer just about amassing 50 candy bars in one night.
This year, making masks is very important, the more creative or multicultural the better.
Children can also see theater programs on ghoulish themes, hear readings of ghost stories and get spooked out in all sorts of haunted places, including a windmill.
All this without ever eating chocolate. (Well, a little wouldn't hurt.) Here is a selection of events in the New York metropolitan region.  'It's Alive!' and 'So, Sue Me'
TriBeCa Performing Arts Center  199 Chambers Street  (212) 346-8510  Recommended ages: 5 and up  Through Nov. 6


Appeals Court Rules Against Minority Plan
The University of Maryland may not award a group of scholarships exclusively to black students, a Federal appeals court ruled yesterday in a decision that challenged the policy of the Clinton Administration.
A three-judge panel of the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals in Richmond ruled unanimously that the university had failed to show how the Benjamin Banneker scholarship program make up for the effects of past racism, the legal justification most often cited for scholarships set aside for a particular group.


Closing Arguments in Tailhook Lawsuit
Winding up a seven-week trial that offered a chronicle of debauchery by Naval aviators at the 1991 Tailhook Association convention here, lawyers for Paula A. Coughlin today said she should receive $5 million to $10 million dollars in damages resulting from a sexual assault on her.
Lawyers for the Hilton hotel where the convention took place countered in closing arguments that Ms.
Coughlin, a former Navy lieutenant who was the original whistle-blower on events at the convention of the association, had suffered only "mild" injuries from the incident.


Hedda Nussbaum Collapses in Court While Viewing Video of Past Injuries
It has been seven years since Joel Steinberg last struck Hedda Nussbaum.
But when a videotape of the countless injuries she suffered at his hands was played in a Manhattan courtroom yesterday, Ms.
Nussbaum collapsed on the witness stand and had to be helped out of court.
She did not utter a sound as she slumped in the witness chair, and many people did not know what had occurred until her lawyer, Betty Levinson, rushed to her side.
Earlier in the day, she had testified that when Mr.
Steinberg struck her with a metal exercise bar, he would strike her more "if I made any sound and alerted a neighbor."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.81
4.88
3.04
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.96
4.96
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.45
5.46
3.16
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.86
7.88
5.36
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.05
8.06
5.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.87
8.90
7.02
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.84
6.83
5.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Nets to Keep Backcourt Busy
When the Nets meet the Celtics tonight in the annual Hall of Fame game in Springfield, Mass., their starting backcourt of Kenny Anderson and Kevin Edwards will be given significant playing time for the first time in the preseason.
Anderson has been nursing a sore left hamstring and Edwards has been bothered by tendinitis in his right Achilles' tendon.
Coach Butch Beard, who had lamented the fact that many of his key players had been hampered with minor injuries, yesterday ran a rigorous practice, in which all except Chris Childs (bruised right foot) participated.


Art in Review
Suzanne McClelland
Paul Kasmin Gallery  74 Grand Street  SoHo  Through Nov. 5
Suzanne McClelland's floor-to-ceiling abstract paintings have been memorable for their scale, their incorporation of words, and the unsettling organic effect produced by the thick opaque gels that seem to ooze from their surfaces.
Their implications of both distressed, inarticulate speech and physical decay made them seem very much at home in the charged environment of the last Whitney Biennial.


Pitney Bowes Is Planning To Reduce Its Staff by 2,000
Pitney Bowes Inc., the maker of postage meters and mailing equipment, said yesterday that it would cut its worldwide staff by 2,000 employees in the next year.
The company also reported a 39.1 percent increase in third-quarter earnings, which was modestly below expectations.


Ruddick Corp.(RDK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Ambac Inc.(ABK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bonds Stable With G.D.P. Due Today
Prices of Treasury securities moved slightly higher early yesterday, with the market holding on to most of its gains as many investors moved to the sidelines ahead of today's third-quarter report on gross domestic product.
The 30-year bond rose 4/32 to a price of 93 27/32 for a yield of 8.05 percent, down from 8.06 percent on Wednesday.
Shorter bill rates were unchanged.


Forstmann To Acquire Ziff-Davis
Emerging as a surprise bidder in one of the most closely watched media auctions of the year, the investment firm Forstmann Little &amp; Company said yesterday that it had agreed to pay $1.4 billion in cash to buy the leading publisher of computer magazines, the Ziff-Davis Publishing Company.
In acquiring the family-owned company, Forstmann is buying the most successful computer publisher in the country, whose overall profit margin is about twice that of the rest of the industry.


Shell Oil Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Boston Edison Co. (BSE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Leasing Deal For Cars Stirs Hot Dispute For Suffolk
A Suffolk County plan to lease 1,700 cars has led to a dispute involving the County Executive, who signed the lease; legislators who claim it was a sweetheart deal, and the District Attorney, who has turned the matter over to a special prosecutor because of rumors of impropriety about everyone involved, including himself.
The District Attorney, James M. Catterson Jr., whose son drafted the lease agreement, said the controversy appeared to be based more on innuendo than fact.
Members of the Republican-dominated County Legislature say the dispute smacks of intimidation and cronyism on Mr.
Catterson's part.


New Museum Celebrating American Indian Voices
IT has been said that America will never know peace until the damage done to its native people has been acknowledged and their cultural birthright restored.
The National Museum of the American Indian, which officially opens Sunday at the Alexander Hamilton United States Custom House in lower Manhattan, may someday be counted a significant step toward that end.
Judging by the museum's inaugural presentation, however, that step is still faltering and exploratory.
The 500-plus objects on display in three contiguous shows are of surpassing beauty; together they demand inclusion on any itinerary of the city's major art attractions.
But they have nearly been sabotaged by an overproduced installation and by a curatorial philosophy that too often favors political grandstanding and feel-good sentiment over discretion and scholarship.


Art in Review
Martha Madigan
Michael Rosenfeld Gallery  24 West 57th Street  Through Nov. 12
Shadowy autumnal figures romp across Martha Madigan's large photograms, made by a complex process in which some elements were produced without a lens.
Ms.
Madigan records the silhouettes of her subjects as white shapes on color photographic paper, then includes both negative and positive images of various leaves on top of and around these ghostly forms.


Three Unraveling Marriages in the Shadows of World War II
Beware the small-town play, I say, in which the characters have names like Tood, Weetsie and Aunt Ola.
It usually means the playwright is hellbent on proving that such characters are as colorful as the names they bear.
So they will say things like, "I was happy as a dead pig in the sunshine" or "I got iced tea so good it'll knock your papa down." They aren't likely to have much education and may even go barefoot.
But in the end, you can count on them to teach the city sophisticate about love and dreams gone sour.


Donnelley (R.R.) &amp; Sons (DNY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Big News: Let There Be Games
THIS is why I wanted to jump up and give Charles Grantham and David Stern a great big hug yesterday: they gave me someplace to go this winter.
For more than two months, the only way to watch major league sports in the New York region has been to endure hideous traffic jams and ghastly football crowds at the New Jersey Meadowlands straight out of the apocalyptic paintings of Hieronymous Bosch.


Disclosure Rules Proposed on Lead Hazards
The Clinton Administration has proposed rules that would require sellers of homes, landlords and real-estate agents to disclose "known information" about lead-based paint hazards before they sold or leased most housing built before 1978.
The proposed rules, drawn up by the Environmental Protection Agency and Department of Housing and Urban Development, would not require sellers and landlords to conduct tests themselves.


Pacificorp (PPW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bettors' Dollar Bills Pursue $60 Million Worth of Dreams
New Yorkers came together yesterday in stores throughout the state in a rare expression of common purpose: to buy $1 Lotto tickets in the hope of winning a $60 million jackpot.
The big prize, the second largest lottery jackpot ever in New York, prompted some to buy a coral-colored Lotto card for the first time and others to buy more than usual.
At the rate of 18,000 a minute, people played the numbers of sick friends' hospital rooms, heeded inner voices or let the computer pick their numbers for them.


Movie's Stunts Send a Deadly Message
To the Editor:
I wish to advise that a new movie, "Little Giants," might ultimately lead to tragic fatalities.
A scene in the movie depicts a race on public streets between Rick Moranis in a go-cart and Ed O'Neill in his red convertible.
This movie, which is rated PG, could send an erroneous message that such stunts are O.K. since Mr.
Moranis, performed the stunt.
This scene alone would be cause for dismay, but it gets worse.


Case Corp.(CSE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


An Adagio of Penn State Memories
Shortly before sunrise tomorrow, Anthony Davis -- jazz pianist, composer and college professor -- will become Anthony Davis college football fan.
Davis and his 15-year-old son Timothy will make the four-hour drive from New York through the bluffs and waves of amber and magenta of Central Pennsylvania to his final destination: State College, Pa.
Population 65,000.
On the surface, Davis is no different from thousands of other Penn State fans who will descend on State College to watch their beloved, top-ranked Nittany Lions face Ohio State.
He still remembers a game with Ohio State 30 years ago -- Nov. 7, 1964 -- when Penn State upset undefeated Ohio State, 27-0, in Columbus.


Lautenberg And Haytaian Spar on Issues In TV Taping
Sticking to their scripts as they waved props in the air, the two major candidates for the United States Senate from New Jersey yesterday taped their last scheduled televised appearance before the Nov. 8 election, using both words and body language to get their messages across.
Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, the 70-year-old Democratic incumbent who is seeking his third six-year term, unrolled a printout of what he said was a list of his opponent's 600 votes in support of increased state spending over the last 13 years in the New Jersey Assembly.
His 54-year-old Republican challenger, Chuck Haytaian, retorted: "Grandstanding is what Senator Lautenberg does best."


Mapco Inc.(MDA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kuwait Is Allowing U.S. to Station a Squadron of Warplanes
Kuwait has agreed to allow the United States to station a squadron of 24 warplanes there as part of a broad effort to curb Iraqi military power, the Pentagon said today.
As part of the effort to strengthen the American military presence in the region, the Pentagon also said that the United States would store a brigade's worth of armor in Qatar.
Last week, Kuwait agreed that the number of tanks that the United States could store on its territory could be expanded to a brigade.


Africa Awarded Five Teams for 1998 Cup
Convinced that Africa has made more progress than any other confederation in the last decade, the world governing body of soccer yesterday awarded that continent, along with Europe, a two-team increase for the 1998 World Cup in France.
With the cup field expanding from 24 teams to 32 teams, FIFA increased the berths for Africa from the three that took part in the United States this past summer to five for the next tournament.


The Works To Watch At Auction
LIKE traders who compulsively watch the stock market to see where the smart buys are, collectors, dealers and curators peruse Sotheby's and Christie's catalogues in hopes of discovering either bargains or great works they haven't seen on the market before.
This will be especially true in the next two weeks as the important round of Impressionist, modern and contemporary art auctions takes place in New York.
This fall's sales, which begin on Tuesday at Sotheby's, offer a smattering of everything.
But taken as a whole, the artworks, thought to be worth more than $140 million, are nothing to crow about.
While the offerings, which go on view starting this weekend, include works by masters like Monet and van Gogh, Warhol and Lichtenstein, the sales are generally thinner than they have been in years.
Gone is the glamour of the $50 million masterpiece that epitomized the boom years.
Instead, these sales reflect the way the auction world used to be 15 years ago: a serious arena for trading art.


Japan Tobacco Plunges 24% On Its First Day of Trading
The preparations for the share offering were bumpy, the auction was a failure and the opening of trading today in the newly listed Japan Tobacco Inc. was just short of a debacle.
The Finance Ministry persisted in selling and listing the shares of Government-controlled Japan Tobacco, a one-time monopoly that still controls more than 80 percent of the cigarette market here, at what most analysts considered an inflated price of 1.438 million yen, or about $14,673, a share.
The price was considered so excessive that investors bought just 59 percent of the 666,666 shares offered by the Government at auction prior to today's trading.


A Satirical Look at Black Yuppies
In "Drop Squad," Bruford Jamison Jr. (Eriq LaSalle), a token black employee at an advertising agency, is supposed to help pitch dubious products to what his white boss calls "the colored community." Bruford's accounts include Mumblin' Jack Malt Liquor, a beverage "available everywhere black people are served."
There's also the Gospel-Pak, which is fast-food fried chicken with such Biblical overtones as scripture-like quotations on the Gospel-Pak napkins.
To pitch this product, there's a television commercial featuring two choir singers, a cashier in a racially demeaning costume and Spike Lee, the film's executive producer.


Engelhard Corp.(EC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quebecor Printing Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Defending Austerity, Russia Government Survives a Vote
After a strong speech to Parliament by the Prime Minister defending an austere draft budget for 1995, the Russian Government survived a vote of no-confidence today in the lower house.
Of the 450 deputies, 194 voted against the Government, 32 votes short of the required majority of 226.
There were 54 votes against the no-confidence motion, while 55 deputies abstained and 147 deputies did not even show up to vote.


Hoping Lions' Roar Is Not Just a Whimper
Tomorrow is Homecoming Day and I haven't yet decided whether or not I'm going up to Baker Field to cheer Columbia on against Princeton to what sometimes seems like its first winning season since Charles Van Doren took the quiz show title.
I could justify the trip because Columbia football is the only game in town; the Yankees are playing the World Series in their dreams, the Rangers season is frozen and St.
John's is a month away from loosing Felipe Lopez.
But rooting for Columbia football teams is beyond mere fandom for alumni; feelings range from passionate to mixed to nil, even among those who know the difference between the Big East and the Western Canon.
At a banquet earlier in the week that included a number of Columbia graduates, I took an informal poll.
They seemed titillated by Columbia's current 3-2-1 record (1-2 in the Ivy League after beating Yale last week), but too savvy to get as excited as some of the reporters.
Saul Cohen, '57, the securities expert who has done very well raising money for himself, Columbia and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, said: "I don't think I've missed a game in 40 years. And I can remember going to the field house and seeing coaches cry. Losing is not good for the kids. This is good."


CLINTON REPORTS PROGRESS IN TALKS IN SYRIAN CAPITAL
President Clinton made a one-day venture into shuttle diplomacy today in hopes of speeding the way toward an Israeli-Syrian peace.
He said he won some private assurances from President Hafez al-Assad of Syria that could speed the peace talks but did not get from the Syrian leader a message that aides had hoped might soothe an anxious Israeli public.
Instead, as Mr.
Clinton became the first American President in 20 years to visit Damascus, the Syrian capital, Mr.
Assad used a joint appearance with Mr.
Clinton to question why Israelis should fear for their security if they were to surrender the Golan Heights and to ask why anyone should expect him to visit Israel as a show of good will.


Give President Credit for Restoring Tax Equity
To the Editor:
President Clinton has been criticized for waffling and wavering and providing ill-defined leadership, although his legislative accomplishments are actually quite impressive.
One Clinton achievement that deserves but doesn't get much attention is the revival of progressive taxation, now reflected in a tax rate structure that begins at 15 percent and rises in four bracket-jumps to a top of nearly 40 percent.


Transamerica Corp.(TA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Romancing a Stone To Get to Outer Space
There are almost as many plots in "Stargate" as there are characters, but the idea behind the movie is simple: space adventure in ancient Egypt.
It works better than you'd think.
For kids, there are relentless special effects, from a spaceship that looks like a flying pyramid to spears that turn into rocket launchers.
For adults, there is a smartly designed parallel universe that echoes the Egypt of old Bible movies, and the appearance of Jaye Davidson (the androgynous star of "The Crying Game") as the sun god, Ra.
Try to imagine him voguing around a party at the Temple of Dendur and you'll have the right image.
Juggling all this makes "Stargate" move more slowly than any action movie should, but it has plenty of enticing moments.
The story begins in Giza, Egypt, in 1928, when archeologists discover a large stone wheel with mysterious symbols carved on it.
Leaping to the present, we see James Spader as an Egyptologist, Dr.
Daniel Jackson, being laughed off the podium when he suggests that the Egyptians didn't build the pyramids.
He doesn't know who did build them, but the answer is lurking in outer space.


On My Mind; Bitburg and Beyond
Since President Clinton had to conclude his pilgrimage to Syria without getting any decent peace newsbreaks for his trouble, or time to take the exciting tourist trip to the two dozen torture centers of Damascus or the mortar ranges of the rich variety of terrorist camps, I thought he might be in the mood for a nice Hasidic joke.
This villager dies and it falls to the rabbi to make the eulogy.
He cannot bring himself to shade truth while wearing a prayer shawl, so he tells it to Heaven straight -- the man lying here was a killer, a thief, a rapist, and goodbye to bad rubbish.


Black Woman Is Named Police Chief in Atlanta


Herbalife International Inc.(HERB,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Presstek Says Rumors Are False
Lawyers for Robert Howard, the chairman of Presstek Inc., and his son, Lawrence, presented documents to The New York Times yesterday to show that Mr.
Howard of Presstek is exactly who he says he is.
In addition, Robert Howard has volunteered to return to the United States from his home in France on Sunday to be fingerprinted to prove his identity, his lawyer said yesterday.


Halliburton Co. (HAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A listing in the Benefits column on Sunday about a dinner that was held on Monday for the University Settlement Society of New York misidentified those honored.
They were Peter Riegert, an actor, and Leslie Winthrop, president of the Advertising Agency Register, an advertising service company in New York.


Bosnian Government Army Wins Its Biggest Victory Against Serbs
After spending most of the 31-month-old war on the defensive, Bosnian Government forces have won their most decisive victory against the Bosnian Serbs, sweeping through lines that had long encircled them in the Bihac pocket in northwestern Bosnia.
In a two-day offensive in an area 149 miles northwest of Sarajevo, Bosnian forces have captured a wide area of territory from the Bosnian Serbs, taken large numbers of abandoned weapons and sent about 7,000 Bosnian Serb civilians and soldiers into flight, United Nations official said today.


Just a Quiet Apartment With 6 Gators
It was a tropical paradise -- a jungle of trees and dangling plants, an artificial sun, two murky pools, two iguanas, four turtles, a cockroach farm and (count 'em) six alligators, the largest six feet long -- all arrayed throughout a fourth-floor loft in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.
And then, just before noon yesterday, the Fire Department came.


Sonat Inc.(SNT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BC Telecom reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Burlington Raises Offer For Santa Fe
Competing with a hostile bid by the Union Pacific Corporation, Burlington Northern Inc. raised its stock swap offer yesterday to acquire the Santa Fe Pacific Corporation to $3.25 billion, from the original $2.7 billion, when the merger was announced on June 30.
Burlington Northern is now offering Santa Fe's shareholders 34 percent of one Burlington Northern share, or $17.17, based on the closing price of Burlington Northern's stock on Wednesday.
Initially, Burlington Northern offered 27 percent of a share, or $13.64.


Espinosa Out Of Marathon
Andres Espinosa, the 1993 New York City Marathon champion, made his withdrawal from the 25th race on Nov. 6 official yesterday.
"The men's field is incredibly strong," said Anne Roberts, the marathon's coordinator of elite runners, who said she accepted the 31-year-old Mexican runner's explanation that he had pulled out because he knew he was in no shape for a repeat victory.


Region News Briefs; Trooper Is Sentenced For Faking Evidence
A former New York State Police investigator was sentenced yesterday to a sentence of two-and-two-third to eight years in prison for faking evidence in a 1991 Rockland County carjacking, becoming the fourth trooper in two years to be sent to prison for evidence tampering.
In a separate case, the investigator, Edward Pilus, pleaded guilty three weeks ago to fabricating evidence in a 1992 Orange County burglary.
Although the judge in that case had said he would allow the sentences for both cases to run concurrently, he said yesterday that he was reconsidering because Mr.
Pilus had told reporters he is not guilty and pleaded guilty only because he could not afford to mount a defense.


Art in Review
'Exhibition-ism' 'Museums and African Art'  Museum for African Art 593 Broadway (near Houston Street) SoHo Through March 5
The Museum for African Art may have been bitten by the Conceptual Art bug when it moved to SoHo.
Its 10th-anniversary show, "Exhibition-ism: Museums and African Art," is in many ways consistent with an institution widely respected for having its cake and eating it, too -- that is, for mounting exhibitions that combine a strong ideological agenda with rigorous connoisseurship.
But this small four-part exhibition, so modest it almost seems skimpy, often has a preachy didacticism that its predecessors largely avoided.


P.&amp; G. Sues Bankers Trust Over Swap Deal
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company yesterday sued the Bankers Trust Company over a complex financial transaction that caused P.&amp; G., the Cincinnati consumer products company, to take a $102 million loss in April.
The P.&amp; G. suit is similar to another filed against Bankers Trust last month by Gibson Greetings Inc., also of Cincinnati, which asserted that Bankers Trust misrepresented the risks of several interest rate swaps, a common form of a broad and growing category of financial deals known as derivatives.


Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd.(RCL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Cyanamid Co.  (ACY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; An eminent name in luxury goods enlists the aid of direct marketing to widen its net.
CAN a glamorous thief persuade consumers to think of Baccarat for jewelry as well as for crystal?
Baccarat Inc., the American unit of the French luxury-goods company, is using direct marketing to test an entry into the jewelry business.
The Baccarat Bijoux line of pendants, earrings, cuff links, rings and other baubles, priced from $110 to $2,100, is promoted through a mail-order catalogue now being sent to shoppers.


Mozambican Elections Thrown in Doubt
As Mozambicans streamed to the polls today in their first free elections, hoping to finally exorcise the ghosts of a savage civil war, the main opposition leader cast the entire exercise in doubt with a last-minute announcement that he would reject the outcome.
Afonso Dhlakama, who has recast his Renamo guerrilla army as a political party and himself as the main presidential challenger, charged that fraud by the Government had cheated his party out of any chance of victory.


Russian Troops Quitting a Hot Spot in Moldova
"They would like to spit on this agreement," said the commander of the 14th Russian Army, Lieut.
Gen.
Aleksandr Lebed, speaking for his troops stationed in the self-declared Trans-Dniester Republic.
The agreement, signed on Friday by the Prime Ministers of Moldova and Russia, provides for a three-year phased withdrawal of General Lebed's troops from the region, which is trying to secede from Moldova.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Agassi Defeats Martin in Three Sets  Andre Agassi rallied to defeat Todd Martin, 6-7 (4-7), 6-4, 6-1, yesterday in the third round of the Stockholm Open and will face second-seeded Goran Ivanisevic, a 7-5, 6-3 winner over Andrea Gaudenzi.
Michael Stich, the defending champion, defeated Jim Courier, 7-5, 6-3, and next faces Boris Becker.
It would make Pettengill, of Middletown, R.I., the first American to finish any leg of the BOC Challenge among the Class I (50 to 60 feet) leaders.
HORSE SHOWS  Switzerland Takes Nation's Cup  Switzerland beat out Germany by less than 2 points in the Washington Hospital Center Nations' Cup at the Washington International Horse Show yesterday in Landover, Md.


Sparks Could Miss 2 Weeks
Word out of the Giants late last night was that cornerback Phillippi Sparks would not only miss Sunday's game against the Lions but could miss two weeks of action because of a severe groin injury.
Sparks hurt his groin yesterday during one-on-one drills with the wide receivers.
When Mike Sherrard went deep, Sparks tried to plant but his foot slipped on the wet field and he practically did a split.


Sterling Chemicals Inc.(STX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brooklyn Union Gas (BU,N) reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Israeli Mezzo in a Recital
Siggal Zeira, a young Israeli mezzo-soprano who won this year's Joy in Singing award, gave a promising although imperfect award recital at Merkin Concert Hall on Tuesday night.
She has a commanding stage presence and an attractive, thickly colored tone, smothered in legato.
But her delivery was much too heavy for a set of Brahms lieder that opened the program, and her attempts at comic characterization in several of Mahler's "Knaben Wunderhorn" came off as coy poses.
She repeatedly sang flat in the upper register (though she floated a few lovely high notes) and her voice was tenuously supported at the lower end.
There was, however, a weighty intensity to her "Urlicht," by Mahler, and a roof-raising largeness of tone in Ravel's "Kaddisch," from "Deux Melodies Hebraiques." Four songs of Tchaikovsky, including "Do Not Ask" and "At the Ball," had the proper Slavic heft.
She was at her best in a set of three Israeli folk songs, where her sometimes overdrawn expressive gestures did not seem out of place.


CHRONICLE
The speeches at the Oxford Union, the prestigious debating society at England's Oxford University, tend to be lofty and the tones stentorian.
But tonight, the delivery is sure to be, well, down to earth, when Kermit the Frog takes the podium.
"We don't usually invite amphibians, but we feel that Kermit is a cultural icon of our generation," said JOANNA CARR, a student and the Oxford Union's vice president, whose idea it was to invite the Muppet.
"There has been lots of student interest." She said she expects 1,000 people.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day on Wednesday, about a decline in the shares of Outboard Marine, misidentified the exchange where its options are traded.
It is the Chicago Board Options Exchange, not the American Stock Exchange.


For Sale: Germany's Phone System
For months, the largest American and European investment-banking houses have courted the German Government, jockeying to be named the lead foreign bank for the privatization of Deutsche Telekom, the state telephone monopoly.
It is a prize that justifies bowing down before civil servants.


Thomas G. Gee, 69; Ex-U.S. Judge Ruled In Creationism Case
Thomas Gibbs Gee, a retired judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, died on Tuesday at Methodist Hospital in Houston.
He was 69 and lived in Houston.
He died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease, the court said.


Bracho Trades Award for Shot at Riding
A banned jockey, JESUS BRACHO, surrendered his Eclipse Award as the nation's outstanding apprentice jockey of 1992 to regain a license to race in Florida.
Bracho was stripped of his right to ride after racing stewards determined that he submitted falsified riding documents from his native Venezuela.
He was the most prominent of seven Venezuelan jockeys expelled in 1993 for record discrepancies.
The Bracho investigation concluded that he should not have qualified as an apprentice, a designation entitling his mounts to carry less weight.
Stewards suspended him for 60 days and recommended a life ban.
The state division was scheduled to hear Bracho's appeal next week when the agreement was reached on a more lenient penalty.


Accounts
*
Miller Brewing Co., Milwaukee, to TBWA London, as the first agency to handle its Miller Genuine Draft beer brand in Britain.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Tropic Trading Co., Toronto, to Slater Hanft Martin, New York, to handle its Beach Patrol sun care products, previously handled in-house.
Billings were estimated at $2.5 million.


Next Stop, Kuwait
President Clinton, after visiting Egypt, Jordan, Syria and Israel, is to leave Jerusalem today for Kuwait and visit American troops there.
The Pentagon announced yesterday that Kuwait would let the United States station a squadron of 24 warplanes there in an effort to curb Iraq's military power.
According to the Pentagon, there are almost 9,000 American troops in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, where they will be conducting training exercises.


IV Fluids Found Harmful in Trauma Cases
A study of seriously injured people receiving emergency trauma treatment has concluded that the common practice of immediately giving many of these patients intravenous fluids may be detrimental, researchers said today.
It has long been standard treatment to give fluids to bleeding trauma patients in hopes of keeping their blood pressure up, staving off shock and preventing damage to organs from blood deprivation.


Abroad at Home; The Public Citizen
The highest office in a democracy, Justice Brandeis used to say, is the office of citizen.
Like James Madison and the others who founded the United States, he believed that Americans have a duty to be involved in the issues facing their country.
The man who performed the office of citizen better than any contemporary I know died last weekend.
Jerome B. Wiesner was scientist, president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, government official.
In or out of public positions, he never stopped caring or working for the country's good.
He never thought that was not his problem.


Fisher Scientific International Inc.(FSH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Price/Costco Inc.(PCCW,NNM reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Family Permits Skew Arab Jerusalem's Culture
To the Editor:
Rachelle Marshall notes in her Oct. 21 letter that Israel is building new settlements in East Jerusalem and its suburbs, thereby changing the demographics of the center of Palestinian society and culture.


At U.N.L.V., the Tarkanian Era Hovers in the Rafters
Their gym was locked, their coach was in the Poconos and their only authority figure was a trainer.
They were like an intramural team; no one had custody.
On the night of Oct. 14, they moped in a dormitory room, counting down to a celebration they could not observe.


Macmillan Bloedel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Everything Half-Off? Clinton Brings President's Day Sale to Syria
Along the narrow alleys of this city's labyrinthine souk, merchants trying to lure passing tourists inside their cluttered shops were practicing a new line this morning.
"American?" asked one, idling in a doorway framed by bolts of brightly colored cloth.
"Come inside. Today, for Clinton, we give you half-off off everything."
The aggressive salesmen are notorious at telling anyone whatever they want to hear.
But all across this ancient desert capital today, it seemed people everywhere were talking about Bill Clinton, or reading about Bill Clinton, or watching Bill Clinton on television.


Major Publisher Sold
Forstmann Little agreed yesterday to pay $1.4 billion in cash to buy Ziff-Davis Publishing, the leading publisher of computer magazines.
The acquistion would include PC Magazine and Computer Shopper.
The investment firm's offer surprised the media industry.
Business Day, page D1.


John Alden Financial Corp.(JA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Standard Speeches of Chiles and Bush: What Is Fair? What Is Negative?
Following are excerpts from speeches by Gov.
Lawton Chiles, the Democrat seeking re-election in Florida, and his Republican challenger, Jeb Bush, the businessman who is a son of former President George Bush.
The speeches, both delivered on Oct. 19 in Lakeland, Fla., and transcribed by The New York Times, provide examples of the messages each candidate is delivering in his standard campaign speeches.
In the case of Mr.
Chiles, he was speaking in his home town.
GOV.
LAWTON CHILES
In our last debate, Jeb said it is not fair for me to talk about his mom or daddy.
It's O.K. for them to come to Florida and raise $4 million for him.
But don't say anything about them: It's not fair, it's not fair, it's not fair.


Arrest Uncovers Arsenal
The police said they found an arsenal yesterday when they arrested a man for soliciting prostitution in the West Farms section of the Bronx.
Inside the man's van, they said, they found 18 pipe bombs, 10 loaded magazines for a machine gun, 1,000 rounds of ammunition for 9-millimeter pistols and shotguns, a backpack with a flame-thrower, a gas mask, Mace, coffee cans filled with either gunpowder or fireworks powder, a steel-plated vest, a steel-plated neck protector and bulletproof helmets.
The suspect, identified as Antonio Olmeda, 36, of 2543 Holland Avenue, the Bronx, was charged with soliciting a prostitute and criminal possession of weapons.


Seasoned D'Amato Aides Run the Pataki Campaign
Zenia Mucha, deputy campaign manager for State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican candidate for governor, is tired of hearing charges that her current employer is dancing on strings manipulated by her former employer, United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
So when she was asked why so many aides, former aides and consultants to Mr.
D'Amato -- including herself -- now work for Mr.
Pataki, she snapped, "Because we're good."


Issues of Race Are Raised In Simpson Jury Selection
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson asserted today that prosecutors were attempting, through needlessly persistent and provocative questioning, to keep blacks off the jury.
Their accusations brought race to the surface of a case in which it has always lurked not far below.
The assertion, made in twin impromptu news conferences by two of Mr.
Simpson's lawyers, followed a testy exchange between Deputy District Attorney William W. Hodgman and an elderly black man, one of six candidates screened today for the Simpson jury.
"You're pumping me as if I'm on trial or something!" the man, a 71-year old retiree from South-Central Los Angeles, exclaimed.
"I don't like that. You're sort of riling me."


Fiery Volcano In Colombia Spewing Gold
A volcano in Colombia is spewing more than a pound of gold each day into the atmosphere, a scientist said yesterday.
He said the volcano was also depositing 45 pounds of gold a year into the rocks lining its crater.
"I expect there will be a rush to stake claims in this volcano," said the scientist, Dr.
Fraser Goff, a geologist at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico.
Dr.
Goff made the discovery at the Galeras volcano in the Colombian Andes.


Pumpkin Time: Halloween Treats for Active Spirits
Halloween is on Monday.
Here is a sampling of Halloween activities this weekend and Monday in the metropolitan New York region.
Today  HARVEST FESTIVAL, South Street Seaport and Marketplace, 19 Fulton Street, lower Manhattan.
A weekend of activities features selections from the Broadway musical "Show Boat" by cast members today at 12:30 P.M.
There will be mask-making and pumpkin-decorating tomorrow and Sunday from noon to 4 P.M. and ghost stories tomorrow and Sunday from 1 to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 732-7678.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about a Federal price-fixing case against the General Electric Company misstated the Justice Department's record in taking criminal antitrust cases to trial.
G.E.'s is not the only criminal antitrust trial.
It is one of the most significant since 1981, according to the department's records, which also list 199 other criminal antitrust trials.


Panel on Money Symbols
"The Token: America's Other Money," a symposium on the use of tokens for money over the last 200 years, will take place tomorrow at the American Numismatic Society, Broadway at West 155th Street, Washington Heights.
Lectures by collectors and curators will deal with various tokens and their uses, from scrip issued as currency during wartime to coins used as political campaign souvenirs.
An exhibition of more than 300 vintage coins is on view at the society through December.The symposium is in two sessions, from 10 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. and from 2 to 5 P.M..
A $25 ticket includes a buffet lunch and post-symposium reception; a $50 ticket includes dinner.
Information and registration: (212) 234-3130.


Hercules Inc.(HPC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lowery Discovers That Simple Goodbyes Can Be Complicated
Nick Lowery learned you can go home again -- but only if you have a sideline pass.
Lowery, the Jets' field-goal kicker, was alternately wistful, proud and distressed today as he related his return to Kansas City last Sunday.


An Agonizing Search for Two Boys
Susan Smith said she stood in the middle of a dark, isolated road on Tuesday night and screamed, "I love you all" as a carjacker disappeared in the distance with her two children in the back seat.
So far, the people of this small textile town in northwestern South Carolina have been unable to pray Mrs.
Smith's two little boys home again.
Hundreds of law enforcement officers and volunteers have been searching the highways and deep forests of this rural piece of the state, hoping the carjacker released 14-month-old Alexander and 3-year-old Michael.
But as of this evening, investigators still had no solid leads, and the worst crime in recent memory in pastoral, peaceful Union County remained unsolved.


In the Fog, These Shots Seem Much Easier
Rumor has it that a foursome went around the Olympic Club in 66 today.
Word is that Steve Lowery, one of the four, had a hole-in-one and that Bill Glasson, another of the four, nearly spun a 9-iron shot into the cup at No. 18 for eagle, and that David Frost needed just 24 putts and Mark McCumber shot 31 on the back nine.
We stress that these are only rumors, because no one actually saw the first round of the Tour Championship.
A fog rolled in off the Pacific Ocean and wrapped itself around the premises like a huge, damp cotton ball.
Players came and went, ghostlike apparitions in the cloud that never cleared, and by the time play had concluded the only thing to go on was hearsay.


Diverse Expressions Of a Body Obsession
In New York in the 1940's, the Russian-born artist Pavel Tchelitchev was sometimes seen as Jackson Pollock's chief rival.
His work was actively promoted by Charles Henri Ford, editor of View magazine and his lover; his patrons included Edith Sitwell and Gertrude Stein, and the Museum of Modern Art acquired "Hide-and-Seek," a large and elaborate Surrealist fantasy, the year he finished it.
In terms of history as it is now written, Pollock won.
Tchelitchev got the consolation prize: "Hide-and-Seek" became the Modern's second most popular painting. (Andrew Wyeth's "Christina's World" was the first.)


Raul Julia of Sesame St.
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 25 obituary on Raul Julia neglected to cite one of the actor's activities that touched the lives of countless people well before "The Addams Family." I vividly recall the warmth, charm and intelligence of Mr.
Julia's character in the 1970 debut season of "Sesame Street." His English and Spanish rendition of "Sing, Sing a Song" never failed to captivate me and my young daughter.
JUDITH E. STEIN  Philadelphia, Oct. 25, 1994


Restaurants
"Welcome home!" says the proprietor as you walk in the door.
Don't take it too personally; he seems to say this to everyone who comes to Le Perigord.
And with good reason: most of the customers seem very familiar with this brightly lighted, old-fashioned room.
The regular crowd appreciates the warmth and kindness of the management and does not seem to mind that the ceiling is low, the tablecloths could use ironing, some of the Limoges plates are chipped and a few of the flowers in the pretty arrangement on the table died yesterday.
They also seem unaware that while their waiter hovers over them making small talk, his less fortunate customers are being ignored.


Kaneb Services Inc.(KAB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Grossman's Inc.(GROS,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Arabs and Jews Talk Economics
Make peace pay.
That is the goal of the conference starting Sunday in Casablanca, Morocco.
King Hassan II will play host to officials from Israel, Jordan, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and dozens of other Middle Eastern, North African and Western countries who will gather to discuss economics, not politics.
Government leaders and executives from about 1,000 corporations will meet for three days to discuss joint business ventures.
Arabs and Jews talking openly about trade, tourism and regional economic development would have seemed unimaginable a year ago.
The conference is the first step in turning the unimaginable into the routine.


Tosco Corp.(TOS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brokerage Firm Admits Crimes In Energy Deals
After more than three years of denying that it broke the law, Prudential Securities admitted yesterday for the first time that the firm committed crimes in its sale of certain limited partnerships in the 1980's and agreed to pay $330 million to resolve criminal charges.
Combined with a civil settlement of at least $371 million reached with Federal and state regulators last year, the fines and penalties imposed on Prudential by the Government in the scandal now exceed $700 million.
That eclipses the penalties for any other Wall Street crime, including the $650 million paid by Drexel Burnham Lambert to settle securities fraud charges.


Brunswick Mining reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Eastern Enterprises (EFU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Orion Capital Corp.(OC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Rangers, It's Workout In a Lockout
The Rangers have started to hold informal workouts for players who have remained in the New York area, but even Mark Messier -- a self-described optimist -- is growing frustrated by the lockout, which has shut down the National Hockey League for nearly four weeks.
Attending a Police Athletic League benefit to honor Bob Gutkowski, the former Madison Square Garden president, Messier said last night that he was certain the impasse between the players' union and ownership would have been settled by this point.
And, after spending the last few weeks in Los Angeles with Wayne Gretzky, his former teammate with the Edmonton Oilers and a close friend, Messier appeared sentimental for the game and anxious to get back on the ice.


Woolworth
Shares of Woolworth moved in a narrow range yesterday as the retailer continued its search for a new chief executive.
This month, the Council of Institutional Investors included Woolworth on a list of 20 companies delivering the worst return to stockholders.


Caballe Heads Roster For Tucker Benefit
Montserrat Caballe, Carol Vaness, Vladimir Atlantov, Thomas Hampson, Sherrill Milnes and Samuel Ramey are among the artists scheduled to take part in the Richard Tucker Music Foundation concert on Sunday at 6 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
Jennifer Larmore, the winner of the 1994 Richard Tucker Award, will sing also, and "Gallop Apace," a Lee Hoiby work that was commissioned by the foundation, is to have its world premiere, sung by Constance Haumann.
Rise Stevens is the guest of honor.
Julius Rudel will conduct members of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra and the New York Choral Society.


Ten Writers Win Whiting Awards
Ten people have received the 1994 Whiting Awards, given annually to "writers of exceptional talent and promise." The awards, from the Mrs.
Giles Whiting Foundation, carry prizes of $30,000 each.
These are the winners:


Reaching In


No Headline
"My mom told me a long time ago, 'Never get in a fight with a lady."' -- OLIVER NORTH, responding to an attack by Nancy Reagan.  [ 8:6. ]


Woodstock '94 Site Is Clean and Green
Nearly two and a half months ago, hundreds of thousands of young people slid, moshed and danced their way through three days of music and nostalgia.
Then, when it was all over, they packed up their memories and tales of survival, leaving a 740-acre farm here a sea of mud, rotting pizza, empty Pepsi containers and soiled clothing.


Solzhenitsyn Castigates Russia's Lawmakers
In a searing lecture to Russia's Parliament, Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn today appealed to those in power to worry less about their privileges and care more about the suffering of ordinary Russians, confused by so much change.
In his thin, reedy voice, standing at a lectern bearing the czarist double-headed eagle, the writer and historian tried to take to the legislators the cares and concerns of the people he had met on his long train ride across Russia, after he returned home in May from 20 years' exile in the United States.


Traffic Alert
MONDAY The Avenue of the Americas will be closed from Spring Street to 22d Street starting at 7 P.M. for the Halloween parade.


Catholic Bishops Offer Nuns Wider Yet Unspecified Role
Responding to appeals from religious women, a synod of Roman Catholic bishops said today that nuns would have greater, if unspecified, participation in running the church, but appeared to exclude them from the highest ranks of the male-dominated Vatican bureaucracy.
The synod made its decision after a month of debate in which American clerics in particular pressed for a wider role for what the Church calls consecrated women, highlighting a divide between the perceptions of female religious responsibilities in industrialized and developing countries.
It did not address the issue of women's ordination.


C-Mac Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Corrections
An article yesterday about a new series of Republican Party television advertisements referred imprecisely to their financing.
They will be paid for with donations received under limits established by the Federal Election Commission, not with "soft money," donations exempt from the commission's restrictions.


The No. 1 Congressman and His No. 1 Test
He is the institution who cannot act like one, the silver-haired Speaker of the House who quotes Winston Churchill in the other Washington but is forced to shoulder a buffalo rifle here to prove he is still Tom Foley of eastern Washington.
Trying to save a 30-year Congressional career in his run for re-election, Mr.
Foley has endured an unusual number of onion-smothered chili dogs, insinuations that because he has no children he is out of touch with the concerns of families, and disgruntled questions about why he built a million-dollar house on the East Coast and not in Spokane, where he owns a co-op apartment.


Canfor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Speed of F.D.A. Action on Rules for Drug Tests Is Questioned
The Food and Drug Administration has proposed new rules for drug trials after five patients died from taking an experimental drug.
But two scientists who reviewed the cases said today that they were disappointed that the agency had acted without waiting for the results of other investigations of the deaths.
The rules, proposed on Thursday, would be more stringent in requiring reporting of side effects in patients taking an experimental drug.
They are expected to take effect after a 90-day period for public comment.


Oddities, Like Jokes and Secret Things
Toward the end of their show at Irving Plaza on Thursday night, the first of four sold-out concerts, They Might Be Giants played Steve Miller's 1973 hit, "Gangster of Love." It's a wildly ridiculous song, with lyrics like "You're the prettiest thing I ever did see/Really love your peaches, want to shake your tree." But it has a great groove, and the band squeezed the pleasure out of it, making the performance roll with humor, letting all the contradictions hang exposed, flapping in the wind.
Dealing with oddities is the band's strength, presenting pieces where the music and the words either don't quite add up or come to strange conclusions.
Unlike "Gangster of Love" and most mainstream pop, which rely on a strong sense of first-person narrative, They Might Be Giants songs dispense with ego entirely.
Everything is a joke, or elliptical, or hidden behind a persona; a sense of the absurd fuels the band in every aspect except the craft of the music itself.


MohawkIndustries(MOHK,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Bilingual Education Has a Place in Our Culture; Meaningless Tests
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 20 news article on the problems of bilingual education in New York City fails to mention that vast numbers of children are being assigned to bilingual programs simply because they cannot read, rather than because they are bilingual.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Odds and Ends Coalesce And the Women Love It  Irving Plaza
Beck's show on Wednesday night was a little bit of this and some of that, but mostly rock.
The audience, which packed the sold-out house, was there to hear one of the more talented alternative rockers to arrive this year, whose record "Mellow Gold" (Geffen) with its hit, "Loser," is loaded with wonderfully crude pieces.
The tunes, snippets of blues, distorted singing, out-of-tune guitar parts, hip-hop and hard rock, are an amazingly fertile synthesis of all the detritus banging around in a musically literate 24-year-old's head.


Huffington, the Outsider, Seldom Attracted Raves In His Earlier Ventures
As he campaigns across California in what has become the most expensive Senate race in history, Representative Michael Huffington likes to talk of himself as an entrepreneur who knows the pressures of meeting a payroll.
"You've never signed the front of a paycheck because you've been in government for 25 years," Mr.
Huffington, a Republican, scornfully told his Democratic opponent, Senator Dianne Feinstein, this month on CNN's "Larry King Live."


Ogden Corp.(OG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Fresh Coat of Paint on the Past
EVERY day, David Margolis, old but reinvigorated, stands in the rotunda of the newly opened First Avenue entrance to Bellevue Hospital and brings to life the faint, long unviewed murals he painted there more than 50 years ago as a W.P.A. artist.
Sometimes, you can go home again.


New York Can Do More to Cut Bus Pollution
To the Editor:
New York City's alternative-fuel vehicle program has suffered some problems (news article, Oct. 21).
Although it is the largest such program in the country, it has failed to reduce air pollution and the use of foreign petroleum and to enhance local economic development.


CHRONICLE
ROSALYNN CARTER has written "Helping Yourself Help Others: A Book for Caregivers," which is being published by Times Books, and much of the advice it contains comes from her own experience.
The former First Lady has cared for family members since childhood.
"When I was 12 years old, my daddy got sick with leukemia, and he died when I was 13," she said yesterday.
"I was the eldest of four children, and I helped my mother."


Pentagon Acts Openly on Base Closings
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 18 editorial erroneously claims the Pentagon is "Cheating on Base Closings." To save billions of dollars, the United States Department of Defense is closing bases -- hundreds of them -- and restructuring its operations.
Only by doing so can we save funds to maintain the training and equipment essential to our armed forces.


Eviction Raises a Congregation's Anger
The police could have used better judgment in ordering worshipers to leave the church.
That's just about all anybody can agree on.
But what motivated the disruption of the 11 A.M. service at a Korean-American church here on Oct. 16 -- racism, overzealous enforcement of the zoning code or both -- is a question that everyone answers differently.


Tug-of-War Develops Over Earth Day in '95
It would be a green extravaganza of Super Bowl dimensions, complete with Roman numerals, a pop music festival, a trade exposition, a big rally and a coast-to-coast consciousness-raising: Earth Day.
Next year is the 25th anniversary of the rallies that first cropped up on April 22, 1970, and everybody wants a piece of the action, including the Clinton Administration, the environmental movement and even big business.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
The Living, the Dead And the Power of Fable  TriBeCa Performing Arts Center
The line between the living and the dead is never certain in the Mexico of "The Crossroads," Juan Tovar's adaptation of the fiction of Juan Rulfo.
It is a world of literal ghost towns, where spectral voices echo through empty villages and phantom families taunt those they have left or been abandoned by.


Work Program at Jail Is Cut And Then Ordered Restored
The Department of Correction abruptly canceled work-release privileges for inmates in New York City's jails yesterday as the department began to put into effect Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's latest round of budget cuts.
Only a few hours after the cancellation was announced, the Mayor's office overruled the department after City Council officials complained that the administration continued to impose cuts the Mayor proposed on Tuesday without waiting for Council approval.


Met Life Shakes Up Its Ranks
Chastened by a scandal over improper sales tactics by agents more concerned with their commissions than their customers, the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company is shaking up its ranks and moving to improve training of its sales force.
At the same time, the company is trying to cut costs.
New York-based Met Life grew to be the nation's leading issuer of life insurance policies by selling coverage to low- and middle-income consumers often shunned by other companies.


N.F.L. Revises Drug Policy
The National Football League Players Association announced yesterday that it had worked out a new substance abuse policy between the players and the teams with greater emphasis on evaluation, treatment and education.
"What we did was add a stronger funded commitment to evaluation, treatment and education in a confidential manner without weakening the testing and discipline components," said Doug Allen, assistant executive director of the N.F.L.P.A..
"It's more like an employee assistance program that tries to address substance abuse problems on all fronts."


Future Shop Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Franklin Resources Inc.(BEN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Public &amp; Private; Rewards in Freedom
When Guido Calabresi was sworn in as a judge in Connecticut on the 55th anniversary of the day his family arrived in the United States, his speech included this assessment of America: "Our tragic moments -- for which we are still paying and will long pay -- are those times when our laws furthered bigotry and discrimination."
The words of the immigrant boy, once dean of Yale Law School, now sitting on the Second Circuit Court of Appeals, describe well Proposition 187, which Californians will consider on Election Day.


Deutsche Bank Is Moving a Unit to London
In a signal that German banks want to become more important players in global securities markets, Deutsche Bank A.G. said today that it would move its investment banking operations to London and merge them with Morgan Grenfell, a London investment bank acquired in 1990.
Though the move had been expected, financial analysts saw it as a significant step.
Deutsche Bank is Germany's largest, but it has had a relatively minor international presence in mergers and acquisitions and in global sales of equities.


Cinergy Corp. reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


Contemporary Museum for Geneva
This city of bankers and diplomats may be one of Europe's richest, but persuading it to spend money on the arts has never been easy.
That helps explain why it has taken 20 years to establish Geneva's new Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art.
The wealthy Swiss and foreigners drawn to this city also see little reason to spend their own money on the arts, which further explains why, when the museum finally opened last month, its home was a modest, turn-of-the-century factory and not some fancy architectural creation.


Photo Award
Ellen Binder, a New York freelance photographer, won the 15th annual W. Eugene Smith grant in humanistic photography, it was announced yesterday by Nikon, which sponsors the $20,000 grant.
A second grant of $5,000 was awarded to Viviane Moos, also a New York-based photographer.
The grant, created in 1978 to help photojournalists who chronicle the human spirit, were named for the late photojournalist W. Eugene Smith, who died in 1978.


Delmarva Power &amp; Light Co.  (DEW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Decline on Wall Street Hurts The City's Fragile Recovery
Having led the New York metropolitan area out of recession, the financial industry now faces mounting troubles that are adding to the billion-dollar budget woes of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
At the same time, Wall Street's travails threaten to cast a pall over the fragile recovery in New York City and its suburbs.
Unlike the crash of 1987, which ended a speculative frenzy in stocks, Wall Street's current traumas are largely a consequence of a steep fall in the less-visible bond market, which once provided a cushion of stability for the volatile securities business.


Long Bond Returns Below 8%
Treasury prices jumped sharply yesterday after the Government's report on third-quarter economic growth showed that inflation remained in check even as the economy moved ahead at an unexpectedly rapid pace.
The surprising rally sent the yield on the 30-year bond back below 8 percent.
The stock market also surged on the news, with the Dow Jones industrial average jumping 55.51 points, to 3,930.66.
The Dow is just 47.70 points below its all-time high of 3,978.36, reached on Jan. 31.  [ Page 38. ]


Sports of The Times; Foreman's Eternal Quest
TWENTY years ago today, about 15 of us crowded into an office at the Johnson Publishing Company to watch the closed-circuit telecast of what we feared would be Muhammad Ali's physical and symbolic Waterloo.
This was "The Rumble In The Jungle," George Foreman, the powerful young heavyweight champion, versus Ali.
Technically the fight was being fought on Oct. 30 at 4 A.M.
But because of the 8-hour time difference between Kinshasa, Zaire, and Chicago, we watched the fight on the 29th.
In a sense, we were witnessing history before it took place.
This was truly the signature of Ali's genius: being in two times at one place.


Emco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy The economy grew at a robust 3.4 percent annual pace during the summer.
But inflation showed no sign of acceleration in the Commerce Department's report on gross domestic product for the third quarter.
The Clinton Administration trumpeted the data as portraying a healthy, stable economy.  [ Page 1. ] Wall Street's woes threaten a fragile recovery in New York City and its suburbs.
The financial industry, which had led the local economy out of recession, is suffering a downturn nearly as sharp as the stock market crash of 1987.
But this time the losses have been in the less-visible bond market, which once provided a cushion of stability for the volatile securities business.  [ 1. ] Markets Bonds staged a surprisingly strong rally, pushing the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond below the psychologically important level of 8 percent.
Investors were heartened by the report on third-quarter economic growth, which showed inflation in check.  [ 37. ] Stocks surged, bolstered by the G.D.P. report.
The Dow Jones industrial average climbed 55.51 points, or 1.4 percent.  [ 38. ] The dollar strengthened as currency dealers took their cues from the advances in bonds and stocks in the United States.  [ 47. ] Gasoline prices rose sharply after two refineries halted operations, heightening concerns about tight supplies.  [ 47. ] Companies Metropolitan Life is seeking to put a sales scandal behind it by shaking up its ranks and moving to improve training of its sales force.
A cautious and conservative approach helped the company avoid the kinds of investment mistakes that have plagued some other insurers.
But that tendency to avoid rocking the boat also allowed some bad sales and management habits to fester.  [ 37. ] Johnson &amp; Johnson hopes sucralose will rival aspartame.
But the no-calorie sweetener must first win F.D.A. approval.  [ 37. ] The head of Atlantic Records will take over the helm of Warner Brothers Records, its sister label, in an effort to quell turmoil within the company's corporate ranks.  [ 37. ]
McDonnell Douglas pleased investors, who sent its stock soaring.
The company plans to repurchase 18 million shares, split the stock 3 for 1 and increase the dividend 71 percent.  [ 37. ] Paine Webber sued two rival brokerage firms, accusing them of raiding Kidder, Peabody for its top brokers.
Paine Webber agreed to acquire Kidder earlier this month.  [ 39. ] Tenneco plans to sell more of Case, reducing its stake in the farm and construction equipment subsidiary to 49 percent.  [ 39. ] Carson Pirie Scott is seeking to buy Younkers, in what would be a merger of two Midwestern department-store chains.  [ 39. ] G.E.C. made a hostile bid for VSEL, Britain's leading submarine maker.
The move pits the company against British Aerospace, which had reached a takeover agreement with VSEL.  [ 39. ] Deutsche Bank plans to move its investment banking operations to London and merge them with Morgan Grenfell.  [ 39. ] Your Money The way banks sell mutual funds has been criticized by a number of customers, who contend they were misled about the risk, pushed into inappropriate investments and not told of the fees involved.
Recent surveys by researchers suggest that many banks could do a better job of informing customers.  [ 33. ] New rules limit escrow surplus requirements on mortgages.
Millions of dollars may be refunded to home buyers.  [ 34. ] Timing is important when selling shares of a mutual fund.
For tax reasons, financial advisers urge people who are planning to sell to do so before the fund's distribution.  [ 33. ] A second mortgage or a home equity line of credit?
With interest rates rising, the traditional loan may be a better choice.  [ 33. ]


Educators Scrambling to Assess Ruling That Struck Down a Scholarship Program for Blacks
A Federal appeals decision that struck down a scholarship program for black students at the University of Maryland sent educators around the nation scrambling today to review whether their own race-based programs might be open to challenge.
The decision, issued on Thursday by the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in Richmond, found that a scholarship program that awarded aid to black students to try to promote diversity and compensate for past discrimination was unconstitutional because it gave unfair preference to one racial group.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Ivanisevic Edges Agassi  Goran Ivanisevic edged Andre Agassi, 10-8, in a seesaw, third-set tie breaker last night to gain the semifinals of the Stockholm Open.
Each player blew a match point in the tie breaker before the world's second-ranked player connected with a cross-court forehand to win the quarterfinal, 6-1, 3-6, 7-6 (10-8).
Ivanisevic's victory snapped Agassi's 14-match winning streak that started in the United States Open.
Ivanisevic will play Russia's Evgeny Kafelnikov in Saturday's semifinals.
Kafelnikov, seeded No. 11, rallied from a set down to defeat No. 4 Sergi Bruguera, 6-7 (4-7), 6-4, 6-2. (AP) YACHT RACING  One Australia Wins  One Australia, the new America's Cup yacht skippered by John Bertrand of Australia, won the first race yesterday of the International America's Cup Class Canterbury of New Zealand World Championship off San Diego.
Bill Koch's all-women's America's Cup team placed second, 3 minutes 20 seconds behind Bertrand.
Pettengill Is Second: Steve Pettengill of Middletown, R.I., aboard Hunter's Child, arrived in Cape Town yesterday, nailing down second place in Class I (50-60 feet) for the first leg of the BOC Challenge solo around-the-world race.
It was the highest placing by an American in BOC Class I. Isabelle Autissier of France, the first-place finisher, completed the 6,818-mile Charleston-Cape Town run last Saturday.
HARNESS RACING  Lookout Victory Wins  Lookout Victory, driven by John Patterson Jr., won the $334,000 Cadillac Breeders Crown 2-year-old filly trot at Woodbine Race Course in Rexdale, Ontario, last night.
Trailing early, Lookout Victory went outside and passed Sensible Lady at the half-mile mark, and took command, winning by six-and-one-quarter lengths in 1:572/5 .
In other races, Eager Seelster won the $384,500 2-year-old colt trot by one length over a hard-charging Armbro Nash.
Yankee Cashmere, driven by Peter Wrenn, won the $501,400 2-year-old filly pace by two lengths, beating Hattie in a wild run down the stretch in 1:56.
Jennas Beach Boy, driven by Bill Fahy, captured the $670,700, 2-year-old colt final in 1:514/5 by four lengths. (AP) CROSS-COUNTRY  Dartmouth Dominates  Sam Wilbur, a senior from Lincoln, Maine, registered a 40-yard victory over teammate Ted FitzPatrick in the Heptagonal Games and led Dartmouth to the team title at Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx.
Wilbur, who was second last year, finished the 5-mile race in 24 minutes 47 seconds, and FitzPatrick's time was 24:55.
Laura Woeller, a junior from Fulton, N.Y., successfully defended her women's 3.1-mile title in 18:14 but failed to lead Cornell to its fourth straight team crown as Dartmouth prevailed with 46 points.


CHRONICLE
ADAM MICHNIK, the intellectual force behind the Solidarity movement in Poland, did not speak English when he arrived in New York on Oct. 1 to be a visiting professor at the New School for Social Research.
He also has a speech impediment, a distinct stutter.
Still, neither obstacle kept him from delivering an address in English to an overflowing crowd last week at the Casa Italiana auditorium on West 12th Street.
"The audience was stunned by his enormous courage," said ELZBIETA MATYNIA, a sociology lecturer at the school who is his translator in his classes.


Liberia's Civil War Takes Toll on Children
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 22 news article presents a devastating picture of the deteriorating situation in Liberia, where a civil war has resulted in an estimated 150,000 deaths since 1990.
However, you fail to point out the heavy toll taken on the children of Liberia.


In a Land of Potatoes, It's Broccoli Time


Belnord Sale Leads to End Of Rent Fight
Twenty years after angry tenants went to war with the owner of one of the Upper West Side's grandest apartment buildings, a peace settlement was reached yesterday, ending one of the longest rent strikes in New York City's history.
The owner gave up the building, the Belnord, and the tenants, many of whom can barely recall a time before their struggle, won a pledge from the new owner that the building would once again have hot and cold water full time, enough workers to keep it clean and a fresh paint job for its dingy exterior.


Vendors Added Flavor To Harlem's 125th St.
To the Editor:
The showdown between vendors and police on 125th Street in Manhattan last week was deplorable.
The continuing heavy police presence is bad for morale.
The street looks gutted and desolate, shorn of its African ambiance (news article, Oct. 23).


IN PERFORMANCE: CABARET
A Big Voice That Hints Of More Than Meets the Ear  Danny's Skylight Room
In sheer vocal presence, Judy Argo, a singer from Atlanta, is one of the more impressive visitors to the city's cabaret circuit.
Ms.
Argo, who is appearing at Danny's Skylight Room (346 West 46th Street, Clinton) through Nov. 5, has a big, chesty alto that is large enough to fill several clubs the size of Danny's.
Because her blunt pop-jazz phrasing treats most lyrics as straightforward declarations, when she sings ballads there is often the sense that she is consciously keeping a lid on the more rambunctious side of her musical personality.


Giuliani Refuses to Endorse One Caller's Point of View
If there were any doubts that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's endorsement of Mario M. Cuomo might have a backlash among some of the Mayor's supporters, they were erased during Mr.
Giuliani's weekly call-in radio show on WABC-AM (770) when a man named Jim called from his car.
JIM "First of all, I've got to talk for myself, but also a large contingency of my own people that are very disappointed in you for backing Mario Cuomo. But that's your business. I think you turned your back on some people who got you there in the first place. And you're, uh, I say we were very disappointed."


Nova Corp.(NVA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New York State Electric &amp; Gas (NGE,N) reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


Bilingual Education Has a Place in Our Culture
To the Editor:
New York City Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines has attached a caveat to the Board of Education's report faulting bilingual and English as a Second Language programs.
The study found that students in bilingual programs did not fare as well academically as students who take most of their classes in English.


Ban Homework in Half Moon Bay? Pupils See a Half-Baked Idea
When an iconoclastic school board member proposed abolishing homework for students in this coastal community south of San Francisco, the board president jokingly accused him of trying to become the patron saint of all high school students.
A ban on homework sounded like the answer to every young person's prayer.
But in the two weeks since the board member, Garrett Redmond, touched off a national debate on the value of homework, many of the school district's 3,500 students have expressed a conclusion sure to delight their teachers: homework is essential to their education, and they do not want it taken away.


Anadarko Petroleum Corp.(APC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about President Clinton's talks with President Hafez al-Assad of Syria misstated the number of victims in the mass killings of Muslim worshipers in February at a mosque in the West Bank town of Hebron.
It was 29, not 100.


A Little Infamy Goes a Long Way
First things first: the blood does not drip.
In "Four Scenes in a Harsh Life," the now infamous Ron Athey piece, which opened at Performance Space 122 on Thursday night, there is a sequence you may well have read about.
That's the one that was performed in Minneapolis under the aegis of the Walker Art Center, which contributed $150 that came from a National Endowment for the Arts grant.
That led to a newspaper account of the piece by a reporter who had not seen it.
That led to cries of outrage from members of right-wing Christian organizations.
And that led to Mr.
Athey and the endowment's being denounced on the floor of the United States Senate.


Bruncor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For a Bronx District, Cuomo Isn't Just a Choice, but a Faith
Every telephone pole in Williamsbridge seems to be wearing a Mario Cuomo poster.
Cuomo fliers skitter daily under locked front doors.
Everywhere, people state their gubernatorial preference with gusto: Cuomo!
It doesn't seem to matter much, in this heavily black and West Indian neighborhood, that Mr.
Cuomo has been Governor for 12 years, or that many voters elsewhere say they are sick of his face and hungry for change.


McDonnell Dividend To Jump 71%
Flush with cash, McDonnell Douglas has decided to spend a bit on stockholders.
It announced yesterday that it would repurchase 18 million shares, split the stock 3 for 1 and increase its dividend 71 percent, news that drove the stock up more than $15 a share to a record close.
Analysts said the action reflected the slowdown in new military aircraft programs, which reduced the company's investment requirements and made the cash available.
The analysts also said it indicated better operating efficiency.


Clinton Visits U.S. Troops In Kuwait
At a final public stop of his Middle East tour, President Clinton today paid tribute to thousands of soldiers he rushed here just three weeks ago and warned anew that Saddam Hussein would pay a heavy price if he tried again to menace Kuwait.
"The United States and the international community will not allow Baghdad to threaten its neighbors now or in the future," the President declared from a platform erected on the backs of two M1-A1 Abrams tanks.
"That is not our threat; that is our promise."


Castle (A.M.) &amp; Co. (CAS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinton Visits G.I.'s in Kuwait


Peter French, 76, Magazine Editor
Peter French, a retired editor of Business Week magazine who was also an author, died on Wednesday at his home in Peter Cooper Village in Manhattan.
He was 76.
The cause was cancer, said his son David.


Carson Offers $150 Million for Younkers
Trying to join the wave of consolidation in the department store industry, Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Company said yesterday that it was seeking to buy Younkers Inc. for about $150 million in cash.
Younkers, however, was cool to the unsolicited offer.
The acquisition would create a company with sales of about $1.7 billion and more than 100 department stores in the Midwest under the Carson Pirie Scott, Bergner's and Younkers names.
Because the two companies have similar customer bases, marketing philosophies, stores and geography, analysts said a marriage would produce big savings by wringing out redundancies.


Sharpton Files Class-Action Suit On Behalf of Harlem Vendors
The Rev.
Al Sharpton and the leader of a group of street vendors on 125th Street in Harlem filed a class-action suit against the city yesterday in Federal court, claiming that the vendors' civil rights were violated when they were forced from the street earlier this month.
The suit, filed in United States District Court in Manhattan, seeks to reverse the Giuliani administration's attempt to relocate the vendors to an open-air market on an empty lot eight blocks to the south, on Lenox Avenue between 116th and 117th Streets.
It asks that about 1,100 vendors receive $100 million in damages from the city.


Inquiry Starts On Candidate Who Hired Illegal Alien
The United States Immigration and Naturalization Service has begun a preliminary inquiry into whether Representative Michael Huffington violated Federal law when he employed an illegal immigrant at his home in Santa Barbara for five years.
A spokeswoman for the immigration service, Virginia Kice, said today in Los Angeles that the agency began looking into the matter after Mr.
Huffington, a Republican seeking a United States Senate seat, conceded at a news conference on Thursday that a nanny who was in this country illegally worked at his home from 1989 until 1993.


Hofstra's Playoff Hopes Slipping After First Loss
Hofstra, undefeated and untied before tonight, is unlikely to be awarded a spot in the Division I-AA playoffs after tonight.
Trailing by 17 points in the fourth quarter, the Flying Dutchmen came up with a valiant effort, but fell short in a 24-21 loss to Towson State at Hofstra Stadium.


Man Is Held In Strangling Of Woman
The police have arrested a New Jersey man in the killing of a 23-year-old woman whose body was found in September in a truck trailer in Greenwich Village.
The man, Todd Featherstone, 38, of Newark, a former boyfriend of the victim, has a history of sexual assault, the police said.
He was picked up at his job at a New Jersey mall on Thursday after detectives received word that he was about to leave for Maryland, officials said.


Starks's 42 Points Wasted In Finale
When John Starks hit a 30-foot shot as time expired he turned to the referee and asked that the shot count for 4 points.
Unfortunately for the Knicks, it was just a 3-pointer and New York -- despite a 42-point night from Starks -- dropped its final preseason game, 103-102, to the Washington Bullets here tonight.
Starks, who had 19 points at the half and 29 after three quarters, sat out the first six minutes of the final quarter before scoring his last 13 to keep the Knicks in the game at Kiel Arena.


Enserch Corp.(ENS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


International Roster at AIDS Benefit
There is something companionable about noncompetitive skating events.
It may be the sight of all those waves from good-looking young ice-dancers as they leave the rink after their duets.
But companionable warmth filled the air on Monday night at Madison Square Garden in "Angels on Ice," a benefit for the Gay Men's Health Crisis.
It was a night for aficionados to savor the fine points of performances by some of the brightest international stars in skating.
But there was a great deal to enjoy for those who can't tell an axel from a salchow.
And the excitement of watching an extraordinary gathering of gold medalists from world and national competitions was contagious.


Israel Is Dour On Prospects With Syrians
Despite public attempts to put a bright face on President Clinton's diplomatic mission to Damascus, Israeli officials said today that they had heard nothing new to suggest that they were closer to peace with Syria.
The dour assessment was also reflected in the Israeli press, which described the results of the President's several hours in Syria on Thursday as meager to the point of failure.
"Pretty depressing," a commentary in the newspaper Haaretz said, singling out the failure of President Hafez al-Assad to condemn terrorism publicly even though Mr.
Clinton said the Syrian leader had done so earlier in private.


Douglas &amp; Lomason reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Central Louisiana ElectricCo.(CNL,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


Executive Changes
COLTEC INDUSTRIES, New York, an industrial manufacturing company, said John W. Guffey Jr., its president and chief operating officer, would become chairman and chief executive, succeeding David I. Margolis, who will retire on Feb. 1.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Chronicle column on Thursday about the new chairman of the Andrei Sakharov Archives at Brandeis University misstated his title and, in some editions, misstated his given name.
He is Ronald S. Lauder, chairman of two divisions of the Estee Lauder Companies, not the company's president. (Leonard A. Lauder is his brother and the president and chief executive of Estee Lauder.)


Fina Inc.(FI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Observer; The C-Span Miracle
The real miracle of television is C-Span.
I lie abed at a roadside inn in Grantville, Pa., and C-Span takes me back to youth.
Or whatever that fizzy condition was back there in the mists of faraway 1962.
It is the spectacle of Senator Edward M. Kennedy debating one Mitt Romney in Boston that does the trick, but there would be no spectacle here by the Pennsylvania high road if it were not for C-Span.


The High Life on Park Avenue


Jets to Learn if the Bye Was a Rest Cure
The most important components on the Jets' offense and defense -- quarterback and pass rush -- sailed through their final practice today, healthy again after a bye week.
The week began with Boomer Esiason still hobbled with an ankle sprain, and with defensive end Marvin Washington practicing lightly with a knee injury.
And then there was Marvin Jones, the perennially injured middle linebacker, who finally joined the team's full practice today, too.


Great Lakes Power reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Mystery Death and a Larceny Arrest
For the last three months, people who live near the red brick building at 340 East 31st Street in the East Flatbush section of Brooklyn wondered what had happened to Anne Wolowitz, a 90-year-old woman who had lived for decades in a small apartment on the fourth floor.
On July 21, she followed her routine of calling several times to a local meals program for the homebound elderly, grilling people there about when her food would be delivered.
When she failed to call on July 22, the police were called and the apartment was searched, but Miss Wolowitz was not found.


Dow Has 55-Point Jump, Reacting to G.D.P. Data
The stock market surged yesterday after the Government reported that the gross domestic product grew at a surprisingly rapid 3.4 percent annual rate in the third quarter.
The bond market, which opens earlier than stocks, also jumped, and yields, which move in the opposite direction from prices, fell sharply.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
A Version of MTV, Though a Well-Bred One  Joyce Theater
Hubbard Street Dance Chicago, the versatile troupe directed by Lou Conte and now in its final week at the Joyce Theater, showed off a well-bred version of MTV in a local premiere, Margo Sappington's "Step Out of Love."


Vacco Claims His Opponent Is Promoting Gay 'Agenda'
Dennis C. Vacco said tonight that voters should be aware that his opponent in the race for New York State Attorney General, Karen S. Burstein, promotes a homosexual "agenda."
Mr.
Vacco had previously maintained that Ms.
Burstein's homosexuality should not be a campaign issue.
But when asked about it during a debate tonight, he cited a Burstein campaign leaflet that said she will "lead the fight for lesbians and gay men in New York and across America."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.75
7.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.00
4.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.75
4.77
3.03
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.99
4.96
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.42
5.45
3.17
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.78
7.86
5.42
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.95
8.05
5.97
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.78
8.87
7.04
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.84
6.84
5.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


College Football; The Inflating of Nebraska's Hopes
The vest, as Brook Berringer describes it, is sort of an armored bustier, something that Madonna might wear if she went undercover.
The padded, plastic breastplate covers the entire torso of Nebraska's convalescent quarterback.
Actually, he said he felt more like Robocop than Madonna.
And he's not looking to remain bulletproof today against Colorado, only to keep his lungs inflated.


Now Playing in Politics, Latest Techniques of Hollywood
It's not as if the Democrats were not having enough trouble with Republican efforts to paint their candidates as clones of President Clinton and to capitalize on the widespread unhappiness with his performance.
Now, they are having to watch their rivals' advertising transform Democrats into Bill Clinton through a new video technique that was used in the movie "Terminator 2."
The technique, known as morphing, merges two images slowly, giving the effect of a smooth metamorphosis from one image to the other.
So what proved effective in the Arnold Schwarzenegger movie is being tried in political commercials.


Sydney Walker, 73, A Character Actor Of Stage and Film
Sydney Walker, a stage and screen actor whose career spanned nearly five decades, died on Sept. 30 at the home of friends in San Francisco.
He was 73 and lived in San Francisco.
He suffered a brief illness, said Nick Kaledin, a friend in New York.


Computer Task Group Inc.(TSK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tenneco Set To Cut Stake In Case Unit
Tenneco Inc. said today that it planned to sell another large piece of its Case Corporation farm and construction equipment business to the public and trim its stake in Case to about 49 percent by year's end.
Tenneco has filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission to offer 15.6 million Case shares to the public.
The company owns 71 percent of Case, the second-largest farm machinery manufacturer in North America after Deere &amp; Company.


Altering Nature's Design


Transactions
Baseball  American League CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Exercised their 1995 option on Charles Nagy, pitcher.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Agreed to terms with Paul O'Neill, outfielder, on a four-year contract.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Named Bucky Dent dugout coach and infield instructor and Ed Napoleon first base coach.
National League ATLANTA BRAVES -- Agreed to terms with Rafael Belliard, infielder, on a two-year contract and Steve Bedrosian, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
CHICAGO CUBS -- Announced that Brett Fischer, assistant trainer, will not be offered a contract for 1995.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Agreed to terms with Shawn Holman, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Agreed to terms with Tommy Harper, batting coach, on a one-year contract.
Football  National Football League CHICAGO BEARS -- Signed Darwin Ireland, linebacker, from the practice squad.
Waived Keshon Johnson, cornerback.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Announced the retirement of Ron Lewis, wide receiver.
Signed Keith Crawford, wide receiver.


A Man and His Oud. How's That Again?
The ancient oud, as if hurled from Arabia through the centuries, now finds itself in the loving hands of Simon Shaheen in a tiny walk-up in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
Mr.
Shaheen has displayed the range and soul of this short-necked, pear-shaped plucked instrument, the precursor of the European lute, like few others.
He has coaxed the oud's elastic, syncopated sound across musical borders, from classical Arabic compositions to contemporary jazz fusion.
He has stretched social boundaries, too, establishing himself as an important interpreter of Arab culture for Western audiences.


Laboring in the Shadows, Grantham Enters the Fray
Charles Grantham has been working in shadows.
Since taking over as the executive director of the National Basketball Association players union in 1988, he has wrestled with succeeding Larry Fleisher, who inaugurated the league's revenue sharing-salary cap revolution with David Stern.
The commissioner's shadow is perhaps the largest, since Stern receives nearly all the credit for the N.B.A.'s prosperity for more than a decade.
In the current labor ferment in sports, Grantham has operated in a quieter corner than baseball's Donald Fehr, hockey's Bob Goodenow and football's Gene Upshaw.
But with the N.B.A. teetering between strike and lockout, Grantham has his first chance to make a mark on the union during its toughest collective bargaining.


Lyons Journal; A New Mosque as a Beacon for a 'French Islam'
In the 15 years since the idea of building a Grand Mosque in Lyons was first broached, it became a topic of such heated debate that even after its first stone was laid in 1992, few people here believed that the dazzling white Islamic "cathedral" would ever be completed.
Both the Roman Catholic Archbishop and the Chief Rabbi of Lyons favored giving the 130,000 Muslims in France's second-largest city a proper place of worship.
But the extreme rightist National Front was fiercely opposed, while the mosque's future neighbors fought the project in court.


Crestbrook Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sparks's Short Career Is Long on Injuries
The Giants will have to reshuffle their secondary for Sunday's game against Detroit at Giants Stadium because Phillippi Sparks will miss the game with a severe groin injury.
The injury, unfortunately for Sparks and the Giants, is one of many in the cornerback's short career.
During training camp, Sparks had arthroscopic surgery on his right knee to remove torn cartilage.
He was able to bounce back in just a matter of weeks, but that wasn't the case last season, when he tore ligaments in his foot and missed 11 games.


Hooper Holmes Inc.(HH,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Exide Corp.(EX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Unfinished Justice at Prudential
For a fraud that dwarfs most of the crooked schemes ever seen on Wall Street, Prudential Securities now agrees that it committed a crime.
It also agrees to cough up $330 million in restitution in exchange for the Government's willingness to withhold a ruinous indictment.
After three years of denying criminality, the company acknowledges that its sale of $1.4 billion in overblown limited partnerships was shot through with lies that targeted and victimized more than 120,000 unsuspecting investors.
Thanks for the admission of criminality.
Thanks also for the $330 million.
But shouldn't someone be headed for prison?


Mrs. Reagan Denounces Oliver North On Iran Affair
Nancy Reagan attacked Oliver L. North, the Republican Senate candidate in Virginia, on Thursday, asserting that the former aide to President Ronald Reagan "lied to my husband and lied about my husband."
Mr.
North ducked the barb today, saying, "My mom told me a long time ago, 'Never get in a fight with a lady.' "


Seeking to Quiet Turmoil, Warner Taps Atlantic Chief
In an attempt to quiet the turmoil at Warner Brothers Records, executives of the parent Warner Music Group asked Danny Goldberg, chief of its Atlantic Records, to become chairman of the sister label this morning, company executives said.
Doug Morris, the chairman and chief executive of Warner Music U.S., had said last night that he would name a new chiarman next week.
Warner Music executives declined today to confirm that Mr.
Goldberg was the choice.


Intermet Corp.(INMT,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Don't Look Too Far Ahead
VENUS WILLIAMS, the much-heralded 14-year-old who makes her pro debut next Monday in the Bank of the West Classic in Oakland, Calif., will play SHAUN STAFFORD, ranked 59th in the world, in the first round.
And if Williams wins, who would her opponent be in the second round?
ARANXTA SANCHEZ-VICARO, the French and United States Open champion.


In the Last Three Weeks, Pataki Has Far Outpaced Cuomo in the Fund-Raising Race
Despite the recent bump up in poll numbers for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, his opponent, State Senator George E. Pataki, far outpaced him in raising money in the last three weeks: Mr.
Pataki raised $4.45 million, compared to $1.96 million by Mr.
Cuomo, according to financial disclosure forms filed yesterday.
Meanwhile, B. Thomas Golisano, the Independence Fusion candidate, has sunk $2.84 million of his own money into his race since Oct. 7, bringing to roughly $6 million the total amount the Rochester businessman has spent on his campaign for governor.


Don't Blame Cereal Makers for High Prices
To the Editor:
Re "Who's Puffing Up the Price on Cereal?" (letter, Oct. 22): I can assure Daniel Farkas that there is no conspiracy among cereal manufacturers to keep prices high.


Burstein's Gay 'Agenda' Cited
In the race for New York Attorney General, Dennis C. Vacco accused his Democratic opponent, Karen Burstein, a lesbian, of promoting a gay "agenda." Page 25.


Have Passports, Will Travel: Russian Stars Are Pardoned
Russia's Foreign Ministry yesterday ordered new passports issued to two hockey players who left the Soviet Union illegally to play in America.
The move effectively pardons ALEXANDER MOGILNY and SERGEI FEDOROV, and clears the way for them to take part in a charity tournament in Russia next month.
Authorities also said they had dropped criminal charges filed against Mogilny when he left the Soviet Union in 1989 while serving in the army and playing on an army team.
Mogilny immigrated to the United States to join the Buffalo Sabres, and Fedorov left in 1990 to join the Detroit Red Wings.
Both are among the highest-paid players in the National Hockey League.


Russian Miners Become Victims Of Upheaval They Helped Start
Surrounded by rusting machinery, piles of coal and the murmurs of colleagues trooping sullenly toward the Komsomol mine shaft for the day's second shift, Vyacheslav V. Chibisov grew angry explaining how he had become a victim of Russia's economic upheaval rather than a beneficiary.
With demand for coal collapsing, Moscow has told Mr.
Chibisov and Komsomol's 650 other workers that the mine will be closed within 18 months, a casualty of the Government's plan to slash the $2 billion it pays to keep mines open, even the most uneconomical ones.


I.A.A.F. Offers Its Support
PRIMO NEBIOLO, president of the International Amateur Athletic Federation, has announced plans for revitalizing the sport of track and field in the United States.
"We hope to embark on a serious support program for track and field in the United States so that U.S. athletes can receive the publicity and recognition they deserve," Nebiolo said yesterday in Mar Del Plata, Argentina, where he is attending the Ibero-American championships.
"A more healthy, visible status for U.S. athletics will certainly help the overall publicity of our sport internationally."


Jannock Ltd. (JANNF,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
CENTURY CASINOS INC., Denver, has signed a 15-year joint venture agreement to establish and operate an entertainment center in Shenyang, Liaoning Province, China.
Century will own 67 percent of the venture.
SHAW COMMUNICATIONS INC., Edmonton, Alberta, a cable television systems operator, will buy Alberta Broadcasting Corp., Fort McMurray, Alberta, a cable television system operator, for about $11.5 million in cash.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Stephen Foster and Friends In an Evening on the Back Porch Alice Tully Hall
Thomas Hampson stepped back from the standard art-song repertory on Wednesday evening to explore the world of 19th-century salon songs, particularly those of Stephen Foster.
Collaborating with the Jay Unger Trio, Mr.
Hampson sang many a Foster favorite -- "Jeanie With the Light Brown Hair," "Gentle Annie," "Old Folks at Home" and "Beautiful Dreamer" were all offered in relaxed, easygoing arrangements -- as well as a few interesting rarities.
He also sang a few ballads by Robert Burns and Thomas Moore, who influenced Foster.
And Mr.
Unger, best known for his soundtrack performances for Ken Burns's "Civil War" series, led his band in Civil War songs and a few robust 19th-century fiddle pieces.


Hiring a Spouse and Slashing Medical Costs
UNEMPLOYED
When John Williamson, of Menlo Park, Calif., lost his job as an applications engineer for a semi-conductor manufacturer in 1992, the loss of health care benefits for his family was a big blow, he said.
WORKING FOR HIMSELF
He initially looked for a job with full benefits, but found he was in more demand as a consultant.
So he started his own home business.
White Eagle Consulting, which does semiconductor tests and measurements.
A TANTALIZING TAX BREAK
His financial adviser told him of a ruling earlier this year by the Internal Revenue Service that allows sole proprietors to write off medical expenses.
The catch is that the business owner must employ the spouse at a reasonable wage and then provide health benefits to substantially all employees.
A GOOD FIT
Mr.
Williamson's wife, Jan, had been keeping the books anyway.
All he had to do was put her on the payroll and establish a plan to reimburse employees for medical expenses.
The plan covers family members, so his wife's coverage extends not only to their two children, but also to Mr.
Williamson.
MEDICAL COSTS IN 1993 Total medical expenses were $6,848.
Insurance payments - $4,248 Deductibles - $800 Chiropractor - $1,320 Dentist - $264 Other - $216 SETTING UP THE PLAN
Now, White Eagle will pay Mrs.
Williamson a salary of about $15,000 a year - a move that is a tax wash for the couple.
It will aslo spend about $500 to establish a written medical benefits plan.
SUBSTANTIAL SAVINGS
Mrs.
Williamson will pay the family medical bills, and the company will reimburse her.
The money is a tax-deductible expense for the business, and free from personal income tax for Mrs.
Williamson.
Beacuse White Eagle pays about 50 percent in Federal, state and self-employment taxes, the plan effectively results in a 50 percent savings for the Williamsons.
Larry Pon of IDS Tax and Business Services says certain restrictions apply.  *
Reimbursements are limited to $5,000 per household.  *
The employer must be a sole proprietor.  *
The spouse must be a bona-fide emplyee.  *
The medical plan must cover nearly all employees.  *
The spouse's salary must be reasonable.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen's response to a Republican television advertisement attacking the Democrats referred incorrectly in some copies to a Presidential aide shown with Mr.
Bentsen.
He was Gene Sperling, not Robert E. Rubin.


Beneficial Corp.(BNL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INFLATION IN CHECK
Despite a series of interest-rate increases this year, the American economy grew at a surprisingly rapid 3.4 percent annual pace during the summer, Government figures showed today.
Consequently, 1994 is now shaping up as possibly the second-best year in a decade.
Yet inflation still showed no acceleration and, at least by some gauges, slackened a bit during the July-September quarter.


With Cuomo, Giuliani Feels G.O.P.'s Fury
On his first day of campaigning for Mario M. Cuomo, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani experienced the bitter price of bipartisanship today as angry supporters of State Senator George E. Pataki seized on Mr.
Giuliani as the symbol of their candidate's misfortune.
Not only was the Mayor mercilessly heckled as a sellout by rank-and-file Republicans who crashed a Cuomo rally here, but he also drew almost identical taunts from the furious leaders of his party, including its candidate for governor.


Aptar Group (ATR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The N.H.L. Takes a Shot, And Players Turn It Aside
As chunks of the season continue to melt away, National Hockey League officials are trying to entice the union into an agreement centered on a study of the league's financial condition.
At first glance, the union did not leap at the idea.
"We're not saying our way or no way," Jeffrey Pash, the league's No. 2 negotiator, said yesterday.
"We're trying to come up with something to get this process off dead center. I'm concerned if we don't we'll be looking at a long, cold winter. We thought this might be a way to get us off dead center and get a framework to get back on ice."


Two Ways To Tap A Home's Equity
Which makes more sense: a second mortgage or a home equity line of credit?
That's the perplexing question for people who want to tap the equity in their homes for college, a car, business or any other purpose.
Even though rising interest rates have made lines of credit slightly less appealing this year, they are still popular, mainly because of relatively low initial rates and fees.


Police Find Pattern of Arson by Gangs
In Atlanta, a young gang member was charged with murdering two infants after he threw a Molotov cocktail into the apartment of their 18-year-old mother, who was quarreling with another woman who was a friend of the gang.
In St.
Paul, five children were killed by a firebomb intended to intimidate their older brother who had seen a gang murder.
And in Los Angeles, 10 people were killed when gang members tossed a firebomb into a crowded apartment building.


Own a New York Home? You May Be Due $400
A couple's 13-year crusade for change in the mortgage business came to an end this week with new rules that will lead to refunds for millions of home buyers.
In 1981, Eugene and Frances Rogan of Merrick, L.I., began a letter-writing campaign after they discovered that their lender had tacked $134 onto their monthly mortgage payments for escrow.
The practice left the Rogans with escrow balances of $1,000 or more at the end of each year -- money that they could not retrieve and that earned interest for the lender.


Prospective Simpson Juror Is in Favor of Long Skirts
Lawyers in the O. J. Simpson case spent another day interviewing prospective jurors -- and dealing with hemlines, earplugs and marching bands.
Judge Lance A. Ito and two sets of lawyers questioned 12 more candidates today, bringing to 75 the number interviewed, and to 38 the number to be interviewed further next week.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the proposed acquisition of the Ziff-Davis Publishing Company by Forstmann Little &amp; Company misstated the number of employees at the publishing company.
It is 3,300, not 300; Forstmann has said it plans to keep all current employees.


To State Lotto Players, $70 Million Looks Lucky
Lines were long.
Hopes were high.
With their dollars and their dreams, thousands of people around the state hurried yesterday to put their bets down on the highest prize of any regularly scheduled Lotto since New York State established the game on Nov. 11, 1978.
The jackpot, set at $60 million when no one won the $40 million that was up for grabs on Wednesday night, was raised overnight to $70 million after 13 million tickets were sold on Thursday.
The ticket sales showed no sign of abating.


METRO DIGEST
PATAKI BACKERS BLAST GIULIANI
On his first day of campaigning for Mario M. Cuomo, Mayor Giuliani experienced the bitter price of bipartisanship as angry supporters of State Senator George E. Pataki seized on the Mayor as the reason for their candidate's misfortune.
Page 1.
WHERE CUOMO IS NOT A CHOICE BUT A FAITH
Every telephone pole in Williamsbridge seems to be wearing a Mario Cuomo poster.
Everywhere, people state their gubernatorial preference with gusto: Cuomo!
Williamsbridge, in the Bronx, is a place where people still believe in Mr.
Cuomo.
Though they can list good things they say he has done, their confidence also seems to boil down, at least in part, to a kind of faith.
Page 1.
Despite Mr. Cuomo's recent rise in the polls,


AETNA LIFE AND CASUALTY CO. (AET,N)
The Aetna Life and Casualty Company said yesterday that third-quarter earnings declined 43 percent as the company added to its reserves for pollution claims and raised estimates of catastrophe costs.
Aetna reported earnings of $129 million, or $1.15 a share, compared with $226 million, or $2.03 a share, in the corresponding quarter a year earlier.
Revenue rose 1.3 percent, to $4.385 billion from $4.328 billion.
The results were below Wall Street expectations of $1.48 a share, according to a survey of analysts by Zacks Investment Research.


Jason Inc.(JASN,NNM) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In an Unpredictable State, the Senate Race Appears Predictable
One of the familiar criticisms of politicians this year is that they are afraid to take the tough stand, to cast the courageous vote.
Here in Maine, where Ross Perot won 30 percent of the vote in the 1992 Presidential election, his strongest showing in any state, Representative Thomas H. Andrews, a Democrat, has time and again taken positions that he said were in the best interest of the nation, though they might have seemed disadvantageous to Maine.


Entergy Corp.(ETR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Debate, Already
The fact that Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York and his Republican challenger, State Senator George Pataki, have yet to face off in a campaign debate is a disservice to New York voters.
Chances are it will not happen, because each camp keeps insisting on its own format.
Both candidates contend that their stance is a matter of high principle.
But the tactical calculations on both sides of the tiresome debate over debates are transparent.


A Slow Start in Haiti
With his Presidential term interrupted by three years of enforced exile, Jean-Bertrand Aristide had ample time to think about how and where he would lead Haiti once he got back.
Yet two weeks after his return, key Cabinet jobs remain vacant and the Government has offered only a vague blueprint for the remaining 16 months of its mandate.
It is obviously impossible, in such a short time, to fulfill the material hopes placed in this Government by the millions of poor Haitians who elected it, suffered for it and patiently awaited its return.
All the more reason for Father Aristide to encourage thinking about longer-term economic prospects to assure people that today's sacrifices are not in vain.


Houston Industries Inc.(HOU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Donald Ashwander, 65, Is Dead; Composer for Children's Troupe
Donald Ashwander, a composer and musician best known for the effervescent scores he wrote for the Paper Bag Players, died on Wednesday in Manhattan.
He was 65 years old, and lived in Brooklyn.
The cause was a heart attack while he was preparing for a performance for public school children at the Riverbank State Park Cultural Center in Harlem, said Judith Liss, the managing director of the Paper Bag Players.


Crown Central Petroleum Corp.(CNP.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Religion Journal; New Gospel Translation With Roots on Slave Ships
The American Bible Society, publishers of the Scripture in many tongues, has added another language to its list, releasing a New Testament Gospel in Gullah, a historic African-English language spoken mainly in coastal South Carolina.
The Gospel According to Luke is rendered in Gullah as "De Good Nyews Bout Jedus Christ Wa Luke Write." The New York-based society has published it as a bilingual, 144-page paperback, with the Gullah translation appearing in bold type on each page, beside a fine-print King James Version in English.


Patent Barred For Compton's
The United States Patent and Trademark Office has formally rejected a patent filed by Compton's New Media that had been sharply criticized by the computer industry for its sweeping claims, executives at the Interactive Multimedia Association said today.
The Patent Office originally issued the patent to Compton's, which produces encyclopedia CD-ROM's, in August 1993.
The patent covered fundamental techniques for searching and retrieving information from multimedia data bases.
When the patent award was publicized, however, it drew a storm of protest from many in the computer industry who said the patent was too broad and covered various elements of voice, data and video software long in use.


Commonwealth Energy System (CES,N) reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


U.S. Seeks End to Bosnia Embargo in 6 Months
The United States proposed today that the Security Council lift its arms embargo against the Muslim-dominated Government of Bosnia in six months, a move that would be intended to force the Bosnian Serbs to adhere to a peace agreement drawn up last July.
The United States resolution, which will probably be voted on next week, is an effort to force Bosnian Serb acceptance of a peace settlement that partitioned Bosnia among warring factions and cut the area under Bosnian Serb control from 70 percent to 49 percent.


English Mystery Plot Based on a 1920's Case
Did Maj.
Herbert Armstrong use the arsenic he bought for killing lawn dandelions to murder his wife and then to try to murder a new lawyer in town who was threatening his own practice?
The case is true, played out in the early 1920's, and its outcome still divides the residents of Hay-on-Wye, an English town near the border of Wales.
Now, feeding an apparently insatiable British appetite for tales of wimpy husbands doing away with nagging wives, "Dandelion Dead" has been dramatized by Michael Chaplin for London Weekend Television.
It is being presented here in two 90-minute "Masterpiece Theater" episodes.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the New York State governor's race misidentified the State Senator from Saratoga Springs.
He is Joseph Bruno, not George.


A Serb Threat To Retaliate With Shelling
A Serbian commander today threatened to resume the shelling of Sarajevo if Bosnian Government forces pursue an offensive in northwestern Bosnia that has brought their most decisive victory against the Serbs in the 31-month war.
Gen.
Dragomir Milosevic, the Serbian commander in the Sarajevo area, said he would order the shelling of "selected targets" in Sarajevo in the event of new attacks by what he called "Muslim fanatics."


For Nets, Hall of Fame Is Part of a Blind Alley
The Nets' team hotel did not have 12-year-olds playing table tennis until 2 A.M., as it did in Moline, Ill., last week.
And the arena thermostat worked, a welcome change from the chilly, half-empty buildings in Albany and Atlanta.
Just the same.
Another outpost, another night of forgetting to switch on the defense.
Another loss.


Stopping Time, if Just for an Hour; To Everything There Is a Season, and It's Ours to Fall Back
Tomorrow creeps in petty places, like subway stations.
This unstoppable fact has kept Julio Santiago and his Macbeth-fracturing, battery-powered screwdriver busy this week.
In fact, he has been making time in the subways fly.
Backwards.
Before Eastern Standard Time begins at 2 A.M. tomorrow, 867 clocks in New York City's subway stations have to be turned back one hour.
Someone also has to change the larger-than-life clocks atop the Metropolitan Life tower at Madison Square and the Con Edison building at Irving Place.
Not to mention all the videocassette recorders, microwave ovens and digital watches.
A lot of people will dig out instruction manuals.
A lot of jewelers will have sore fingers.


Corporate Bond Reversal
Corporate bond funds that chalked up very respectable three-year records have suffered a reversal of fortune this year.
Of the top 10 funds ranked by three-year returns, only FPA New Income has stayed in the black so far this year, and its meager return does not match its load.
"People who took big risks in the bull market of '91 to '93 were really rewarded," said Jason Windawi, an analyst for Morningstar Mutual Funds.
Alliance, the top fund, had very long maturities that lifted its yield, and many leading funds had significant junk bond and foreign debt.
The junk -- or high yield -- bonds have held up, he said, but with rates rising the long maturities and foreign holdings have boomeranged.


Baseball; Yanks Give O'Neill $19 Million Contract
One day before Paul O'Neill would have filed to become a free agent and started a process that could have ended his association with the Yankees, the club signed him yesterday to a four-year contract worth $19 million.
There has been limited signing activity throughout the major leagues because of the continuing labor strife, but the Yankees made a bold, calculated move when they prevented O'Neill, the American League's top batter in the strike-shortened season, from bursting into the open market.
Mindful that they need O'Neill's powerful hitting and dependable defense to duplicate their first-place standing of 1994, the Yankees made the 31-year-old outfielder an offer lucrative enough for him to spurn free agency.


Favorites Grounded As a Pilot Takes Off
The Tour Championship was supposed to be the battle of the titans, the duel of the giants, the week that Nick Price and Greg Norman settled the argument as to the identity of the PGA Tour's 1994 leading money winner and the winner of the Vardon Trophy.
That's not quite the way things are shaping up here at the Olympic Club.
At the halfway point of the richest event in golf, Price, the leading money winner, is mired in 29th place in the 30-man field.
Norman, whose stroke average of 68.68 is the lowest in golf, shot 75 -- the highest round of the day -- and is tied for 26th.


Training the Birds for Winter


Paine Webber Sues 2 Rivals for Kidder Hirings
Seeking to prevent wholesale defections at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, the Paine Webber Group Inc. sued two rivals yesterday, accusing them of offering "exorbitant" financial incentives to lure Kidder's top brokers away before Paine Webber completed its takeover of Kidder.
In separate lawsuits, filed in New York City and Chicago, Paine Webber contended that the recent hiring of Kidder brokers by Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc. and Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. constituted a raid that could jeopardize its deal to buy Kidder from the General Electric Company for $670 million in stock.


Bridge; How should partner respond to a takeout double? One answer is to read a new book.
The oldest bidding convention in bridge is also the most used.
A new, comprehensive and altogether excellent book on the subject is "Takeout Doubles," by Michael Lawrence, one of the world's best player-writers.
It is available from him at 131 Alvarado Road, Berkeley, Calif. 94705, for $15.95 including postage.
Some delicate problems are addressed.
If you pass an opening bid, for example, and then double when the opener rebids his suit, is that for takeout?
According to Lawrence, the answer varies with circumstances.
It certainly needs partnership discussion, preferably after reading the book.


Mozambican Drops Boycott
One day after he clouded Mozambique's first free elections by rejecting them as fraudulent, the main opposition leader today dropped his boycott, cast his own ballot, and pronounced himself "the father of democracy in my country."
After meeting into the early morning with the Western donors who are financing the election, Afonso Dhlakama, leader of the Renamo rebel group and a candidate for the presidency, said he was "very satisfied" that his assertions of a Government conspiracy to cheat his party would be taken more seriously.


Atlantic Energy (ATE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hotel Is Told to Pay $1.7 Million To Woman Molested by Aviators
Concluding that the Las Vegas Hilton Hotel was negligent by failing to set up adequate security during the Tailhook Association's bawdy 1991 convention here, a jury today awarded $1.7 million to a former Navy lieutenant who was among several dozen women sexually assaulted at the gathering.
The victory by former Lieut.
Paula A. Coughlin seems certain to set the stage for at least a dozen other lawsuits against the Hilton, the site of the notorious gathering at which, Navy and Pentagon investigators concluded, 83 women were assaulted or at least harassed by naval aviators at the Hilton Hotel.


A New League To Be Unveiled
The creation of the first new major baseball league in 80 years will be announced at a news conference in Manhattan next Tuesday.
The United Baseball League sent out a news media advisory yesterday with information about a news conference.


Selling Funds? Timing's Important
Anyone who owns mutual funds outside of tax-deferred retirement accounts may want to do some fancy footwork before the end of the year.
Funds are obligated to distribute any revenues they have generated to shareholders at least once a year.
For stock funds, at least, the distributions are concentrated in December, with a smattering in November and January.


Journalists Subpoenaed In Dispute With Rowland
The tussle between the Republican gubernatorial candidate, John G. Rowland, and The Hartford Courant over the release of a police report about a dispute between Mr.
Rowland and his former wife grew more heated today when subpoenas were issued to an editor and the reporter who had covered the document chase.
The subpoenas came from a lawyer for the Police Chief of Middlebury, Patrick J. Bona, an open supporter of Mr.
Rowland, who had refused the newspaper's initial request for the report.
The subpoenas do not seek the names of secret informants and sources, but rather the notes of conversations between members of the State Freedom of Information Commission and the Courant employees.
The two journalists are Christopher Keating, a reporter, and David Fink, an editor.


Unreleased Beatles Songs to Be Offered
Capitol Records announced yesterday that it would release a two-disk collection of previously unreleased Beatles recordings on Dec. 6.
The album, called "Live at the BBC," includes performances taped by the band from 1962 to 1965.
During that period, the Beatles appeared regularly on the BBC's popular music programs, and had several shows of their own, including "From Us to You," "Pop Go the Beatles" and "The Beatles Invite You to Take a Ticket to Ride."
The set is the first official release from the Beatles archive since 1977, when Capitol issued a concert album, "The Beatles at the Hollywood Bowl." The BBC performances were also recorded live, but in a quiet recording studio, far from the fans who shrieked their way through the group's concert performances.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-6  TEST FOR THE NEW RUSSIA
Russia is planning to cut back operations at its subsidized coal mines, and how that is accomplished will be seen as a test of whether it can carry out economic plans without causing a social crisis.  1


Avenor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
They Come From Wales, But They Don't Sing  Avery Fisher Hall
Even if the concert of the BBC National Orchestra of Wales at the United Nations on Monday had been open to the public, few Welshophiles could have attended, since the country's favorite musical son, the baritone Bryn Terfel, was making his New York recital debut at Lincoln Center.
As it was, the rampant Terfelmania may have enhanced the size and enthusiasm of the audience for the public repeat of the BBC program on Wednesday evening.


A Reminder
Standard time resumes at 2 A.M. tomorrow. Clocks are set back on hour.


Shot-Putter Is Banned
PAUL EDWARDS, the British national shot-put champion, was banned for four years yesterday after the confirmation of a second positive test for steroids in Birmingham, England.
Edwards, 35, tested positive at the European championships in Helsinki, Finland, in August.
He failed a second test two days later after returning to England.


Kennametal Inc.(KMT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pataki:L Attacking Golosano And 'Hooker Heaven'
CANDIDATE George E. Pataki  PRODUCER Russo, Marsh &amp; Associates, Alexandria, Va. and Sacramento, Calif.


A Shovel Instead of a Shot
PAT LaFONTAINE, star center of the Sabres, finally saw some action yesterday, but all he did was turn over a spade of dirt at the construction site of the team's new hockey rink.


Irish Leaders Meet In Historic Forum
For the first time since sectarian warfare erupted in Northern Ireland 25 years ago, political leaders of the outlawed Irish Republican Army sat down today with leaders from the North and the Irish Republic to begin discussions about eventual peace talks.
As Gerry Adams, the President of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political wing, took his place at the Forum for Peace and Reconciliation at Dublin Castle this morning, sitting around him were dozens of Roman Catholic and a few Protestant officials who were no longer vilifying him.


For 2 Parkways, Final Tolls Are on Halloween (No Trick)
Drivers who regularly pass through the Saw Mill River toll plaza here have grown accustomed to the outstretched hand of Robert Roberts, the toll taker with the wavy white hair and long white beard who is a dead ringer for Santa Claus.
Around Christmastime, Mr.
Roberts, 61, a large man, always wears a bright red suit.
But drivers this week were asking, why was he wearing the costume a full two months early?
His answer is simple: There will be no Christmas at the tolls here this year, or any other year.


Government, On-Line
To the Editor:
Re "On-Line Legislation Serves Only the Elite" (letter, Oct. 21): The Government Printing Office's Access service provides the Congressional Record, Congressional bills and other Government information on-line.
By law, the G.P.O. must charge fees to individual users.


INSIDE
Bishops Act on Role of Nuns
A Roman Catholic synod said that nuns would have a bigger role in the church, but still appeared to exclude them from top-level jobs.
Page 5.
End to a Housing Fight
One of the longest rent strikes in New York City's history ended when the Belnord's owner gave up the West Side building.
Page 21.
Jackpot Grows, as Do Lines
No, food shortages aren't afflicting New York.
The lines are for the $70 million lottery jackpot -- the drawing is tonight.
Page 23.


Keeping the Secrets That Everyone Knows
MORE than 30 years after his death, John F. Kennedy has gone through several incarnations: martyred saint, manic satyr, Manichean statesman.
Now history has to confront his legacy as a covert operator.
Locked away in secret Government archives on the Kennedy Administration are hair-raising tales from the cold war: how he trained thugs in Latin America, rigged foreign elections, sucker-punched prime ministers and potentates.
What was the thinking behind his attempt to depose "Papa Doc" Duvalier, the dictator of Haiti?
What was the depth of his involvement in attempts to kill Fidel Castro?
Though the broad outlines of these tales are known, the full story is still veiled.


Industry Fills Tremont Park But Avoids Going Farther
When Clay Park Labs, a generic drug manufacturer based in the Bronx, announced plans to build a new plant here two weeks ago, the $10.8 million project represented a double milestone for the Tremont neighborhood.
The plant, to be built on a stretch of vacant land between Bathgate and Third Avenues just south of the Cross Bronx Expressway, nudged up occupancy to 100 percent at the Bathgate Industrial Park, a 12-block development formed by the city and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey in 1982 to help resurrect this burned-out section of the South Bronx.
With no land left inside the park, however, attention is shifting to the perhaps harder task of revitalizing the surrounding neighborhood.


A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to Prime Time
THIS IS Margaret Cho talking about her new ABC sitcom in a recent stand-up performance for HBO: she's wearing a tight, zipped-up black leather jacket, black leather pants and no blouse.
Her hair is long and wildly curly and she wears bright red lipstick.
She faces the huge audience and says confidently: "Just got my own TV show -- it's called 'All-American Girl.' It took a long time to agree on that name -- I wanted it to be called 'The Margaret Cho Show' because I am such a  [ expletive ]  egomaniac. They had their own ideas, of course.
" 'East Meets West.'  [ Incredulous pause. ]
" 'Wok on the Wild Side.' That's W-O-K.  [ Incredulous face. ]


POSTINGS: State Report; Rent Regulation From 1943 to '93
On Nov. 1, 1943, the Federal Office of Price Administration issued regulations freezing New York City rents at their March 1, 1943, levels.
There have been rent rules ever since, and their first half century is the subject of "Rent Regulation After 50 Years," a report recently issued by the New York State Division of Housing and Community Renewal.
The report, an overview of one of the most hotly debated public policy issues in New York, provides detailed statistical information on New York's regulatory system, which affects 2.5 million tenants in more than 1 million privately owned housing accommodations in New York City and in municipalities in Nassau, Westchester, Rockland and several upstate counties.


Ellen Mullins, John Bollinger
Ellen Goldhamer Mullins, the daughter of Dr.
Florence Kalm of New York and Dr.
Arthur Goldhamer of Yorktown Heights, N.Y., was married in New York yesterday to John Grattan Bollinger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Henry Bollinger of Fort Washington, Md.
Justice Carol H. Arber of the State Supreme Court in New York officiated at Sardi's.
The bride is the director of marketing at The Asbury Park Press in Neptune, N.J.
She graduated from New College.
Her father, now retired, was the curriculum coordinator for ECOS, an ecological-education program of the United States Department of Education, in Yorktown Heights.
Her mother, a cultural anthropologist, is an associate education officer at the New York City Board of Education in Brooklyn.


So Far, Best and Worst Buys in League's Shopping Network
After nine weeks, and eight games for most of the National Football League teams, it has become clear exactly what kind of return on their investments in free agents, trades and draft picks they can expect to get this season.
The Giants invested little in the free-agent market and made no trades.
And to this point they're getting out exactly what they put in.
San Francisco invested heavily on defense in the free-agent market, but only cornerback Deion Sanders seems to be paying the kind of dividends that they had hoped for.
Still, the 49ers are 5-2 and in the thick of the playoff race.


The Cone Sisters: Shoppers or Connoisseurs?
FOR ANYONE INTERESTED IN experiencing the punch and variety of avant-garde European art, the city of Baltimore was surely not the place to be during the first decades of this century.
Or was it?
In 1905, a city native, Etta Cone, went with her friend Gertrude Stein -- another Baltimorean, by adoption -- to Picasso's Paris studio and, on impulse, bought an etching.
It was the first purchase of what turned out to be a vast, decades-long shopping spree.
By the time Etta bought her last Picasso 44 years later, she and her older sister, Claribel, had filled their Baltimore apartment with some 3,000 art objects, among which were now-legendary masterpieces of 20th-century art, including Matisse's "Blue Nude" (1907), Gauguin's "Woman With a Mango" (1892) and Cezanne's drop-dead "Mont Sainte-Victoire Seen From the Bibemus Quarry" (circa 1897).


Habitats/Old Lyme, Conn.; An Old Brick Captain's Home With Topiary Gardens
BACK in the beginning of the Great Depression, the couple who lived in the old brick captain's house here took in a young horticultural student at the Yale School of Architecture.
The student, who designed the elaborate topiary gardens -- extraordinary because the house is an unostentatious one -- went on to create the formal gardens at Williamsburg.
The real estate agent cleared his throat.


Karla B. Tafrate, John Partilla 3d
Karla Beth Tafrate, a daughter of Polly and Raymond Tafrate of South Salem, N.Y., was married on Friday to John George Partilla 3d, a son of Stephanie and John Partilla of Huntington, L.I.
The Rev.
Thomas Hughart performed the ceremony at the Bedford Presbyterian Church in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Partilla, 25, graduated from Denison University and is a sales associate in the custom marketing group of the Meredith Corporation, the publishing company, in New York.
Her father retired as a science teacher at White Plains High School.
Her mother teaches the first grade at the Increase Miller Elementary School in Goldens Bridge, N.Y.


Pacers and Co. Only Nipping at Knicks' Heels
When the Indiana Pacers traded for the former Knick Mark Jackson last summer, they acquired an impresario of the no-look pass and someone who seems to have mastered the blunt prediction.
When asked the difference between his new club and the Knicks, Jackson had a fast answer.
"Better team," he said, referring to the Pacers.
But in truth, Jackson sounded more wishful than truthful.


Pumpkin Stars in Some Nontraditional Roles
THERE is more to pumpkin than the perennial jack-o'-lantern or pumpkin pie.
Pumpkin puree, made fresh by baking or boiling fresh pumpkin or cooking it in a microwave oven -- then mashing it or processing it in a blender or food processor -- can be added to enrich a host of dishes, notably risotto and pasta sauce.
Chunks of pumpkin can make a savory stew to spoon over couscous, rice or other grains to serve as a vegetarian main dish or alongside grilled meats.


In America; The Tax Cut Con
There are at least two reasons why all New Yorkers should be thankful for Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's endorsement of Gov.
Mario Cuomo.
First, it provided a jolt of excitement and entertainment to a campaign that had spread an epidemic of yawning from Buffalo to Brighton Beach.


Mortgage Outreach Efforts
EVERY now and then the mortgage lending community rolls out the impressive dollar amounts it intends to set aside to help inner-city, immigrant and minority families buy homes.
Until recently, however, these families had good reason to be cynical.
Despite the fanfare, they were still being asked to demonstrate the kind of employment and borrowing history that bore little resemblance to the way many really lived their lives.


Your Typical Crowded, Swinging, Silent Bar Scene
Bonnie Thomas avoids bar scenes as a rule, since she usually gets crowded into a corner and ignored.
But last Wednesday, she was at the center of the action at the Wildlife bar on Amsterdam Avenue, chatting happily with friends and meeting new people.
"I feel very left out at parties with hearing people," said Miss Thomas, who has been deaf since birth.
"Here, I can relax -- it's so easy for me to be free to be myself."


A Most American Opera (via France)
VIRGIN CLASSICS' NEW release of Carlisle Floyd's opera "Susannah" (7 2435 45039 2; two CD's) should appeal to several constituencies.
It will be welcomed by those interested in American opera and especially its golden age of the 1940's and 50's, when both "serious" and Broadway composers were confident they were creating a new, distinctly American operatic style.
It will be enjoyed by anyone who likes a good, tight, dramatically effective, musically appealing piece of musical theater.
It can be happily listened to by those who don't much care for the niceties of dramatic construction but enjoy compelling, ingratiating musical experiences.
Lovers of good singers will be attracted by the starry cast, headed by Cheryl Studer, Jerry Hadley and Samuel Ramey.
Followers of Kent Nagano's cometlike career will want to hear the latest evidence of his skills as a conductor.


Senator Heinz's Widow, in Break With Party, Attacks Republican Candidate
Joining a growing list of Republicans breaking ranks with their party, Teresa Heinz, the widow of the late Senator John Heinz of Pennsylvania, has delivered a lacerating attack on Representative Rick Santorum, the conservative who is giving a stiff challenge to the state's Democratic Senator, Harris Wofford.
Calling Mr.
Santorum "a challenger who is short on public service and even shorter on accomplishments," Mrs.
Heinz said in a speech on Thursday night at the University of Pittsburgh: "We all know these types -- critical of everything, impossible to please, indifferent to nuance, incapable of compromise. They laud perfection, but oddly never see it in anybody but themselves.


Pumpkin Stars in Some Nontraditional Roles
THERE is more to pumpkin than the perennial jack-o'-lantern or pumpkin pie.
Pumpkin puree, made fresh by baking or boiling fresh pumpkin or cooking it in a microwave oven -- then mashing it or processing it in a blender or food processor -- can be added to enrich a host of dishes, notably risotto and pasta sauce.
Chunks of pumpkin can make a savory stew to spoon over couscous, rice or other grains to serve as a vegetarian main dish or alongside grilled meats.


Seeing Byways of Paris On a Mountain Bike
Travelers to Paris looking for a new way to discover the city's narrow alleys and crowded avenues can take a guided mountain-bike tour.
Three Ducks Youth Hostel rents a bike with an English-speaking guide for about $23, calculated at 5.6 francs to the dollar.
Tours, which average about 20 people, give riders access to spots that cannot easily be reached on a conventional bicycle.
Three Ducks Youth Hostel, 6 Place Etienne Pernet, 75015 Paris, (33 1) 48.42.57.87, runs the seven-hour bike tour every day, beginning at 11 A.M.


Beleaguered Are the Peacekeepers
As the United Nations, founded in 1945, prepares for the transition from its first half century to its second, it is undergoing a profound intellectual and political transformation.
History shows that those living in a revolution are often unaware of the dimensions of the changes taking place around them.
Today, the U.N. does not have the time to await history's assessment; we must sort out the new concepts and changes as they unfold.


Rosario Resort
To the Editor: After a lengthy, tiring and expensive ferry trip from Victoria, B.C., my husband and I finally arrived at the Rosario Resort, Orcas Island, Wash., in mid-June.
This visit to the hotel you later wrote about ("A Seaworthy Resort," Sept. 11) was to be the highlight of our vacation.


Who Really Sits Where At the Metropolitan Opera
To the Editor:
Thanks for "People's Guide to the Opera," Oct. 16.
A few comments about your map of the Metropolitan Opera and who sits where:
The Center Parterre is not just occupied by wealthy socialites.
It is also used by corporations, an encouraging sign that client entertaining isn't limited to hockey games or tennis matches.


Whose Deficit, and How Big?
POLITICS has its own 17-year locust, called the deficit.
For long years it lies underground, chewing at the roots of prosperity, only to surface briefly around elections, for a brief chatter before diving back out of public consciousness.
Well, it's almost November.
What a clamor.
In one ear of the electorate, President Clinton boasted last week that his prudent governing defanged the deficit for the 1994 fiscal year that ended in September, slicing it by $102 billion -- that's one-third -- from original estimates.
In the other, Republicans touted a "Contract With America" stating that they would wipe out the deficit altogether if voters would just put them in power, though they were notably silent on how.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Screen Mania
ALLOOO, 'amptons Feelm Festeeval." The first sign that the Hamptons International Film Festival had become truly international was the telephone voice of Lucile Casadesus. Ms. Casadesus, of Paris, spent last weekend near the Peconic joining hundreds of volunteers who welcomed the public and the press to the festival.
More than 20,000 lovers of film traveled to the East End to see 48 films from 14 countries.
Some were movie marathoners, like Renee Steinberg of New York and East Hampton.
"Last year we saw 22 films in four days here," Mrs.
Steinberg said.
"I like to see a mix."


Judith Friedman, Ronald Goldstock
Judith Friedman, a Justice Department lawyer in Washington, was married last evening to Ronald Goldstock, the director of the New York State Organized Crime Task Force in White Plains.
Rabbi Brett Goldstein officiated at the home of the bride's parents, Sylvia and Judge Milton Friedman, in Miami.
Ms.
Friedman, 44, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill and received her law degree and a master's degree in criminal justice from American University.
Her father, now retired, was a judge of the Dade County Circuit Court in Miami.
Her mother is an artist.


Traffic Alert
TOMORROW
The Avenue of the Americas will be closed from Spring Street to 22d Street starting at 7 P.M. for the Halloween parade.
Safety Note
Fire officials recommend changing the batteries in smoke alarms twice a year, when daylight saving time starts and ends.
This fall, the date is today.


A Previous Precursor
To the Editor:
In her article " 'Made in Japan' (Without the Inferiority Complex)"  [ Oct. 9 ] , Rita Reif writes that Yoshisada Horiuchi designed the first in-line skates in 1969, a precursor of today's Rollerblades.


Japan Plunges Into Public Art
IN A RARE EVENT FOR overcrowded Japan, a huge plot of land became vacant in the early 1980's, when the United States military relinquished an air base at Tachikawa, an hour west of Tokyo.
A state development corporation with almost unlimited funds undertook to build a $3 billion office complex on 15 acres of the site and allotted $9 million for public art -- a rarity anywhere but especially in Japan, where public art is in its infancy.
Now almost all the 109 scheduled works are in place, with the formal opening set for next month.
Scattering the art among 11 nondescript boxes, each 10 stories high with only slivers of space between them, has been a matter of spooning it in.
Perhaps the only approach to such a site was the one taken, to play games with it.
A huge Jonathan Borofsky piece, 25 feet high, peeps out from behind an office building.
A 136-foot-long mural by Joseph Kosuth, composed of quotes from a Japanese writer, Michiko Ishimure, and James Joyce, winds around the entrance to an underground garage.


Sound Bytes; Going Interactive, Creatively
WHEN she saw the first portable video camera in 1970, Red Burns recognized the potential of the new technology to enable people to make their own documentaries.
It was a defining moment that changed her career from a film maker to a creator of interactive tools.
Over the next two decades, she used a grant from the National Science Foundation to create a two-way television system that allowed elderly residents of Reading, Pa., to interact with one another and "visit" community sites like the city center, Social Security office and local high schools.
The system is still used.


Ethel D. Kahn, Harry Fleischman
Dr.
Ethel D. Kahn of West Orange, N.J., and Harry Fleischman of Wantagh, L.I., were married yesterday at Mayfair Farms in West Orange.
Judge Ruth Pearlman of Jersey City Municipal Court performed the ceremony.
Dr.
Kahn, 71, an associate professor emeritus of human behavior at Rutgers University, is also a consultant to the University of Melbourne in Australia on sexual discrimination and to several New Jersey towns and school boards on racisim, sexism and teen-age conflict.
She graduated from the University of Wisconsin and received a master's degree in human development and a doctorate in social psychology and human relations from New York University.


Correction
Because of an editing error, the Tech Notes column last Sunday, about a new portable data-storage device from the Datasonix Corporation, misstated its storage speed.
The device, the Pereos, can store a total of 1.2 billion bytes of information at a rate of 4 million bytes a minute in about 5 hours -- not in less than 20 seconds.


HAROLD BLOOM
Harold Bloom is certainly right when he tells us that to read literature "in the service of any ideology is not to read at all." But he is mistaken, I believe, in his prediction that the reading of literature for its esthetic value will soon by a "waning art" ("Harold Bloom: Colossus Among Critics," by Adam Begley, Sept. 25).
When, to cite one example, teachers in the English department at U.C.L.A. were asked in a private questionnaire to write their favorite lines of poetry and to give reasons why these lines moved them, they said almost nothing about the political or moral message.


At 78, Mitterrand Is Drawing Both Admiration and Criticism
Ashen-faced, weakened by his fight against cancer, President Francois Mitterrand made an increasingly rare public appearance this week to receive good wishes for his 78th birthday from schoolchildren and to renew his pledge to remain in office until his term ends next May.
Yet while the ailing Socialist looks increasingly like a figure from the past, with even his Presidential powers largely neutralized by a rightist Government and a conservative-dominated Parliament, he still seems to fascinate the French more than any of the politicians in line to succeed him.
The proof is that in the list of nonfiction bestsellers published by Le Nouvel Observateur this week, three of the four top books are about Mr.
Mitterrand's life and years in power.
And this weekend there was the publication of two more books about the President.


Rifle's Importation Was Banned in China Accord
The Chinese rifle that Secret Service agents said was used to spray bullets at the White House yesterday has been illegal to import into the United States since May, Federal officials said.
While the standard model of the semi-automatic rifle, called an SKS, is not classified as an assault weapon and was not one of the 19 weapons banned in the crime bill passed in August, its importation was banned by President Clinton as a condition of the most-favored nation status granted China earlier this year.
If the weapon used yesterday had been modified to contain more than 10 bullets, its sale would be outlawed by the crime bill.


OUT OF THE DARKNESS
It cannot be emphasized too strongly that serotonin reuptake inhibitors like Prozac and Zoloft are not "feel good" pills, nor do they transform one's personality, in the sense that if you don't like the one you have, you can acquire a new one through chemical manipulation (Good Health: "Out of the Darkness," by Melvin Konner, Oct. 2).


Biggest Gay Church Finds a Home in Dallas
This conservative city of big churches and Sunday morning traffic jams is home these days to the nation's largest predominantly gay and lesbian congregation.
While many churches afford homosexuals a reception lukewarm at best, the Cathedral of Hope Metropolitan Community Church boldly proclaims itself a place where one can be openly homosexual and Christian, too.


Pilot's Death Renews Debate Over Women In Combat Role
The death of one of the Navy's first female combat pilots last Tuesday has rekindled tensions within the military over the decision to expand the roles available to women, even though the cause of the accident is not yet known.
Navy officials from Honolulu to Washington are going out of their way to defend the pilot, Lieut.
Kara S. Hultgreen, against what they say are spurious accusations about her flight record -- and to defend the new roles for women in general.


Supply-Side Composers Join the Band
AFTER A HALF-CENTURY OF COMPLAINTS, analyses, manifestoes and diatribes, there is still no compelling explanation for the unnatural condition of the contemporary composer.
It is no longer possible simply to blame composers for writing esoterica, listeners for preferring cliches, orchestras for craving box-office receipts, or patrons for seeking more glamorous investments.
The contemporary composer can seem to be a marginal figure, an artist without portfolio.
The average consumer can easily survive without hearing new music.
Most performers, aside from specialists, can easily imagine not playing it.
Meet the Composer stepped into this bizarre universe in 1982 with an experimental program that seemed inspired by its homey name: create "residencies"; pay a composer a full-time salary and convince an orchestra to make him or her an important part of its activities; create an artificial situation that may eventually become natural.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
Long Island  PERFECT THROUGH SIX: James Devito rushed for two touchdowns and tossed one other as WEST ISLIP improved its record to 6-0 en route to a 56-6 romp over HALF HOLLOW HILLS EAST (3-3).
Jonah Shierant scored twice for the Lions and Scott Coppo added a touchdown and booted 9 extra points. . . . .
With 2 minutes 20 seconds remaining, Frank Rapacki ran it in from 15 yards out to help MASSAPEQUA (6-0) avoid a major upset in its 13-12 victory over LAWRENCE (3-2-1).


The Prison on the Hill
PERSISTENT RUMOURS By Lee Langley. 294 pp. Minneapolis: Milkweed Editions. $21.95.


'Tamer of Horses,' in Author's Revision
IT is reaffirming to reflect on teaching as a noble profession and on the relationship between teacher and student as inviolable.
If only for that, "Tamer of Horses," by William Mastrosimone, rates honorable mention among the precious few theater works dealing with the civilizing power of education.
The play's 1985 premiere remains a haunting reminder of the Crossroads Theater Company in its glory days.
Lee Richardson was then in charge of an electric production.
In retrospect, even the confines of the old rickety Crossroads space contributed to a wholeness of intensity.


On Sunday; 73,000 Times In 22 Tongues, 1 Vow: 'I Do'
"BOY meets girl, so what?" Bertold Brecht once asked sourly, having obviously missed the occasion at the city marriage bureau when an 88-year-old groom eagerly inched forward with the aid of his walker and of his 23-year-old bride who, it is recalled, made a point of requesting six extra copies of the marriage certificate.
"The old guy lived seven years," a bureau worker said Friday amid the midday nuptial marathon.
"I was delighted." This is the bureau's busiest stretch of the week, when Larry Israel, the city's chief marriage maker and rote romantic, can be found pronouncing more than 100 couples husband and wife in a three-hour period.
These are unheralded doings in a city that is supposed to be wary of optimism.


A Kennedy-C.I.A. Plot Returns to Haunt Clinton
It was a small clandestine operation in a little South American country three decades ago.
President Kennedy ordered the Central Intelligence Agency to subvert the country's leader.
The leader fell, and the C.I.A.'s men quietly left town.
Time passed, and the wheels of history turned.
The cold war ended, and with its end the fallen leader was elected President of what is now independent Guyana.
United States law says it is time to unseal the secret documents that detail Kennedy's plot against him.


40,000 Ticket Holders May Get Eastern Payout
About 40,000 travelers who bought tickets on Eastern Airlines but were unable to use them because the airline filed for bankruptcy in March 1989 may receive reimbursement for a fraction of their losses under a bankruptcy plan filed recently by the airline's trustee.
The plan calls for ticket holders who filed claims against the airline in 1989 to receive 11 cents for each dollar they are owed.
That level of reimbursement is higher than in most previous airline bankruptcies.


Wall Street; For Government Bond Funds, a Big Time to Borrow
CASH is trash.
Or so the managers who run Government bond funds seem to think.
As redemptions have mounted this year -- along with losses for investors as bond prices have plunged -- the managers have not sold enough bonds to keep up.
At the end of September, the overall cash position of Government bond funds was a negative $734 million, as funds borrowed to meet redemptions.


Habitats/Old Lyme, Conn.; An Old Brick Captain's Home With Topiary Gardens
BACK in the beginning of the Great Depression, the couple who lived in the old brick captain's house here took in a young horticultural student at the Yale School of Architecture.
The student, who designed the elaborate topiary gardens -- extraordinary because the house is an unostentatious one -- went on to create the formal gardens at Williamsburg.
The real estate agent cleared his throat.


Don't Tent Them In: Beyond Bryant Park
THE Bryant Park tents may be the main attraction as the fashion circus hits New York this week, but the sideshows are increasingly compelling.
Even as the tents and the New York Public Library have become, after two seasons, the hub for the spring and fall collections, dozens of New York designers are staging shows at other venues, ranging from a TriBeCa photography studio and a SoHo trattoria to a Fifth Avenue coffee bar and an Eighth Avenue pornography theater.


Procter's Tale: Gambling in Ignorance
THE wonderful world of interest rate swaps has largely been hidden from public view.
Now, as some of the big losers in the game cry foul and sue, more of it is coming to light.
Last week, Procter &amp; Gamble became the second Cincinnati company to sue Bankers Trust.
Like Gibson Greeting Cards a few weeks earlier, P.&amp; G. sees itself as a swindled innocent that relied on the advice of a slick New York hustler and lost millions.


Don't Send In The Foreign Legion!
AMERICAN diplomacy, newly awakened to Africa by the need to intervene in places like Rwanda and Somalia, is discovering that one of the most stubborn obstacles to constructive change on the continent is an old friend: France.
For five years, while a civil war has raged in Liberia, some of France's closest allies in West Africa have generously played host and supplier to the conflict's most belligerent combatant, Charles Taylor.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Sing, Sing, Sing
Whatever Mel Torme has to say about singing is worth reading, and in MY SINGING TEACHERS (Oxford University, $19.95), his reflections on a lifetime of listening and learning, he has a lot to say.
The book is less a thoroughgoing analysis of musical technique than an anecdotal medley of the observations of a master.
Vocalists who influenced him include the usual pantheon of gods (Bessie, Billie, Frank, Bing, Nat, Ella, Louis) and grandes dames (Ethel Waters, Mabel Mercer, Connee Boswell, Helen Forrest), as well as a few artists not known primarily for their singing: Johnny Mercer, Woody Herman, Fred Astaire.
A gifted arranger and composer as well as a pre-eminent performer of American popular music, Mr.
Torme, whose previous books include portraits of Buddy Rich ("Traps, the Drum Wonder") and Judy Garland ("The Other Side of the Rainbow"), remains a musician first and a writer second; no one reading "My Singing Teachers" will advise him to give up his night job.
But those who have admired the modesty, generosity and taste he has displayed as a singer will find many of those same qualities in this book.
PATRICIA T. O'CONNER


N.B.A. Takes a Lock Instead of a Lockout
Would you look a gift horse in the mouth?
Would you shut your business if it were the only one open?
Would you pull up on a three-on-none fast break to run a half-court set?
Give the National Basketball Association credit for gratefully accepting the uncontested layup, for deciding to play its 1994-95 season, for recognizing a chance to at least dump $10 worth of regular into what once seemed to be a bottomless tank of fuel.


L.I.'s Traffic Nightmare May Be Easing
AS the Long Island economy grew wildly in the 1980's, so did traffic congestion.
But now that the boom times are over, economists and planners say, there is growing evidence that congestion will ease.
Soon, the experts say, there may be fewer tie-ups on major roads at peak times, a result of a restructuring of the economy, changes in demography and technology and the Federal Clean Air Act, under which 750 large businesses on Long Island have to file plans next month to reduce the number of people who drive to work alone.


ON THE DEFENSIVE, PATAKI INTENSIFIES ATTACK ON RIVALS
With his campaign squarely on the defensive for the first time in months, State Senator George E. Pataki swept across upstate New York yesterday sharply attacking his two main rivals for governor and his fellow Republican, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani -- who chased after him, stumping for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
As the race edged into its final week and polls showed Mr.
Pataki's supporters drifting away from him, if not necessarily to Mr.
Cuomo, the Republican nominee campaigned in areas where his support is already strongest.
He urged voters not to waste a ballot on the independent candidate, B. Thomas Golisano, and complained that Mr.
Cuomo "lacks the guts to show up and debate me one on one."


Distributing Food From Granby Farm
In "A Town Rallies to Preserve a Farm From Two Centuries Ago," Oct. 16, it is reported that the Hartford Food System's Community-Supported Agriculture project at the Holcomb Farm in Granby "offers up to 200 people the opportunity buy shares . . . with half the produce distributed to regional food banks and soup kitchens." It's a small point, but the project does not give produce to food banks or soup kitchens.
The project, which planted five acres in 1994, offered a total of 62 shares, feeding an estimated 200 people.
Thirty shares were purchased by Granby residents and 30 shares were split among five social service agencies in Hartford, which purchased them at a reduced rate.
The agencies then distributed the produce to low-income clients either for no cost or for a nominal fee.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
97.28
97.20
108.55
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5108
1.5000
1.6870
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3515
1.3512
1.3204
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6235
1.6270
1.4815
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$387.30
$390.80
$368.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Prison Pumpkins:


Show of Support, and of Thanks
Dinner for Dance Theater of Harlem, Manhattan Center Ballroom, Oct. 25.


'A Good, Noble, Uplifting, Campaign'
QUEST FOR THE PRESIDENCY 1992 By Peter Goldman, Thomas M. DeFrank, Mark Miller, Andrew Murr and Tom Mathews with Patrick Rogers and Melanie Cooper.
Illustrated. 742 pp.
College Station: Texas A &amp; M University Press. $29.95.


Bosnian Troops Hammer Serbs; 1 Killed in Retaliatory Strike
Bosnian Government forces continued their strongest offensive of the war today, attacking Bosnian Serb soldiers in the Sarajevo area.
United Nations officials reported mortar fire on western suburbs of the Bosnian capital, possibly an act of retaliation by the Serbs.
One person was killed and at least three others wounded when artillery shells hit the Muslim suburb of Hrasnica, Reuters reported.
Other reports said the district was also hit by mortar and anti-aircraft fire.
The United Nations had no immediate information on whether the Bosnian Serbs were responsible.


Nittany Lions Offer 63 Reasons to Be No. 1
In the world of college rankings, where appearances are often everything, looks can be deceiving.
But not today.
Penn State, needing a decisive victory to keep Nebraska from surging into the top spot in the polls, pulverized Ohio State, 63-14, before a record homecoming-day crowd of 97,079 at Beaver Stadium.


Could It Be? A Winter Worse Than Last Year?
ALL right, how bad is it going to be?
There's barely frost on the pumpkins, but the season that everyone is talking about is winter.
You hear it in the post office, the grocery store, on commuter trains.
And the consensus is -- it's going to be bad.
Very bad.
Worse than last year.
Twenty storms.
Thirty storms.
Mass quantities of snow.
The source of much of this gloom and doom is the 1995 Old Farmer's Almanac, which is indeed predicting severe weather conditions for the Northeast this winter.
The forecast calls for "near record amounts of snow" for New York, with a particularly cold and snowy November and early December.
A heavy snowstorm is predicted for mid-December, followed by a severe cold wave before Christmas.
Even in March, the Almanac forecasts plenty of cold, snowy weather.


For Better Sex, Says Dr. Frieda, See 'Robert's Rules of Order'
In the course of their research on human sexuality the authors obtained an exclusive interview with Dr.
Frieda Tingle, who, they claim, is the world's leading expert on sex.
The following conversation is excerpted from that interview.
Q. Dr. Tingle, what do you think of "Sex in America"?


Debunking the Derivatives Bogyman
To the Editor:
Thank you for making it clear that collateralized mortgage obligations are not derivatives and that true derivatives are an essential tool in managing risk.
Made less clear, however, was that there are two broad types of derivatives: those that manage risk and those that are designed to accept risk to create higher returns.
Financial institutions that are in the business of making money with money properly use the latter type.
A problem arises when corporate treasuries try to make money with money and their "bets" do not pan out.
Blame has to be apportioned, and fingers point at the derivative dealers.
Since such corporations make the deliberate choice of accepting risk, this is rather like the a bad worker who blames his tools." J. MAX LEWIS  Darien, Conn., Oct. 3  The writer is the managing director of the Harrow Group, a boutique investment bank.


DONORS URGE HAITI TO TAX THE RICH
As the United States and the World Bank seek to round up the $550 million in international aid planned for Haiti this year, they are urging President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to make sweeping changes in the way Haiti's Government works, including collecting far more in taxes from the rich.
As the effort to restore democracy in Haiti shifts gears with President Aristide now back in office, officials from the Clinton Administration, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund are laying out the steps they want taken to put the Government on a solid footing.


Please, Mr. Postmaster
ANTONIO CORSO peered into a bin of unsorted third-class mail and looked pained.
Would the department store fliers, women's underwear catalogues and circulars advertising ShopRite "cancan" days make it into the mailboxes of East New York that day?
"I'm trying to get back to basics," said Mr.
Corso, the new Brooklyn postmaster.
"This is what we've got to focus on."


World Markets; In Israel, a Ho-Hum Response to Peace
PEACE doves have fluttered around the Middle East all year, but Israel's Tel Aviv stock exchange is no longer paying much attention.
After Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Yasir Arafat, leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization, shook hands on the White House lawn last September, Israeli share prices shot up, having more than doubled the previous two years.


Monsters, Demons and Other Delights
A GIANT-SIZE KING KONG snatches Fay Wray from the claws of a pterodactyl.
A caped Dracula, 10 feet tall, pauses on a shadowy Gothic staircase, about to swoop down on an unsuspecting victim.
Frankenstein's Creature holds a human skull above a closed coffin.
These and other enlarged images of vintage movieland monsters take center stage in the exhibition "Screams on Screen: 100 Years of Horror Film," at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center.
Memories will be refreshed by the sounds of creaking doors, screeching women and eerie music that accompany the display of 300 photographs and objects, which opens, appropriately enough, on Halloween (tomorrow) and remains through April.


Seoul Bars Prosecution Of Presidents
After a long investigation, the South Korean Government said today that two former Presidents engaged in a "premeditated military rebellion" in 1979 that eventually led to their assuming power.
But the Government said it would not prosecute the two men, Chun Doo Hwan and Roh Tae Woo, saying that they had also made contributions to the country's development and that a trial would reopen old wounds and divide the nation.


DARING RESEARCH OR 'SOCIAL SCIENCE PORNOGRAPHY'?
To read that an American intellectual is flirting with notions of racial superiority fills me with anger and disgust.
The idea is false, ugly, vicious and downright stupid.
Belief in it exposes the believer to be not a darling destined by genes to be above the rest of us, but someone too pompous to see he condemns himself as a fool.
Charles Murray well deserves the ridicule and scorn he fears.
MICHAEL LYDON New York


Brown Uses a Late Rally to Send Cornell to First Defeat
Brown 16, Cornell 3
Paul Fichiera ran for 124 yards and a touchdown yesterday as visiting Brown handed Cornell its first defeat of the season, 16-3, while capturing its first Ivy League victory.


The Caribbean Flavors a Homeric 'Odyssey'
DEREK WALCOTT, THE POET and 1992 Nobel laureate for literature, has always been bewitched by theater.
This much is clear in "The Odyssey," his new, lusty, Caribbean-flavored stage adaptation of the Homeric epic, now at the Fichandler Theater at the Arena Stage in Washington.
It's also clear that when you have a text as vividly descriptive as Mr.
Walcott's verse play, you don't really need theatrical tricks to illustrate moments best left to the imagination.
Such stage effects can sometimes surprise but, at best, they are almost always redundant.
Mr.
Walcott covers a lot of ground as he finds a new voice for the ancient tale of Odysseus, the soldier-king who spends 10 adventurous, trial-packed years making his way home from the Trojan War.
While his loving wife, Penelope, stays chaste in Ithaca, fending off suitors ready to take Odysseus' place, he must deal with shipwrecks, wrathful gods, sirens, monsters, incarceration, mermaids, a side trip to hell and absolutely foul weather.


The Western Conference
THE PREDICTIONS PLAYOFF TEAMS  1.
Seattle  2.
Houston  3.
Phoenix  4.
Denver  5.
Golden State  6.
San Antonio  7.
Utah  8.
Portland THE CHAMPIONSHIP Western Conference -- Seattle  Eastern Conference -- Indiana  N.B.A. champion -- Indiana  M.V.P. -- Reggie Miller, Indiana  Rookie of the Year -- Grant Hill, Detroit  Toughest Coaching Job -- Paul Westphal, Phoenix KEY ADDITIONS Dallas -- Signed Forward Roy Tarpley; Drafted Guard Jason Kidd; Drafted Guard Tony Dumas.
Denver -- Signed Guard Dale Ellis; Drafted Guard Jalen Rose; Signed Forward Cliff Levingston.
Golden State -- Acquired Guard Ricky Pierce; Signed Forward Rod Higgins; Drafted Forward-Center Clifford Rozier; Acquired Forward-Center Carlos Rogers; Signed Center Manute Bol.
Houston -- None.
L.A.
Clippers -- Acquired Guard Pooh Richardson; Acquired Forward Malik Sealy; Drafted Forward Lamond Murray; Acquired Guard-Forward Eric Piatkowski.
L.A.
Lakers -- Acquired Forward Cedric Ceballos; Drafted Guard-Forward Eddie Jones.
Minnesota -- Drafted Forward Donyell Marshall; Drafted Guard Howard Eisley.
Phoenix -- Signed Forward Danny Manning; Signed Forward Waymon Tisdale; Drafted Guard Wesley Person.
Portland -- Drafted Guard Aaron McKie; Signed Center James Edwards.
Sacramento -- Signed Forward Alaa Abdelnaby; Signed Forward-Center Frank Brickowski; Drafted Forward Brian Grant.
Seattle -- Acquired Guard Sarunas Marciulionis; Acquired Forward Byron Houston; Signed Center Bill Cartwright; Drafted Forward Dontonio Wingfield.
Utah -- Acquired Forward Adam Keefe.


Emblems of 2 Nations: Tiaras and Tunics
UPTOWN -- "History has flung itself at Russia," writes Brian Moynahan, in "The Russian Century" a new book of rare photographs published by Random House.
On Oct. 26, some of New York's most accomplished partygoers flung themselves at vodka, blini and each other at the newly restored Consulate of the Russian Federation at East 91st Street.
They were there, on the second floor of the 90-year-old mansion, to preview an exhibition of photographs from the book.
But the atmosphere was so festive it felt more like a mixed-up coming-out and homecoming party for Russia itself.
"I'm very pleased very much indeed to have such an event," said Ivan Kouznetsov, the consul general of the Russian Federation in New York.
He was standing next to Harold Evans, the president and publisher of Random House, who was wearing an "I Love Gorbachev" tie.


Urban Optimism Misplaced?
To the Editor:
In "Inner Cities Beckon Savvy Retailers" (Viewpoints, Oct. 2), Paul S. Grogan is whistling past the graveyard.
His optimism that America's inner cities are hotbeds of entrepreneurial opportunity is well-intentioned but starkly in error.
His assertion that "there are markets for the asking for retailing pioneers" for supermarkets and banks couldn't be more wrong.
The few examples of successful supermarkets he notes are the exceptions that prove the rule -- those neighborhoods have virtually no supermarkets or bank branches.
America is alone among industrial nations in abandoning huge sections of its big cities.
While this nation is a self-styled land of opportunity, its income distribution is the most unequal of any industrial nation, and inner-city schools are underfinanced, unable to attract and retain good teachers.
School financing through local taxation perpetuates the inequality of educational opportunity and drives the middle class to the suburbs, aggravating inequality.


Getting the Led Out of Led Zeppelin
IN THE 1970's, LED ZEPPELIN almost single-handedly gave rock-and-roll not a bad name, but a worse name.
It added "heavy" to the lexicon of adjectives used to describe rock music, developed a reputation for wild, destructive hotel parties, raked in larger percentages of profits than any band before it and turned an uncompromisingly long song, the eight-minute "Stairway to Heaven," into the most popular tune on radio.
Fourteen years after the quartet broke up, as a result of the alcohol-related death of John Bonham, its drummer, Led Zeppelin's music remains a backdrop to the high school years of teen-agers everywhere.
The group's classic guitar riffs have been hammered indelibly not just into the music of many rap and rock bands but the consciousness of anybody who has ever been near a sound system in the last three decades.


The Eastern Conference
THE PREDICTIONS PLAYOFF TEAMS 1.
Orlando 2.
Knicks 3.
Indiana 4.
Atlanta 5.
Chicago 6.
Charlotte 7.
Miami 8.
Nets THE CHAMPIONSHIP Western Conference: Phoenix Eastern Conference: Knicks N.B.A.
Champion: Phoenix Rookie of the Year: Grant Hill, Detroit M.V.P.: Shaquille O'Neal, Orlando Toughest Coaching Job: Allan Britow, Charlotte KEY ADDITIONS  Atlanta -- Acquired Forward Ken Norman; Acquired Forward Tyrone Corbin.
Boston -- Signed Forward Dominique Wilkins; Acquired Guard-Forward Blue Edwards; Signed Forward-Center Pervis Ellison; Drafted Center Eric Montross; Signed Guard-Forward Greg Minor.
Charlotte -- Signed Center Robert Parish; Acquired Guard Michael Adams.
Chicago -- Signed Guard Ron Harper; Signed Forward Larry Krystkowiak; Drafted Forward Dickey Simpkins.
Cleveland -- Signed Forward Michael Cage.
Detroit -- Drafted Forward Grant Hill; Signed Center Oliver Miller; Acquired Center Mark West; Signed Guard Johnny Dawkins; Acquired Forward Bill Curley.
Indiana -- Acquired Guard Mark Jackson; Signed Forward Duane Ferrell; Signed Forward John S. Williams.
Miami -- Drafted Guard Khalid Reeves; Signed Guard-Forward Kevin Gamble.
Milwaukee -- Drafted Forward Glenn Robinson (unsigned); Signed Forward Johnny Newman; Acquired Forward Ed Pinckney; Drafted Center Eric Mobley.
Nets -- Signed Guard-Forward Sean Higgins; Signed Guard Eric (Sleepy) Floyd; Drafted Center Yinka Dare.
Knicks -- Acquired Guard-Forward Doug Christie; Drafted Forward Monty Williams; Drafted Guard Charlie Ward.
Orlando -- Signed Forward Horace Grant; Signed Guard Brian Shaw.
Philadelphia -- Signed Forward Scott Williams; Drafted Forward Sharone Wright; Drafted Guard B.J.
Tyler; Signed Guard Lloyd Daniels.
Washington -- Acquired Guard Scott Skiles; Drafted Forward Juwan Howard; Drafted Center Jim McIlvane.


POSTINGS: State Report; Rent Regulation From 1943 to '93
On Nov. 1, 1943, the Federal Office of Price Administration issued regulations freezing New York City rents at their March 1, 1943, levels.
There have been rent rules ever since, and their first half century is the subject of "Rent Regulation After 50 Years," a report recently issued by the New York State Division of Housing and Community Renewal.
The report, an overview of one of the most hotly debated public policy issues in New York, provides detailed statistical information on New York's regulatory system, which affects 2.5 million tenants in more than 1 million privately owned housing accommodations in New York City and in municipalities in Nassau, Westchester, Rockland and several upstate counties.


DARING RESEARCH OR 'SOCIAL SCIENCE PORNOGRAPHY'?
Your article on Charles Murray reminded me of another well-known researcher who turned statistical correlation into genetic cause.
He was Henry H. Goddard (1866-1957), a psychologist who invented the "Kallikaks" of textbook fame.
In 1914, he published "Feeblemindedness," in which he correlated poverty, crime and all the poverty-related activities, legal or illegal, of which the professional middle class of early-20th century America disapproved, and concluded they were all caused by feeblemindedness.
Research standards then being what they were, Goddard may have been innocent of the fact that correlations are not causes, but his "research" helped to legitimize sterilization and the eugenics movement.


In Search of Ancient Aztec Secrets
WE were up late one night last week at the farm in Maryland, trying to unlock the secrets of amaranth grain, the ancient Aztec crop.
We tried it popped, and in porridge and pancakes.
But all we ended up with was high-protein grit.
We needed some Aztec spirit in the kitchen to guide us.


Should the Way Back From the Mommy Track Be Smoother?
"Back From the Mommy Track" (Oct.9), Deborah L. Jacobs's look at professional women whose careers were set back because they left work to care for their children, drew an unusually large response from readers.
Following is a sample of those letters: To the Editor:
I was saddened by your article largely because it hit so close to home.
I have been a lawyer more than 10 years.
When my first child was born, I determined to switch from the fast-paced full-time practice of litigation to a part-time practice.
Through four years and another child, I have managed to continue practicing part-time, which many in the field of litigation contend is impossible.


Hungary Should Speed Return of Jews' Assets Looted by Nazis
To the Editor:
Permit me to add some background information to "A Long Battle to Recover Jewish Assets" (news article, Oct. 23).


Today's Art Merges Object and Criticism; No Shrinking Judge
To the Editor:
In "The Jabberwocky of Art Criticism" (Week in Review, Oct. 23), you quote a review I wrote for Art in America as an example of "struggling for kind words" in order not "to alienate artists and gallery owners with negative reviews."


Emily R. Yerman, Steven Steinman
Emily Rose Yerman, a daughter of Ann and Fredric W. Yerman of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Steven Jon Steinman, a son of Marilynn and Marshall L. Steinman, also of Scarsdale, were married last evening.
Rabbi Peter J. Rubinstein performed the ceremony at the Essex House Hotel in New York.
The bride, 27, is an associate at the law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University and received a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father is a senior partner in the law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler in New York and is the chairman of the Jewish Board of Family and Children's Services in New York.
Her mother is the director of resource development for the Westchester Jewish Community Services in Hartsdale.


Tulips and Crocus for New Year's Eve?
WITH memories of last winter's violence lingering, one way to make this winter easier on the soul is to force a few spring bulbs into bloom.
This is easy to do, but it does take a bit of planning, as a few weeks of cold storage are required before even a shoot will appear.
Forcing means exactly what it says.
Hardy spring bulbs are potted up and made to bloom indoors well ahead of their alloted season.
Also, they can be planted in the garden in spring to recover, though they may not bloom again outdoors for a year or two.


Clinton Flies Back Home And Prepares To Campaign
President Clinton returned to the White House this morning after a grueling trip to the Middle East and prepared to redirect his energies toward helping Democrats fend off heavy election losses.
Mr.
Clinton said he believed that his four-day journey had speeded progress toward a wider peace in the region, and he pledged that the United States would play a central role in working toward that goal with Israel and its neighbors.


A Bad Hair Day?
To the Editor:
In his essay "A Pair of Towers Trapped in Gray Flannel Suits"  [ Oct. 9 ] , Herbert Muschamp wrote of the impact of image over substance.
In his effort to describe how style can affect the aura of authority, whether it be fashion or architecture, he described his experience of being distracted during televised hearings of the Senate Judiciary Committee; for example, senators' haircuts could short-circuit his focus from the greater issues.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $875,000
361 West 19th Street  1870 3-family brownstone with garden; 3 bedrooms, 2 1/2 baths, den in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in others; terrace in one, fireplace in each; taxes $8,284, listed at $995,000, 22 weeks on market (Broker: Douglas Elliman)


The Handcuff King
To the Editor:
Tom De Haven, who reviewed William Hjortsberg's novel "Nevermore" (Oct. 2), remarked that the author's heroes, Harry Houdini and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, represent "a most unlikely pair of chums-turned-crimebusters."


A Senate Race Plunges Further Into Nastiness
Just when Virginians thought their Senate race had reached the last frontier of nasty politics, Oliver L. North, the Republican candidate, today accused Vice President Al Gore of insulting people with Down syndrome by referring to Mr.
North's supporters as "the extra-chromosome right wing."
Mr.
Gore apologized for using "a poor choice of words," after being told that they could be construed as an allusion to the genetic defect that causes Down syndrome.


Flog With Care
THE DOMOSTROI  Rules for Russian Households in the Time of Ivan the Terrible.
Edited and translated by Carolyn Johnston Pouncy.
Illustrated. 266 pp.
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press. $29.95.


Walking the Walk
For too long now, the perp walk has been a misunderstood phenomenon.
It is a standard scene on the evening news, captured every day in the city's papers, the brief moment when the alleged perpetrator of New York's latest atrocity is walked by police out the door of a station house.
You watch as an accused murderer or mobster, helplessly handcuffed, is dragged through a horde of screaming reporters and jostling photographers, and you naturally assume you're seeing a barbaric mob wreaking random havoc.
But that's not the case.
It's actually a barbaric mob wreaking exquisitely planned havoc.


Oct.23-29: Woman Fighter Pilot Dies; In the New Navy, Tragedy Doesn't Discriminate
One of the Navy's first female combat pilots was killed in a training accident off Southern California last week -- a reminder of the hazards America's military men, and now increasingly its women, face even in peacetime.
The pilot, Lieut.
Kara S. Hultgreen, 29, of San Antonio, apparently lost control of her F-14 after an engine stalled as she prepared to land on the carrier Abraham Lincoln.
The radar-intercept officer ejected before the plane crashed in the sea and sank, and he was rescued.
Her body has not been recovered.


Susan Georgantas, Samuel Britton
Susan Nicolette Georgantas, the daughter of Aristedes W. and Patricia Cooke Georgantas of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Samuel Spotswood Britton, a son of Kathryn S. Britton of West Hartford, Conn., and John P. Britton of Boston.
The Rev.
Leslie C. Smith performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church.
Mrs.
Britton and her husband, both 25, graduated from Yale University, she cum laude, he magna cum laude.
The bride is a second-year law student at Columbia University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Chemical Bank New Jersey.


'The Moral Animal'
To the Editor:
Oh, no!
Not another one of those male sex fantasies disguised as science!
Here comes Robert Wright's "Moral Animal," with Steven Pinker's unabashedly glowing review.
Once again we are presented with the assumption that all of life is directed by the single guiding principle of maximizing the expression of one's own genes in the next generation.
Hence, "men place a greater value on signs of fertility (such as youth) and sexual fidelity (such as coyness); women place a greater value on signs of a lifelong provider (status, strength, devotion)." Hey, girls, face it!
This guy stuff is genetic.
It's downright Darwinian.


Susan Horowitz and Thomas Pereles
Susan Michele Horowitz, a daughter of Yvette and Dr.
Murray Horowitz of Manalapan, N.J., was married last evening to Dr.
Thomas Richard Pereles, a son of Marilyn Pereles and Richard A. Pereles of Potomac, Md.
Rabbi Philip Schechter officiated at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Mrs.
Pereles, 28, is an associate in the New York office of Gibson, Dunn &amp; Crutcher, a Los Angeles law firm.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in Freehold, N.J., and is the assistant chief of staff in obstetrics and gynecology at Centra State Medical Center there.
Her mother is the office manager for her husband's practice.
Dr.
Pereles, 30, is a chief resident in orthopedic surgery at the Hospital for Joint Diseases Orthopaedic Institute in New York.
He graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received his medical degree from Harvard University.
His mother teaches mathematics at the Burning Tree Elementary School in Bethesda, Md.
His father is a senior principal manager at RMS Technologies, a consulting and engineering firm in Washington.


An Exercise In Making Change
Officials at the Treasury Department recently announced that our currency is being redesigned -- not for esthetic reasons, they claim, but in an attempt to foil counterfeiters. (The difference, it is said, will be practically negligible to the naked eye.) As it happened, this news coincided with the complaints of a friend, Dutch by birth -- a world traveler who had lived in several countries before moving not too long ago to New York.
He found American money confusing, he said.
"It's all the same color and all the same size, and you actually have to look at the numbers to see how much a bill is worth." He had a point, come to think of it.
In the wake of the new French 50-franc note, featuring a drawing of the Little Prince -- a whimsical sort of tribute that would seem somehow heretical in America, where we take our money very seriously -- we invited seven "experts" to reconceive the dollar bill.
The results, seen on these pages, are on exhibit at Artists Space, 38 Greene Street, through Jan. 7.
HOLLY BRUBACH


Corrections
Because of a production error, the calendar of events is omitted from page 22 of the Connecticut Weekly today, and replaced by a duplicate of page 20.
The calendar, "This Week in Connecticut," appears in Connecticut copies of the Employment Advertising section, on page 28; that section went to press after the error occurred.


The Problem With Being Big
Next on the environmental hit list: tallness.
This from Thomas T. Samaras, author of "The Truth About Your Height." Samaras says American men now average 5 foot 9, up from 5 foot 5 in 1776, and are growing an inch per generation, promising disaster -- because tall people use more resources, including bigger cars and homes.
But what about economic stature?
Is car size related to height, or income?
Certainly Dudley Moore consumes more than a six-foot homeless person.


Love the House -- But Can We Afford It?
BUYING a house concentrates the mind, and not least on matters of money.
In the current housing market, the experience of recession appears to have led buyers into more conservative financial planning than their predecessors practiced a decade ago.
The recession retarded the pace of sales and frustrated the ability of many people to make long-term decisions on a house or a community or both.
Slower sales and lower prices made it difficult -- and for many still do make it difficult -- to recover the cash applied to one purchase to make another.
It even affected the attitudes of those who had never bought.


Latest Influx from South Puts Inwood in Flux
Most of the Irish and Jewish families that once dominated Inwood are long gone, replaced over two decades by Dominican immigrants.
But in the last five years, the 40-block-long neighborhood at Manhattan's northern tip has attracted thousands of newcomers from the south: young families from the Upper West Side and artists fleeing the fast-rising rents of SoHo.
Now 10 young homeowners have come up with an ambitious plan to change Inwood.
Mannahatta, the nonprofit organization they founded last February, seeks to clean up the area, drive out drug dealers, attract upscale stores and restaurants to join the Dominican produce stands -- and, in general, unite the various ethnic groups.


Diane Bressler, Dale McNulty
Diane Susan Bressler, a vice president at Lazard Freres &amp; Company, the New York investment bank, was married yesterday to Dale Archer McNulty, the president of the Global Money Management Corporation, an investment concern in New York.
The Rev.
Mark Anschutz performed the Episcopal ceremony at the House of the Redeemer in New York.
Mrs.
McNulty, 40, graduated from Tri-State University and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Chicago.
She is the treasurer of the Original Ballets Foundation, which operates the Feld Ballets/NY and the New Ballet School, both in New York.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Bressler of Sarasota, Fla., where the bride's father is a labor relations consultant and arbitrator.


Oct.23-29: Mozambique's Dhlakama; Lately When Rebel Turns Politician, Africans Worry
Throughout the two-year ceasefire that led to last week's elections in Mozambique, the question about Afonso Dhlakama, the rebel leader turned presidential candidate, was: Is he another Jonas Savimbi?
That is, was he committed to this novelty of democracy, or would he, like his guerrilla counterpart in Angola, Mr.
Savimbi, lead his partisans back to war if he did not like the vote results?
On Thursday, as Mozambicans poured to the polls for the first of three voting days, Mr.
Dhlakama revived the speculation by suddenly announcing a boycott of the election, claiming the Government was plotting a wholesale fraud.


Community Board Meeting Dates In Manhattan
DISTRICT 1 Battery Park, TriBeCa.
Next meeting Nov. 15, 5:30 P.M.; St.
Margaret's House, 49 Fulton Street, near Pearl Street. (212) 442-5050.
Agenda: Foley Sq. Redevelopment.
DISTRICT 2 SoHo, Little Italy, West Village, Greenwich Village, parts of Chinatown.
Next meeting Nov. 17, 7 P.M.; Greenwich House Auditorium, 27 Barrow Street, corner of Seventh Avenue South and Bleecker Street. (212) 979-2272.
Agenda: General discussion.
DISTRICT 3 Lower East Side, East Village.
Next meeting Nov. 22, 6:30 P.M.; Educational Alliance, 197 East Broadway; (212) 533-5300.
Agenda: General discussion.
DISTRICT 4 Chelsea, Clinton.
Next meeting Nov. 2, 7 P.M.; Fulton Senior Center, 119 Ninth Avenue; (212) 736-4536.
Agenda: General discussion.
DISTRICT 5 Central Park South, central business district, theater district, Gramercy Park, Little India, Rockefeller Center.
Next meeting Nov. 10, 6 P.M.; Fashion Institute of Technology, Building A, 227 West 27th Street, near Seventh Avenue, Eighth Floor; (212) 465-0907.
Agenda: Community Access Inc. proposal.
DISTRICT 6 Murray Hill, Turtle Bay, Stuyvesant Square, Peter Cooper Village, Beekman, Sutton.
Next meeting Nov. 9, 7 P.M.; N. Y. U. Medical Center, 550 First Avenue at 31st Street; (212) 679-0907.
Agenda: Stuyvesant Cove Park plan.
DISTRICT 7 Upper West Side.
Next meeting Nov. 1, 7 P.M.; Stephen Wise Free Synagogue, 30 West 68th Street; (212) 362-4008.
Agenda: General discussion.
DISTRICT 8 Upper East Side, Yorkville, Roosevelt Island.
Next meeting Nov. 16, 7 P.M.; Hunter School of Social Work, Auditorium, 129 East 79th Street; (212) 427-4840.
Agenda: General discussion.
DISTRICT 9 Morningside Heights, Manhattanville, Hamilton Heights.
Next meeting; T.B.A.; Community Board Office, 565 West 125th Street; (212) 864-6200.
Agenda: General discussion.
DISTRICT 10 Central Harlem.
Next meeting Nov. 2, 6:30 P.M.; Powell State Office Building, 163 West 125th Street; (212) 749-3105.
Agenda: New York Transport Workers.
DISTRICT 11 East Harlem.
Next meeting Nov. 15, 7 P.M.; La Guardia Memorial House, 307 East 116th Street; (212) 831-8929.
Agenda: Report of the committees.
DISTRICT 12 Washington Heights, Inwood.
Next meeting Nov. 22, 7:30 P.M.; New York State Psychiatric Institute, 722 West 168th Street; (212) 568-8500.
Agenda: General discussion.


A Trial Alternative For O. J. Simpson
To the Editor:
O.
J.
Simpson's lawyers have been claiming that their client cannot receive a fair trial because of the impossibility of picking an impartial jury.
They do have an alternative: trial by judge.


The Price of Fame
To the Editor:
In the 1950's, I worked in a Miami Beach travel agency on Collins Avenue near the Roney Plaza Hotel.
One day I had a late lunch at Al's, a popular restaurant on 23d Street.
When I sat down at the counter and looked at the man next to me, it was none other than Walter Winchell.
I asked: "Would you be so kind as to sign your name on this envelope addressed to my mother? She would be thrilled with your autograph." At first, he said no, but then relented and signed his name on the back of the envelope.


Corrections
Captions on page 14 of the Long Island Weekly today with the continuation of an article about Congressional races are scrambled.
Those pictured are, clockwise from top left: Michael P. Forbes, George Hochbrueckner, Daniel Frisa, Philip M. Schiliro and David Levy.
Because of a production error, the continuation of the article appears with brief passages obscured at the bottoms of columns.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036, or telephone (212) 556-1992.


Fishing in Brooklyn: The Lore and the Lure
Brooklyn's Marine Park is rarely mistaken for Vietnam or Siberia.
There are flounder in the creek and stripers and blues which chase baitfish right up to the shoreline.
Dave Azar, a dentist who has set himself the task of learning the fly fishing opportunities of the Brooklyn shore of Jamaica Bay, catches blues and stripers in the creek among the old pilings that dot the inlet.
When he took me there one recent morning at 7 A.M., blues were working the middle of the channel, penning up bunker and slashing through them.
But they were too far out to reach with a flyrod.
We tried small streamers in the pilings for stripers and had a few tentative takes but no hook-ups.


Kill for Life?
THE NEW WOMAN MEDICAL CENTER OF JACKSON, Miss., has not yet opened on this autumn morning, when a pair of dark blue vehicles arrive.
First, a midnight Chevy pickup rolls past the seven-foot-high fence and through the opened metal gate.
It parks by the rear of the lot, near the unprepossessing white trailer that is the temporary quarters of the United States marshals.
Moments later, a navy Crown Victoria, with tinted windows, pulls to a stop behind the pickup.
The two armed men in the front seat leave the car and are joined by two other marshals, who have emerged from the pickup.
The four form a ring around the car's back-seat passenger, Dr.
Joseph Booker Jr., the only physician currently providing legal abortions in the state of Mississippi.
His bulletproof vest is not visible under his gray shirt, and some say he carries a gun in his black leather waist pouch.
His protectors hustle him toward the back door of the single-story, wood-shingled clinic.
Just then, a bearded man in a rattan sun hat pops his head over the fence, boosted by the folding step stool that he brings on protest days.
His smile is downright gleeful and his voice is taunting.
The marshals barely react.
They have been expecting him.


Is There a Niche for a Home of Just 225 Square Feet?
IN 1992 the Connecticut division of Trammel Crow, one of the nation's largest builders, obtained approvals in Stamford to build 240 mini-apartments of 270 square feet to rent for around $500 a month.
The project never materialized because of problems in acquiring the downtown site, which was in foreclosure.
But the point had been made.
The state's most urbane city had acknowledged a need for very small living spaces to accommodate people on limited incomes.


At Work; Tracking Big Brother in the Office
IT is 1984 plus 10.
Not only is Big Brother watching you, he is disclosing your little sinus problem to your health insurer and selling off your name and demographics to a direct marketing company.
No more free trips to the otolaryngologist.
Soon the phone will ring during dinner -- always during dinner -- and a stranger who knows you just bought a "Brady Bunch Reunion" video at your local Blockbuster will try to sell you a Robert Reed commemorative plate.
Increasingly, American lives are on line.
Information, in many guises and in more intimate detail than ever, is stashed in odd places, accessible by licit and illicit means.
And for every electronic gadget that makes work easier or more efficient, chances are it also makes an employee easier to keep track of.


Suddenly, Arafat Is Odd Man Out
THE stark reality about the peace treaty that Israel and Jordan signed along their arid border last week is that the person perhaps most responsible for it was hardly President Clinton, who held center stage in the desert pomp and circumstance, but Yasir Arafat, who was not even invited.
Had Mr.
Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, not gone first, coming to terms with Israel a year ago, it is unlikely that King Hussein of Jordan would have plucked up the political courage to forge ahead with a deal of his own.
Yet if there was a loser last week in the Middle East's version of Chutes and Ladders, it had to be the P.L.O. chairman.
That seemed to be how he viewed it as well.


Marilyn J. Spiegel, Richard A. Sibery 2d
Marilyn Jane Spiegel, the daughter of Carol and Irwin Spiegel of Freeport, L.I., was married last evening to Richard Allen Sibery 2d, the son of Sharon and Richard Sibery of Huber Heights, Ohio.
Cantor Henry Weintraub officiated at the de Seversky Center in Brookville, L.I.
The bride, 24, graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and is taking science courses at Columbia University.
Mr.
Sibery, also 24, is a certified public accountant at Deloitte &amp; Touche, the accounting firm in New York.
He graduated from Penn.


Tales of Tampa
Sometimes the most valuable memories are best labeled "stretchers," to use Huckleberry Finn's term for recollections caught somewhere between fact and fiction.
YBOR CITY CHRONICLES: A Memoir (University Press of Florida, $24.95), Ferdie Pacheco's nostalgic account of his childhood in the late 1930's and early 1940's in the Latin quarter of Tampa, Fla., can confidently be called a stretcher.
One senses that after 50 years, Dr.
Pacheco has allowed the espresso to grow a bit stronger, the Cuban bread crustier and the neighborhood characters more intriguing.
After all, as Dr.
Pacheco, a television boxing commentator and Muhammad Ali's former physician, describes it, Ybor City's blend of cultures and classes proved fertile ground for mythmaking.
There was, for example, the legendary figure of Sweet Sam, an elegant delivery man who owned a grand piano but mysteriously refused to play it.
Dr.
Pacheco's father also looms large, demanding Old World respect from his family.
The author describes the restaurants, social clubs and movie theaters that serve as the backdrop for his memories.
His stories are bolstered by photographs and his own cartoons, so the reader can actually see the place as he saw it.
Dr.
Pacheco is enthralled by the memory of a neighborhood of family and friends inextricably tied together by custom, values and concerns.
It is these traits that make his anecdotes worth relating.
DOUGLAS A. SYLVA


Search for Rings In Magic Kingdom
The Orlando Magic is a bicycle built for five.
The shooting guard is deadeye from 30 feet; the point guard can see over small trees; the small forward leaps so high he needs air traffic controllers; the power forward has only a few ring-less fingers, and the center cannot even roam Japan anonymously.
If substitutions were prohibited, Orlando might not ever lose.
But because the starters will need oxygen breaks from time to time, the Magic could fall as many as 25 times this season.
Otherwise, half the nation has penciled the Magic into the National Basketball Association finals.


Outdoor Home Lighting Takes On a Softer Look
EARLY this evening, now that the clocks have been turned back an hour to Eastern Standard Time, the landscape will be suddenly plunged into darkness.
One outdoor lighting specialist often jokingly approaches homeowners by saying: "It's 6 P.M. Do you know where your flowers are?"
Where once the extended period of darkness had limited remedies -- a splash of light at the front door, a floodlight over the garage -- today people are using far more sophisticated methods of illuminating their homes, for security and esthetic reasons.


Columbia's New Math: Counting Up to 4
Columbia beat Princeton before a record crowd at Wien Stadium yesterday and thus attained a plateau foreign to Lions' teams for many years.
The score was 17-10 and the margin might have been even larger if not for turnovers.
Coming after Columbia's 30-9 victory over Yale a week ago, these have suddenly become heady times in the Lions' den.
These Lions, whose spirited play in the first half decided the match, have now won four games.
The last time a Columbia team won four times was in 1971, and before that 1961, the year the college gained its only Ivy League championship.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
After reading Nick Tosches' TRINITIES (Doubleday, $23.95), in which the author meticulously examines the international drug racket, you won't be surprised that the United States and other countries all over the world have not been able to do anything about it.
The poor Drug Enforcement Administration does not stand a chance against this mighty force.
"Trinities" is largely "God father" stuff.
Several old capos from Brooklyn are restless.
They have surrendered control to the new generation -- the bright young men with their M.B.A.'s, computers, spreadsheets, statutory mergers, leveraged buyouts and cash conversion cycles.
So the octogenarians set out to take back what once belonged to them.
That includes worldwide control of the heroin industry.


Franchised Hayrides: Halloween Hits
AMID the glow of a harvest moon, a cold wind rustles leaves down a country lane.
With a mechanical groan, a tractor tows its burden: a hay-strewn wagon packed with both young and old.
In the distance looms a hangman's tree with a fresh victim.
As the wagon passes beneath the swaying figure, its noosed head cocked to one side, the dangling body bellows an unearthly shriek and wriggles in apparent pain.


Despite 1993 Contretemps, Rollins Is as Busy as Ever
A year after helping guide Christine Todd Whitman to an upset victory in the New Jersey gubernatorial race in what he described as the greatest political moment of his career and later tarnishing that memory in a bizarre controversy after the election, Edward J. Rollins is as busy as ever.
In California, Mr.
Rollins is helping direct the Senate campaign of Representative Michael Huffington, a Republican, against Senator Dianne Feinstein, a Democrat in her first term.
In Washington State, Mr.
Rollins is trying to unseat House Speaker Thomas S. Foley, another Democrat, and replace him with a lawyer from Spokane, George Nethercutt.
And in New York, Mr.
Rollins is championing the campaign of Bernadette Castro, a political neophyte, against Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
Mr.
Rollins set off a storm after Mrs.
Whitman's victory when he boasted that he had pulled the election out of the bag, in part, by suppressing the black vote in urban and largely Democratic areas.
Mr.
Rollins contended that he had set aside $500,000 in "walking around money" that he instructed the campaign to use in the final days before the election to bribe black ministers to keep them from making endorsements from their pulpits for Gov.
Jim Florio, who was seeking re-election.
Under pressure from Mrs.
Whitman, Mr.
Rollins quickly recanted, calling his statement a fit of bravado.
Inquiries by Federal and state grand juries failed to turn up evidence to prove the initial statement.
Except for the uproar Mr.
Rollins would be making an encore visit this year to New Jersey.
The Republican Senate candidate, Assembly Speaker Chuck Haytaian, had asked Mr.
Rollins to work in his campaign, but swiftly backed out when the controversy broke.
Mention of the issue still raises rancor in many quarters.
"I don't think the outrage of the Rollins affair has dampened whatsoever," said Walter L. Fields Jr., political director for the state chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
"We haven't forgotten the Rollins incident. But most of us have put it in the back of our minds, because we have been concentrating on other problems."
Mr.
Rollins returned to New Jersey in June to meet black ministers and issue a private and a public apology, which the ministers accepted.
"We can forgive," said the Rev.
Reginald T. Jackson of the St.
Matthew African Methodist Episcopal Church in Orange.
"But forgiving is not forgetting."
But there are harsher feelings about Mr. Rollins.
"Rollins was a liar, and you don't have people lie on you and feel good about it," said Donald Tucker, an at-large member of the Newark City Council and the chairman of the New Jersey Black Issues Convention, a coalition of black elected officials, businessmen and civic leaders.
"The damage that he has done will outlive him. I don't accept his apology."


INSIDE
Classes Without Teachers
Illinois's plan to take over the impoverished, understaffed schools of East St.
Louis promises some relief, but it also raises questions.
Page 16.
Schools Project Falters
A criticized plan to remake education with for-profit schools may die for lack of money.
Page 30.
Among Sri Lankans, Despair
Sri Lankans struggled this week to cope with a suicide bombing that killed an opposition presidential candidate and dozens of others.
Page 3.
Hyperbole on the Runway
As fashion week opens in Bryant Park, the social reverberations are being felt around New York.
Page 41


Relaxed Rambling and Good Eating in Providence
THE historic city of Providence, R.I., has rarely figured as a sightseer's destination, but those who have not been there in recent years might take notice.
With some of the best preserved Colonial and Federal American architecture in the country, two nationally known academic institutions (Brown and the Rhode Island School of Design), a spiffed-up downtown, and ample good eating, it easily merits a day or two of relaxed rambling.
Providence was founded in 1635 by Roger Williams, an iconoclastic minister who had been booted out of the Massachusetts Bay Colony for his unorthodox views.
Today, this ethnically diverse city of 170,000 wears its heritage as comfortably as an old tweed jacket.
The compact and colorful East Side, which includes college hill, is a treasure trove of early American architecture .
Brown University in particular is rich with brooding Gothic structures and graceful examples of the Beaux Arts style.


Technology; Battery Makers Are Betting on Lithium-Polymer Cells
BATTERY makers are constantly looking for chemical reactions that employ inexpensive, lightweight materials which can be mass produced into a reliable product.
The chemical process should run in both directions, so the battery can be charged and discharged repeatedly without the materials breaking down.
And it should run at everyday temperatures.
These requirements help explain why batteries are the weak spot in so many products, from cellular phones to electric cars.


Art Is Easier the 2d Time Around
RECYCLING is no longer confined to Diet Coke cans and Evian water bottles.
It's become one of the dominant impulses in American culture today.
Nor is it simply a matter of translating plays and novels into movies, or spinning sequels and prequels off television shows and books.
It's far more pervasive than that.


Stacy L. Weinstein, Mark B. Ehrlich
Stacy Lynn Weinstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Weinstein of West Warwick, R.I., was married last evening to Mark Brian Ehrlich, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
David Ehrlich of Boca Raton, Fla.
Rabbi George Astrachan performed the ceremony at the Newport Marriott Hotel in Newport, R.I.
Mrs.
Ehrlich, 26, is an associate at Hogan &amp; Hartson, a law firm in Washington.
She graduated from Emory University, and she and her husband received law degrees from Harvard University.


WHERE THERE'S WAR, THERE'S AMANPOUR
As a former foreign correspondent who covered the Spanish Civil War, the Russo-Finnish conflict, the evacuation of the British at Dunkirk, the Narvik and North African campaigns, I thought Stephen Kinzer's article on Christiane Amanpour was a well-deserved accolade to a woman who goes from one dangerous news assignment to another.
What a reporter! ("Where There's War, There's Amanpour," Oct. 9).


Firefighter Who Tried to Save Elderly Woman Is Electrocuted
One firefighter was killed and another was injured this morning when they came into contact with a high-tension electrical wire while battling a two-alarm house fire that had already killed a resident, the authorities said.
As the firefighters were climbing down a ladder after 1 A.M. at a house in the North Ward a circular saw they were carrying hit the wire, Fire Director Stanley J. Kossup said.
Firefighter Michael De Lane, 33, of Caldwell, was electrocuted.


Hyperbole Takes to the Runway; The Sirens of Fashion Beckon for a Week -- and Then Some
A year ago, when leading New York fashion designers moved their runway shows to a central location -- two white tents behind the New York Public Library in Bryant Park -- they spoke of the convenience, the added seats for buyers and press and a hoped-for economic lift for one of the city's major industries.
They got that, and more: a social juggernaut.
Today, when the semiannual fashion week opens in New York, the hottest shows will tingle with the excitement of an old-time movie premiere, and the status conferred by an invitation is leading the socially ambitious to beg, cry and threaten their way in.
The siren call of paparazzi will cause V.I.P.'s, both rising and fading, to elbow their way to the front rows, and designers will be shameless about planting celebrities in the seats.


Making Spas On Ships Safer
THE Federal Government is planning to start regulating whirlpool spas on cruise ships.
The Government already grades other health-related operations of 128 ships that touch American shores, particularly their handling of food and drinking water.
But an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease last summer aboard Celebrity Cruises' Horizon has caused the Government's Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to move toward more precise guidelines to safeguard passengers who use whirlpool spas.
The outbreak, the first aboard a cruise ship, resulted in one death, 16 confirmed cases of Legionnaires' disease and 34 additional cases of pneumonia among passengers on nine cruises.
Investigators linked the outbreak to use of the whirlpool spas on the deck, or to passengers' being sprinkled while sitting in the deck chairs in the radius of the tubs' spray.
Legionella was traced in the tubs' sand filter.
The spas have not been in use on the Horizon since.


A Guide to Pop Icons
What do the Lawrence Welk Museum in Escondido, Calif., the Cheryl Ladd Room in Huron, S.D., and the American Kazoo Factory in Eden, N.Y., have in common?
Each qualifies as a landmark in pop culture and is included in a new book, "Pop Culture Landmarks, A Traveler's Guide" by George Cantor, a columnist for The Detroit News (Visible Ink Press; $17.95).
The book offers a state-by-state guide to more than 300 pop culture stopping points, from the Mall of America to Grant's Tomb.


This Business Club Is the Real Old Boys' Network
FRIEDRICH SCHWARZE pauses to reflect when asked how many generations ago one of his ancestors founded Fried.
Schwarze, makers of fine schnapps in Oelde, not far from the Rhine River in western Germany.
"Eleven, I think," he says hesitatingly, "or maybe 12."


Fashionable And Cuddly
The Japanese designer Rei Kawakubo's fall styles are gaining wider recognition from women in Paris, as these photographs show.
The wearers praise the cuddly, soft milled-wool fabric, made by a complex process of steaming, heating and shrinking that results in the look of aged clothing, a sort of riches-to-rags style.
Some of the fabrics are only partly milled, to vary the texture in a single garment.


Giant Clams, Whales, Oh My!
Party for families at the American Museum of Natural History, Oct. 19.


Miami Road Signs For Visiting Drivers
The Metro-Dade County Department of Public Works has installed special road signs in the greater Miami area in an attempt to help out-of-town drivers reach major tourist destinations safely.
The program was started in response to attacks, some of them fatal, on tourists who had got lost on the road, according to a spokesman for the Greater Miami Convention and Visitors Bureau.
The road signs, which first appeared earlier this year as part of a $2.7 million program, show an orange sunburst symbol on a blue background.
Installed along major highways, they designate recommended routes to many popular attractions in the Miami area, such as Miami Beach, downtown Miami, Coral Gables and Coconut Grove, as well as the most direct way to Key West, Fort Lauderdale and Orlando.


Say Zzzzzz


Rifle Suspect Was a Veteran Discharged Dishonorably
The Colorado man being held in today's shooting at the White House had served 3 1/2 years at a military prison in Fort Leavenworth, Kan., for aggravated assault and disorderly conduct, an Army spokesman said.
Law-enforcement authorities identified the suspect as Francisco Martin Duran, a 26-year-old hotel worker from Security, Colo., a suburb of Colorado Springs.
He was employed at the Broadmoor Hotel in Colorado Springs, the officials said.


Charleston Inn
To the Editor: Karen A. Lubieniecki recounted an unsatisfactory experience she had in May at the Battery Carriage House Inn in Charleston, S.C. (Letters, Sept. 25).
Our experience was similar in that we chose this inn as a result of The New York Times's recommendation, stayed there in May and in Room 3, about which she complained.
We found this room delightful.
The decorations were exquisite and the fresh flowers a nice touch.
Although there were no windows, the location of the room was such that it was a cool refuge from the Charleston heat.
Furthermore, the front door, which was windowed, led up to a covered veranda, on which a delicious breakfast was served every day.
We enjoyed this in almost total privacy.


The Anti-Abortion Agenda Of a Times Square Preacher
To the Editor:
The Oct. 2 issue of The City carries a photograph of Brenda Milliner, a preacher who is identified as "a Times Square fixture." Ms.
Milliner also preaches twice a week in front of a women's health care provider in Murray Hill whose services include abortions.
The "gospel" she preaches there is racist, anti-Semitic, anti-gay and anti-woman as she shouts epithets like "Fag," "White Devil" and "Jew Slave Master."


The Nation; G.O.P.'s Big Tent Might Be Buffeted by a Celebration
REPUBLICANS are savoring votes that have not yet been cast, crowing about a realignment that will transform them into the dominant political party for the next generation.
"It's almost too good to be true," said Haley Barbour, chairman of the Republican National Committee.
"It's the best political environment for Republicans I've seen since I got involved in politics in 1968."
But being a Republican is not as easy right now as it might appear.
While the party is poised for major victories on Nov. 8, post-election euphoria may quickly be dampened by a challenge: How to prevent success from destroying the party -- and its chances for retaking the White House.


Making a New Career Out of Grilling
GEORGE HIRSCH is hot.
No local chef has ever cooked for more people, 85 million a week.
Although Mr.
Hirsch's name might not be instantly familiar to most Long Islanders, including people who have eaten at his American Bistro in Kings Park, he is seen nationally on public television.
His program, "Grilling With Chef George Hirsch," produced at WJCT-TV in Jacksonville, Fla., started in May on 220 stations.


Cindy Derrow and Roy Kaufman
Cindy Beth Derrow, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Alfred M. Derrow of Dix Hills, L.I., was married last evening to Roy Sommers Kaufman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold Kaufman of Piscataway, N.J.
Rabbi Leonard B. Troupp performed the ceremony at the North Shore Synagogue in Syosset, L.I.
The bride, 28, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
She is studying for a Ph.D. in history at New York University.
Her father is the chief of medicine of the Hicksville division of the Queens-Long Island Medical Group, a health maintenance organization.
Her mother, Joyce G. Derrow, teaches the first grade at the Hewlett School in East Islip, L.I.


New Anti-Graffiti Team Wages War on Words


Bach On Accordion? Ja!
To the Editor:
In comparing the performance of Beethoven's Opus III sonata on modern versus "authentic" keyboards, Edward Rothstein says: "I doubt that Opus III will ever sound convincing on an accordion. I'm sure it will some day sound compelling on a synthesizer"  [ "After Piano and Fortepiano, the Synthesizer?," Oct. 16 ] .


Single Rooms
To the Editor: In July 1994, I took a "Deluxe Italy" tour of 11 days with Club ABC of Union, N.J.
The package included deluxe accommodations at Ciga five-star hotels in Venice, Florence and Rome.
The cost was $2,349, including a single occupancy charge of about $450.
In each Ciga hotel, I was shown to a veritable broom closet -- claustrophobic, bleak and disappointing.
The Club ABC representative accompanying our group refused to help me rectify this matter.
I was left to my own devices and, in each city, I had to plead, cajole and negotiate to upgrade my accommodations to something reasonably representative of a five-star "deluxe" room.


Court Sharply Limits the Photocopying of Scientific Articles
A Federal appeals court in Manhattan has ruled that Texaco Inc. violated copyright laws when it allowed its library to photocopy whole articles from scientific and technical journals and distributed them to the company's researchers around the country.
One judge, dissenting in the 2-to-1 decision, expressed fear that lawyers would have to be stationed beside photocopying machines to give advice on whether a particular article could legally be copied.
But the majority insisted that the ruling applied only to what it called archival copying for placement of the material in a library for future use.


Pumpkin Stars in Some Nontraditional Roles
THERE is more to pumpkin than the perennial jack-o'-lantern or pumpkin pie.
Pumpkin puree, made fresh by baking or boiling fresh pumpkin or cooking it in a microwave oven -- then mashing it or processing it in a blender or food processor -- can be added to enrich a host of dishes, notably risotto and pasta sauce.
Chunks of pumpkin can make a savory stew to spoon over couscous, rice or other grains to serve as a vegetarian main dish or alongside grilled meats.


Mexico City
In a place as old as Mexico City, settled by the Aztecs in 1325, renewal is as constant as it is inevitable.
While it is true that some changes brutally wipe away the past, others take a fine brush to the city's antiquity, adding new shades and meanings.
Year after year, the most enduring city in North America not only grows older but also more intriguing.
Over the next two months, as one year ends and one more begins, Mexico City will be undergoing another physical and civic renovation, making this a good time to visit, if the smog isn't too bad.
The end-of-the-year holidays also take many Mexicans away from home, leaving the biggest metropolitan area in the world a little less crowded and a bit more open for exploration.


Governor Cuomo, Beyond a Doubt
Mario Cuomo seems always to have been a creature of expectations -- his own and those that others have conferred upon him.
Ever since his incandescent speech to the 1984 Democratic National Convention, people have spoken of him in terms of what "could be" and, later, of what "might have been." He might have been President of the United States.
He surely could have been a justice of the Supreme Court.
Although it is not too late for the Court, there seems only one certain way for him to claim an exalted place in the history books.
That is to have a memorably successful fourth term.
This newspaper thinks he can do that.
We not only recommend his re-election; we urge it as essential to New York's progress.
We are mindful of his shortcomings and we are sometimes annoyed by the gap between the Cuomo rhetoric and the Cuomo reality.
It is also true that New York has lagged behind a nationwide economic recovery.
We nevertheless believe that Mr.
Cuomo towers above his opponents.
His intellect is formidable, his values sound, his understanding of the state's complex needs and opportunities unmatched.


Movies Go for the Power of the Written Word
IN THE FILM "BARCELONA," IN a hospital room in Spain, an American named Ted Boynton keeps vigil beside the bed of his cousin Fred, a United States Navy officer, who lies in a coma after being shot by a political terrorist.
Through dire hours Ted and other visitors read aloud passages from "War and Peace." Although Fred has been given little chance of recovering, he suddenly awakes, ornery as ever.
It's as if the recitations, in a kind of quirky shamanism, have worked a cure beyond the capability of any drug.
Far away in Dublin, in the film "A Man of No Importance," scheduled to open in December, Alfie Byrne (played by Albert Finney) is a bus conductor whose dreary round is heightened by his love of Oscar Wilde.
Rebuffed in his efforts to stage Wilde's "Salome" with bus passengers as actors and frustrated in his gropings for love with both men and women, he loses himself in the glamorous wit and romantic persona that Wilde's work provides him.


Voices Lift in Bach and Mozart
CHORAL music headlines the week's concert activity, with a birthday party, a service for All Saints Day and a Connecticut premiere among the enticements.
The Pro Arte Singers open their season today at 5 o'clock in First Presbyterian Church in Stamford, not only celebrating their 20th anniversary but also introducing their new musical offspring, the Pro Arte Festival Chorus.
In the larger group, the core professional artists are joined by volunteers so that 50 voices can be raised in Bach's Cantata No. 150 and Mozart's Missa Brevis, the latter work interspersed with Gregorian chants, and both accompanied by orchestra.
Under the group's founding director, Arthur Sjogren, the singers alone will also perform "Zoo" by the 20th- century Belgian composer Jean Absil.
Tickets may be gotten at the door, but for other Pro Arte information, call 323-7955.


Elana C. Jacobson, Scott A. Bloom
Elana Carrie Jacobson, the daughter of Sheila and John Jacobson of New Springville, S.I., was married last evening to Scott Alan Bloom, the son of Marla and Arthur Bloom of Grandview, N.Y.
Rabbi David Lincoln performed the ceremony at the Pratt Mansions in New York.
Mrs.
Bloom, 28, is an associate in New York at Arnold &amp; Porter, the Washington law firm.
She graduated from Cornell University and received her law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father retired as an assistant principal of Forest Hills High School in Queens.


Ndeti's Words to Race By: Run Seldom, but Win Often
There is talk of a possible world record on Sunday in the Chicago Marathon.
Such predictions are always risky for a 26.2-mile race where the weather can restrict, the body can falter and the mind can seize up like a hamstring.
The favorite is Cosmas Ndeti of Kenya, which means that forecasting a winning time is as futile as forecasting the weather.
For all of his promising achievement, he remains a runner of sublime mystery and eccentricity.


Tulips and Crocus for New Year's Eve?
WITH memories of last winter's violence lingering, one way to make this winter easier on the soul is to force a few spring bulbs into bloom.
This is easy to do, but it does take a bit of planning, as a few weeks of cold storage are required before even a shoot will appear.
Forcing means exactly what it says.
Hardy spring bulbs are potted up and made to bloom indoors well ahead of their alloted season.
Also, they can be planted in the garden in spring to recover, though they may not bloom again outdoors for a year or two.


Journal; The Final Curtain?
You know Broadway is dead as a showcase for American drama when a) there are no new plays running there; b) Neil Simon announces he would rather be in Greenwich Village; c) New York's Attorney General is closing in on its box offices, or d) the theater industry's leaders are fighting in public, like passengers on the Titanic shoving each other out of the lifeboats.
The answer is, e) all of the above.


The Wicked Witch
To the Editor:
In the letter you published on Oct. 16, "The Old Elevator on Gramercy Park," Scott Meserve neglects to mention who his wonderful grandmother was.
She was Margaret Hamilton, the wicked witch in "The Wizard of Oz"!
This fine woman helped to create a yearly tradition at 34 Gramercy Park when I lived there with my daughter and husband (1980-1984).


What Makes Brooklyn Angry: A Quality of Life Map


In California, the Numbers Add Up to Anxiety
"ENOUGH is enough," said William King, executive vice president of Americans Against Illegal Immigration, based in Southern California.
Mr.
King is a moving force in putting an anti-illegal immigrant proposition on next week's statewide ballot.
"We're going broke in this state. It's just the enormity of the situation." The schools, he complained, are now teaching in 96 different languages.
"It's insanity, it doesn't make sense and the average guy in this country is not going to buy into it anymore."
Proposition 187, called "Save Our State," would deny social services like schooling and non-emergency medical care to illegal immigrants.
The visible targets of the measure are the waves of undocumented workers, but it underscores a growing discomfort with the number of newcomers.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Eddie Bauer Plans to Open 2 More Stores in Manhattan
Eddie Bauer, the outdoor clothing company with the popular catalog, will open two more stores in Manhattan in November, one on Third Avenue at 68th Street and the other on Broadway and Prince Street.


Mediology
Sketch of The Voter, 1994, as currently rendered by The Media: Mad as hell.
Hates the Ins.
Doubts the Outs.
Weary of the world and joyless on the job.
Aggrieved by government.
Nostalgic for family.
Resentful of welfare, immigrants and taxes.
Terrorized by crime, at least the news of it.
Turned off by integration, even the dream of it.
Amused, abashed, misjudged and misled by media -- if you can believe the media.
This depressing portrait is offered a mere three years after America's cold war triumph.
The nation is wealthier, freer and more secure than ever; its values -- democracy, individualism and cheap oil -- are captivating the world.
And still the media make Americans out to be miserable.
No, say many, the media make us miserable; they wallow in violence, rake up muck, stir up strife.
They've made the news itself the enemy of hope.
Grains of truth, buckets of hogwash.
As the media's own polls should have taught, there's no such animal as Typical Voter.
And there's no one beast called Media either.
Many media are indiscriminate about voters, overlooking instructive studies of them.
Voters, in turn, speak indiscriminately about the media when in fact they pick and choose from a huge and varied information menu.


POSTINGS: New Owners for New Haven's Teletrack; A Horse Racing Theater Bets on Bettors
For two and half years, the drum-shaped Teletrack horse racing theater in New Haven, one of the most visible sites along Interstate 95, has been empty.
In August, however, Autotote Enterprises of New Haven bought the three-story, 83,000-square-foot building from General Instrument for $4.7 million.
It intends to expand and reopen the 1,800-seat theater by early 1995.
"Connecticut likes to gamble," said Rick Cowan, president of Autotote.
"There is a real market out here for this."


Stefanie Mandel And Gregg Marks
Stefanie Jill Mandel, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Lewis R. Mandel of Edison, N.J., was married last evening to Gregg Adam Marks, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Marks of Westfield, N.J.
Rabbi Alan Silverstein officiated at Temple B'nai Abraham in Livingston, N.J.
Mrs.
Marks, 26, is an accountant at Smith Barney in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father is an executive director of Merck Research Laboratories in Rahway, N.J.


He's Small. He's Elusive. He's a Star. Yes, He's Barry Sanders.
He watched so much film of Barry Sanders this past week that linebacker Corey Miller felt as if the Lions running back was a close personal friend.
Day after day and night after night, the film machine flickered, showing images of a man who does things humans aren't supposed to.
And although Miller will try to shut down the game's best back today, he couldn't help but be awed by what he saw.
It's what Sanders makes out of nothing that seemed to amaze Miller the most.
He remembered one play against Dallas when Sanders hit a stuffed hole, then, after stopping on a dime, hopped back about 2 yards like a kid imitating the Easter bunny.
And when the hole cleared, Sanders hit the warp drive and burst through it for about a 20-yard gain.
This all happened in a matter of seconds.


A Small World Car, After All
IT'S a big country, and Americans are big people.
We like Big Macs, Big Gulps and Biggie Fries.
We like our cars big, too -- even the small ones.
This poses a challenge in building a "world car," a vehicle that can be made and sold globally with only small concessions to local tastes.
The Japanese are masters at this, but Detroit has never been able to make Americans fall in love with Opels adored by Germans, or set foreigners swooning over the Pinto or the Chevette.


Putting Eye Surgery Into Sharper Focus
To the Editor:
There appears to be a lot of confusion in the coverage you and other news media gave to refractive surgery, to correct for nearsightedness and astigmatism and alleviate the need for glasses and contacts ("Experts Back Laser Surgery on Nearsighted," news article, Oct. 23).


Memories Of Another Era
To the Editor:
I read Neal Gabler's article "The Brief Half-Life of Celebrity"  [ Oct. 16 ]  and thought to myself, what a coincidence!
Let me explain.


Corrections
A caption yesterday about the Ink-Credible Tattoo Convention, which ends today, misidentified the convention site.
It is the Newark Airport Hilton, not the New York Hilton.


Exercise Truck Plies the Suburbs
People think of a health club on wheels as a 'California' thing, but I'm probably the only one in the country doing this," says Fred Daniels, a trainer in McLean, Va.
Daniels has spent $75,000 to pack an exercise bike, stair machine, rowing machine, barbell racks and half a dozen other machines into a customized 46-foot tractor-trailer.
He will drive to a client's house, park the truck on the street and oversee the exercise session just like a regular personal trainer who would make home visits in California.


Where to Revive the Body And Spirit With a Cuppa
WHILE tea may never supplant coffee as America's favorite hot beverage, the delightful tea ritual is having a minor resurgence.
Tea drinkers agree, no question about it, that a cup of the fragrant, deep-bodied beverage in mid or late afternoon has a restorative effect that can revive the body as well as the spirit.
And if the tea is freshly brewed, steeped in a ceramic pot, all the better.
Following is an alphabetical listing of special places where a good cup of tea can be found.
At CAPRILANDS HERB FARM (534 Silver Street, Coventry; 742-7244), in the northeast corner of the state, Adelma Grenier Simmons has long given lectures on herbs, leading tours through her extensive gardens.
Sunday tea is served until the third week of December, resuming again April 1.
Guests sign in at 1:15 P.M. and wander the gardens until 2 P.M., when they assemble in the greenhouse for a lecture.
That is followed at 2:45 by tea in the 18th-century farmhouse.
Tea consists of canapes, sandwiches, warm biscuits or scones, a choice of soup or salad, and dessert that might be brownies, tarts or cake.
The tea served is Caprilands blend, one of several herb teas sold in the Caprilands bookshop.
The tea-lecture cost is $12; reservations are essential.


'The Moral Animal'
To the Editor:
I haven't read Robert Wright's book "The Moral Animal," but if I correctly understand his arguments as presented in Steven Pinker's review (Sept. 25), I have some real problems with them.


Delphine Knight, Sean Brown
Delphine Winthrop Knight, an associate at the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell, was married yesterday to Sean Stewart Brown, a vice president of Axiom Real Estate Management in Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
James Massa performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady Queen of Martyrs Church in Forest Hills, Queens.
The bride graduated from Princeton University and received her law degree from St.
John's University in Jamaica, Queens.
She is the daughter of Delphine and Stiling Knight of Forest Hills.
Her father retired as a research chemist at CPC International, a food-processing conglomerate in Englewood Cliffs, N.J.


An Exercise In Making Change
Officials at the Treasury Department recently announced that our currency is being redesigned -- not for esthetic reasons, they claim, but in an attempt to foil counterfeiters. (The difference, it is said, will be practically negligible to the naked eye.) As it happened, this news coincided with the complaints of a friend, Dutch by birth -- a world traveler who had lived in several countries before moving not too long ago to New York.
He found American money confusing, he said.
"It's all the same color and all the same size, and you actually have to look at the numbers to see how much a bill is worth." He had a point, come to think of it.
In the wake of the new French 50-franc note, featuring a drawing of the Little Prince -- a whimsical sort of tribute that would seem somehow heretical in America, where we take our money very seriously -- we invited seven "experts" to reconceive the dollar bill.
The results, seen on these pages, are on exhibit at Artists Space, 38 Greene Street, through Jan. 7.
HOLLY BRUBACH


Speakerphone Solutions
To the Editor:
It is unfortunate that "Some Reverberations from a Speakerphone" (The Executive Life, Oct. 16) suggests that the technology is as primitive as the manners of some of its users.
For people at either end of the conversation to be able to speak at the same time, one need only have bought a "full-duplex" conference telephone.
There are good ones available at prices ranging down from $1,000 to $150, rather than up from $10,000 to $30,000, as the article suggests.
The "rainbarrel effect" is an unrelated problem that can generally be overcome at no cost.
It occurs because a speaker is too far from the microphone.
A good rule of thumb is that a user should be close enough to touch a speakerphone with an outstretched arm.
These days, there is no need at all to experience a speakerphone as an "odious contraption." It may be harder to fix its users.
MARTIN C. J. ELTON  Manhattan, Oct. 16  The writer is a professor of communication at New York University.


Poem Hits the Charts
Wyn Cooper, an English professor at Marlboro College in Marlboro, Vt., is a very lucky poet.
He wrote a poem called "Fun," which the singer-songwriter Sheryl Crow recorded as "All I Wanna Do." The song reached No. 2 on the Billboard Hot 100.
Q: Is the song true to the poem?


Streetscapes/75 Murray Street; Bought for Its Site, the Rundown Loft Is a Gem
BEGINNER'S luck?
George and Christiane Aprile buy a rundown loft in Manhattan to be near their son's school and discover it is one of the city's most important cast-iron buildings.
Things have not gone as scheduled since they started planning to move three years ago: Moving in is months away and their son is now a junior at nearby Stuyvesant High School.
But 75 Murray Street is full of surprises.
In 1991, when their son Matthew applied to Stuyvesant, the Apriles got the idea of selling their house in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn and moving near his intended school.
They weren't looking for anything special, just something west of City Hall.
In the spring of 1992, when their son passed the admissions test, they settled on an old five-story building "with no windows, no water, no electricity -- just a facade," says Mr.
Aprile, who owns a courier service in Manhattan and who also went to Stuyvesant.


Legislators Bearish on Security Idea
A proposal to establish a private security force for the entire Upper East Side was dealt a serious blow last week as four of the five local legislators voiced opposition.
The legislators took their stand after watching a fierce, months-long debate on the issue among block associations and other civic groups and at community board meetings.
The plan would create a security district, similar to a business improvement district, that would raise up to $20 million a year in property taxes.
The district would hire as many as 500 guards for a 24-hour patrol from 59th to 96th Streets.


Karen Roschen, James Rodgers Jr.
Karen Alexandra Roschen, a daughter of Susan B. Roschen of New York and William E. Roschen Jr. of North Salem, N.Y., was married yesterday to James Hurd Rodgers Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rodgers of Earlysville, Va.
Msgr.
George Bardes performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Rodgers, 31, graduated from Denison University.
She is an account executive at the Lee Jofa Corporation in New York, a decorative fabric company of which her father is the president.
Her mother is a real estate broker at Douglas Elliman-Gibbons &amp; Ives in New York and is the chairwoman of the New York Downtown Hospital.


Oct.23-29: Elusive Peace; Things Are Looking Up For Bosnia's Muslims, on the Battlefield and at the U.N.
Even as Bosnian Muslim forces were exulting in a major success on the battlefield -- they drove Bosnian Serb troops back from their siege of an important northwestern city -- the Clinton Administration last week sought to give them another victory on the diplomatic front.
It introduced a resolution at the United Nations that could exempt Bosnia's Muslim-led Government from the arms embargo applied to the former Yugoslavia after it broke into warring pieces.
The two developments give the Bosnian Serbs compelling new reasons to accept a peace deal that has already been accepted by the Muslims.
But whether they will bow to the pressure is far from clear.
Bihac, the city whose siege the Muslims broke, is only one front in Bosnia, and the lifting of the embargo against the Bosnian Government would not take place until six months from now.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
WILD WEST HISTORY  THIS BLOODY DEED  The Magruder Incident.
By Ladd Hamilton.
Washington State University, paper, $18.95.


Black Clergy, Slurred in '93, Preach Voting in New Jersey
From his pulpit at St.
Matthew African Methodist Episcopal Church this Sunday and next, the Rev.
Reginald T. Jackson intends to preach politics.
To prepare for his sermons, Mr.
Jackson has spent the last week consulting not the Scriptures, but a four-inch-thick file of yellowed newspaper clippings reporting the firestorm set off by Edward J. Rollins Jr., the Republican consultant to Christine Todd Whitman in the 1993 gubernatorial race.
It was nearly a year ago when Mr.
Rollins stunned a roomful of reporters by mentioning that he had paid bribes -- walking-around money, he called it -- to black ministers so they would withhold endorsements from their traditional Democratic allies.


BEST SELLERS: October 30, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work in their small Maine town.
2
3
4
TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching Hour" and "Lasher."
3
2
9
DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory and economy.
4
4
35
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
5
6
19
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
6
1
LORD OF CHAOS, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $25.95.) The sixth volume of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.
7
5
6
NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers and killers.
8
7
7
THE BODY FARM, by Patricia Cornwell. (Scribners, $23.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates the kidnapping and murder of a small North Carolina girl.
9
8
4
WILD HORSES, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) A film maker pursues the secret confided to him by a dying racing expert.
10
9
116
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
11
10
14
THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's casual visit to a small town changes the lives of many of its inhabitants, as well as her own.
12
1
STAR TREK FEDERATION, by Judith and Garfield Reeves-Stevens. (Pocket, $22.) Captain Kirk and Captain Picard must both carry out vital missions.
13
1
SPENCERVILLE, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $23.95.) A cold war veteran returns to his Ohio hometown and rescues an old flame from her sadistic husband.
14
14
6
BROTHERS AND SISTERS, by Bebe Moore Campbell. (Putnam, $22.95.) The loyalties of a black woman are tested by colleagues' behavior in a Los Angeles bank.
15
15
9
A SON OF THE CIRCUS, by John Irving. (Random House, $25.) Returning to his native India, a Canadian physician encounters a murderer he once knew.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
3
4
DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."
2
1
7
BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.) The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the present.
3
2
5
JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.
4
4
3
THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and the efforts to keep it from spreading.
5
6
3
DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the country singer.
6
5
8
COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up comedian.
7
9
45
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
8
7
6
BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An illustrated history of the game.
9
11
3
NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World War II.
10
10
34
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
11
1
ALL THE TROUBLE IN THE WORLD, by P.J.
O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.) A humorist considers the problems of overpopulation, famine, ecological disaster, ethnic hatred, plague and poverty.
12
16
3
RUNNING FROM SAFETY, by Richard Bach. (Morrow, $23.) A middle-aged man's reflections on what he has learned from life.
13
8
5
ALL'S FAIR, by Mary Matalin and James Carville with Peter Knobler. (Random House and Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The 1992 Presidential campaign through the eyes of romantically involved consultants.
14
12
14
MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS, by Hope Edelman. (Addison-Wesley, $23.) The experiences of women after the deaths of their mothers.
15
14
4
THE LAST BUS TO ALBUQUERQUE, by Lewis Grizzard.
Edited by Gerrie Ferris. (Longstreet, $20.) A collection of essays by the late syndicated humorist.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
75
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
2
27
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
3
3
5
MAGIC EYE III, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
4
4
3
REAL MOMENTS, by Barbara De Angelis. (Delacorte, $21.95.) Ways to cope with life's problems.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 15, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) AND THE STARS WERE SHINING, by John Ashbery. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $18.) Mr.
Ashbery's 16th poetry collection offers 58 shining new lyrics, supple, skeptical, conscious of mortality but never oppressed by gloom.
DICTATORSHIP OF VIRTUE: Multiculturalism and the Battle for America's Future, by Richard Bernstein. (Knopf, $25.) The author, a cultural correspondent for The New York Times, has written a study of cultural panic, in which demands for diversity produce uniformity and incorrect speech is summarily punished.
THE FOLLOWING STORY, by Cees Nooteboom. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace, $14.95.) An insignificant man who has experienced transformation by imagination awaits his turn at death in this "Eurofable" by a Dutch novelist.
HINGE &amp; SIGN: Poems, 1968-1993, by Heather McHugh. (Wesleyan University/University Press of New England, cloth, $35; paper, $14.95.) A retrospective gathering of old and new work by a poet who is our laureate of physical love, whose poems about sex are poems of poetic vocation.
IN THE LAKE OF THE WOODS, by Tim O'Brien. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) This grim, telling novel deals with the incapacity to register reality of a politician whose disappearance from the record of the My Lai massacre precedes his vanishing from the earth.
MY GOLDEN TRADES, by Ivan Klima. (Scribners, $22.) Stories placed in Czechoslovakia during the decay of Communist rule; the hero-narrator, an unpolitical man of many occupations (the "trades" of the title), has a keen sense of the satisfactions of everyday life.
NATURALIST, by Edward O. Wilson. (Shearwater/Island Press, $24.95.) A memoir by a distinguished biologist who has never lost his boyhood enchantment with nature, though he has suffered abuse for his sociobiological synthesis.
TAFT, by Ann Patchett. (Richard Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) This generous novel concerns abandonment, dislocation and the recovery of community in a Memphis bar whose owner is a surrogate parent to two displaced teen-agers.
VOYAGE TO THE GREAT ATTRACTOR: Exploring Intergalactic Space, by Alan Dressler. (Knopf, $25.) How seven astronomers (of whom Mr. Dressler was one) made a vexing discovery; more important, an inside story, replete with character and personality, that reads like a novel about the cosmology business in our time.
WHO WILL RUN THE FROG HOSPITAL? by Lorrie Moore. (Knopf, $20.) A sad, witty, disillusioned fairy tale whose heroine (who is pointedly the same age as the author, born in 1957) recalls the illusion of limitless possibility she used to feel.
WINCHELL: Gossip, Power and the Culture of Celebrity, by Neal Gabler. (Knopf, $30.) The life of Walter Winchell, inventor of the modern gossip column, who reached two-thirds of adult Americans in the 1940's and left behind him a national habit of confusing notoriety with news.


Happy Halloween
For Halloween, a few notes, some scary:
*Of 76 reports (1958-1984) in major newspapers of poisoned Halloween candy, almost all were unverified, or hoaxes.
This from Terry Chan, an economist at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory who contributes to the Internet discussion group called alt.folklore.urban.


Oct.23-29: The Right to Die; Did Father Know Best, Or Was It Manslaughter?
Three years ago William F. Meyer 3d helped his terminally ill 88-year-old father commit suicide at the older man's house in West Hartford, Conn.
He helped shroud his head in a plastic bag held in place by rubber bands.
He even restrained his father's arms to keep him from reflexively removing the bag, as his father had done in an earlier attempt.
After reading a letter the older Mr.
Meyer left, the police labeled his death a suicide.
This summer, though, they charged the younger Mr.
Meyer with second-degree manslaughter.


Katherine Koo, H. O. Weissman
Katherine Chi-Lien Koo, the daughter of Gertrude Y. Renaud of New York and Teh-Chang Koo of Kissimmee, Fla., is to be married today to Howard Owen Weissman, the son of Dorothy and Paul Weissman of Woodbridge, N.J.
The Rev.
Gary M. Gallun is to perform the Unitarian ceremony at the Glenview Mansion in Rockville, Md.
Mrs.
Weissman is the manager of advertising at the Federal National Mortgage Association in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, from which she also received an M.B.A. degree.
Her father retired as the president of Dirkson Inc., a home furnishings manufacturer in Taipei, Taiwan.


Correction
An article in New Jersey editions last Sunday about developers entering the South Jersey market misstated the number of bedrooms planned for houses at the Short Hills development in Cherry Hill.
They are to have four or five bedrooms, not two or three.


Today's Art Merges Object and Criticism; Back to the Future
To the Editor:
Re "The Jabberwocky of Art Criticism" (Week in Review, Oct. 23):


Kerry S. Allison, Kellogg Gaines
Kerry Simmons Allison, a daughter of Col. and Mrs.
Paul J. Allison of San Antonio, was married yesterday at St.
Michael's of the Valley Episcopal Church in Rector, Pa., to Kellogg Chilton Gaines, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ludwell Ebersole Gaines Jr. of Washington.
The Rev.
James B. Simons performed the ceremony, in which the bridegroom's aunt, the Rev.
Mary Moore Gaines, took part.
Mrs.
Gaines, 31, is a partner in Teeman, Allison, Perley, an executive search firm in New York.
She graduated from the University of Texas.
Mr.
Gaines, 31, is a vice president at Citicorp Securities in New York.
He graduated from Boston University.


Tulips and Crocus for New Year's Eve?
WITH memories of last winter's violence lingering, one way to make this winter easier on the soul is to force a few spring bulbs into bloom.
This is easy to do, but it does take a bit of planning, as a few weeks of cold storage are required before even a shoot will appear.
Forcing means exactly what it says.
Hardy spring bulbs are potted up and made to bloom indoors well ahead of their alloted season.
Also, they can be planted in the garden in spring to recover, though they may not bloom again outdoors for a year or two.


Feinstein Attacking Opponent for Illegal Nanny
Representative Michael Huffington struggled today with still another accusation that he had aided and abetted illegal immigration, and Senator Dianne Feinstein, his opponent in the Senate election, rushed to take advantage of his mounting political adversity.
In the newest twist to his immigration problems, Mr.
Huffington, a Republican, acknowledged transporting an undocumented family nanny to Washington in April 1993.
That was less than two months after he co-sponsored a House bill calling for a five-year jail sentence for any employer who transported an illegal immigrant for work purposes.


The Direct Approach
To the Editor:
Andy Meisler might have mentioned in his article "A Familiar Name, but I Can't Place the Face"  [ Oct. 16 ]  that some television series have confronted the issue of cast replacements more directly.


In the Region/Westchester; Coffee Bars Bringing New Life to Downtown Areas
SEVERAL downtown areas in the county have been jolted out of their somnolence lately by the opening of coffee bars, those bistro-like establishments that serve espresso, cappuccino and other specialty coffees.
A fairly new phenomenon in Westchester, the bars have been enlivening downtown streets, especially during evening hours, when previously there had been little activity.
On any given night in the village of Bronxville, for instance, young people in trendy clothes can be seen trooping down Pondfield Road on their way to Slave to the Grind, a 16-month-old coffee bar.


Colleen M. Phillips, James J. Panzini
Colleen Mary Phillips, a daughter of John and Sheila Phillips of Spring Lake, N.J., was married there yesterday to James Jude Panzini, the son of Giocchino and Kathleen Panzini of South Toms River, N.J.
The Rev.
Thomas Donato officiated at St.
Catharine's Roman Catholic Church.
Ms.
Phillips, 29, and her husband, 30, are lawyers, she at the Prudential Property and Casualty Company in Morganville, N.J., and he at the law office of Eugene Tazzetto in Parsippany, N.J.
She graduated from Brown University, and he is a graduate of the University of Pennsylvania.
They received their law degrees from Seton Hall University.


Business Diary: October 23-28
THE ECONOMY Farewell, and Hello Again, to Sub-8% Interest Rates  Mind you, these arbitrary barriers mean nothing.
Yet it's hard to resist seeing this as a sort of official end to the Great '93-94 Interest-Rate Sale.
On Monday, in a continuing reaction to inflation that never actually appears, the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond closed above 8 percent for the first time since April 1992, hitting 8.06 on Wednesday.
One reason cited this time was apprehension about data due on Friday.
Yet when the reports came, they showed that while the economy had grown surprisingly fast over the summer quarter -- a 3.4 percent pace -- inflation was still not a danger.
This so cheered the markets that the Dow industrials soared 55 points, and Treasury yields dipped back below that magic number, to 7.95.
And Democrats, fearing a trouncing at the polls, were quick to remind voters that all this good stuff was happening on their watch.


Through This Portal, It's a Whole Other Scene
Wes Craven's New Nightmare  Heather Langenkamp, Miko Hughes, Robert Englund Directed by Wes Craven R 112 minutes


Race for Comptroller: McCall Runs on His Records
CANDIDATE H. Carl McCall  PRODUCER Axelrod and Associates, Chicago and Washington


No Headline
"What politicians offer blacks is no good to us. It's like the Janet Jackson song, 'What Have You Done For Me Lately?"' WILLIE A. PARHAM, a black maintenance worker from Richmond, Va.  [ 22:1. ]


DARING RESEARCH OR 'SOCIAL SCIENCE PORNOGRAPHY'?
Jason DeParle addresses Charles Murray's tasting of great wines as if it were some secret, elitist rite.
I have not yet read the Herrnstein-Murray book, although I'm encouraged to do so.
It seems an antidote to the numbing pap that has been served up.
I am unpersuaded that Murray is altogether right, but it would not be surprising if he were.
After all, we accept the fact that white men can't jump.
CHARLES WOHLSTETTER New York


Handful of Cubans in Camps Seek to Go Home
A Federal judge who halted a plane taking 23 Cuban refugees back to Cuba on Monday has now been asked by 21 of those detainees for permission to depart.
The 21 who sent a letter to Judge C. Clyde Atkins of District Court in Miami on Thursday were on a flight scheduled to leave for Havana from the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay, when the judge held up the plane in response to a suit by a group of Cuban-American lawyers who are seeking to free all 32,000 Cubans in refugee camps in Panama and at Guantanamo.


Should the Way Back From the Mommy Track Be Smoother?
"Back From the Mommy Track" (Oct.9), Deborah L. Jacobs's look at professional women whose careers were set back because they left work to care for their children, drew an unusually large response from readers.
Following is a sample of those letters: To the Editor:
"Back From the Mommy Track" depicts the struggle of working women, who were once -- but are no longer -- in the minority.
Therefore, the corporate cultures they struggle in are on the verge of change.


Giuliani Stops At 5 Cities, Saying Pataki Made a Deal
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani carried his cross-party endorsement of Mario M. Cuomo upstate today, saying the Governor offered a better hope not only for New York City, but also for all the cities and counties in the state.
In a swing of stops with Democratic mayors and other elected officials at airports near Buffalo, Syracuse, Rochester, Utica and Albany, Mr.
Giuliani attacked a fellow Republican, State Senator George E. Pataki, as often as he praised Mr.
Cuomo.


DARING RESEARCH OR 'SOCIAL SCIENCE PORNOGRAPHY'?
Your bias is showing.
"The Most Dangerous Conservative"?
Your cover line (for which there should, no doubt, be a politically correct word like "conservatist") implies that conservatives are dangerous per se.


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball League DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Waived Daimon Sweet and Greg Sutton, guards.
DENVER NUGGETS -- Waived Abdul Fox and Ryan Yoder, guards.
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Signed Clifford Rozier, forward, to a four-year contract.
UTAH JAZZ -- Signed Antoine Carr, forward.


Health Care, Cuba's Pride, Falls on Hard Times
At the big, modern hospital on one end of this provincial city, the medical staff commands the sort of technology that most poor countries can only dream about.
There are CAT scans for the radiologists, ultrasound machines for the obstetricians, stacks of high-tech monitors in the suites for intensive care.
In recent months, though, the doctors here have had to learn techniques they never heard about in medical school.
Short on drugs, they have turned to acupuncture to anesthetize some patients.
Lacking sutures, they have begun sewing up some wounds with hemp.


Collecting Burlap
Alvin Friedrich, a retired Oregon mill operator, is preserving the past, in the form of a thousand or so old burlap feed and flour sacks, neatly arranged on tall wooden shelves.
"I guess they're historic documents," says Friedrich, whose burlap sack collection may be the world's largest.
"They don't make them like this anymore." Since the early 70's, nearly all agricultural sacks have been made out of cheaper polyethylene and polypropylene bags.
"Those new sacks," Friedrich laments, "they're just slippery."


One License After Another
Perhaps you have decided that it is high time you opened a bingo parlor.
You've got the boards, you've ferreted out those little chips, you've even lined up an expert caller.
That's fine, but don't think you can simply set up shop in a church basement and start calling out numbers.
It takes a license to have official bingo games.


The Executive Computer; Clear the Desk: Turn Paper Documents to Computer Files
FOR anyone whose personal computer resides on a desk buried in documents, memos and other correspondence, the promise of the paperless office can seem a cruel hoax.
But lately there is hope.
New, cheaper desktop scanners, along with vastly improved optical-character-recognition software, make it more feasible to convert paper-and-ink documents into files that can be read, edited and stored on a computer.


Today's Art Merges Object and Criticism
To the Editor:
"The Jabberwocky of Art Criticism" (The Week in Review, Oct. 23) makes a few good points but misses the main thrust of contemporary art criticism, or rather what has been revealed again in the last few decades about what art is.


Iraq Has M.I.A.'s Too
To the Editor:
For more than 20 years the United States held accounting for its missing in action in the Vietnam War as a condition for resuming business in Vietnam -- as long as it took for us to acknowledge that the Vietnamese also lacked news of their M.I.A.'s.


Scholarships for the Genuinely Special
WHEN a Federal appeals court ruled last week that the University of Maryland could no longer maintain a scholarship program limited to black students, it raised the question of how far the courts might go in doing away with awards for narrowly defined groups.
What now, for example, for the needy left-handed folks at a small college in Pennsylvania?
There really is a scholarship for them, and for other categories you probably never thought about.
This sort of insult to meritocracy is, after all, a college tradition.


Happy Birthday, Mr. President
To the Editor:
Maureen Dowd's assertion that my book "The Other Mrs. Kennedy" (Oct. 9) is a "recycling" of "old stories" from Ethel Kennedy's private life is dead wrong.
While Washington insiders like Ms.
Dowd had heard "Ethel stories" at cocktail parties over the years, and the press had touched on some incidents, the general public was in the dark about most aspects of her life until now.


Classic Roots
LA MIRABELLE * (212) 496-0458; 333 West 86th Street; $$; all major credit cards
This comforting French bistro is charming in a low-key manner with its frosted glass wall at the entrance, icicle chandeliers, lace curtains and pink walls.
The classically rooted menu features a small roster of bistro fare as well as specials.
For starters, one might begin with French onion soup gratineed ; coquilles St Jacques, or scallops in a rich and well-seasoned Mornay sauce.
Among entrees are veal medallions with a mustard cream sauce and roast duckling in a plum sauce. (Review: 3/31/89; revisited: 10/23/94)


Vox Pop Video: A Public Access TV Guide
FORGET diamonds.
When it comes to public-access television, Fast Forward is a girl's best friend.
I admit I went a little overboard.
In my zeal to immerse myself in the First Amendment, to revel in the joy and the right of my fellow New Yorkers to instruct me and perchance, entertain, I taped 30 hours of programming.
I had the cozy notion that instead of working for a living, I would snuggle up to my comforter and watch TV, a re-enactment of my childhood ploy at playing hooky, when "Mommy, I don't feel good," translated into a full day of "I Love Lucy" and "Bewitched."


Laurie Hinzman and Tommy White
FRIENDS describe Tommy Lee White, 30, as a person with idiosyncratic tastes in everything from music (his favorite CD is "If I Were a Carpenter," a compilation of alternative bands playing Carpenters' songs ) to clothing.
While a student at Mississippi State University, he once arrived at a "Reincarnation, Come as You Were" party dressed as Fred Flintstone.
After he moved to New York, where he is an architect at the Johnson/Wanzenberg design firm, he rarely hung out in nightclubs or hip boites in Greenwich Village.
Instead, he was the sort of guy who would take a date on a walk across the Brooklyn Bridge and ask, "So, how's your knowledge of the skyline?"


Teaching the Arts for 30 Years
Exhibition and dinner, New York Studio School, Oct. 20.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 30, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
7
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.
2
6
THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A revised edition of a 1985 novel about a young girl's mysterious disappearance.
3
5
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a man and a woman and for her first lover.
4
24
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
5
20
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
6
6
PEARL IN THE MIST, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) The ordeals of a girl beset by a hostile stepmother and a troubled twin sister.
7
1
A HOLIDAY OF LOVE, by Judith McNaught, Jude Deveraux, Arnette Lamb and Jill Barnett. (Pocket, $5.99.) Four romantic stories.
8
18
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
9
6
CHAMPIONS OF THE FORCE, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
10
15
FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of American history.
11
11
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Love and hope -- plus recipes -- on a Mexican ranch.
12*
5
HIDDEN FIRES, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $5.99.) A 1982 novel about a Texas preacher's daughter who is tricked into marriage.
13
9
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
14*
1
HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B.
Griffin. (Jove, $6.50.) Three American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German activities in 1942.
15
2
THE FIRES OF HEAVEN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $6.99.) The fifth volume of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
6
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
7
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The memoirs of the radio personality.
3
5
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters reflect on their lives.
4
42
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
5
9
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) Monotheism over 4,000 years.
6*
573
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
7
1
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
8
1
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.
9*
1
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.
10
23
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
11
4
FIVE PATIENTS, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A 1970 book about the practice of medicine and the ways of hospitals.
12*
5
DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A celebration of the Great Plains.
13*
89
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) A memoir.
14*
1
JOHN CHANCELLOR MAKES ME CRY, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) Essays on life by an Atlanta novelist.
15
24
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A memoir of mental illness.
16*
42
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
17*
4
LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Fawcett, $6.99.) The country singer's memoirs.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
4
HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
189
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
10
GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.) The witticisms of a fictional slow-witted wanderer through history.
4
1
THE OLD FARMER'S ALMANAC 1995. (Yankee Publishing, $3.95.) The 203d annual edition of a collection of facts and counsel.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 15, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Now, It's the Rick Scott Health Plan
THE Clinton health plan flopped.
All the alternatives that 435 Representatives and 100 Senators could concoct went nowhere.
Now, it's time for the Scott plan.


A Warning on Souvenirs
Souvenir shopping in the Caribbean is not necessarily the guilt-free pleasure it seems.
A new brochure from the World Wildlife Fund warns that some wildlife souvenirs from the region may be made from endangered species.
"Some exotic mementos actually push endangered species closer to extinction," a spokeswoman for the organization said.
Her advice: grill the vendor before a purchase to determine the product's origin.
If the seller seems uninformed, don't buy.
Heading the organization's list of items to think twice about are sea turtle products (most are from the endangered hawksbill turtle); black coral (for some species, an inch of growth can take decades), and wild birds (many parrot species are threatened).


THIS IS YOUR LIFE
In his excoriation of "docudrama," Max Frankel engages in some fictionalization of his own (Word &amp; Image: "This Is Your Life," Oct. 9).
His discussion of "Quiz Show" contains assertions or implications of fact in order to support his thesis that the movie is an inaccurate representation of historical reality.
The problem is that these statements are not true.
Moreover, it is clear that there has been no independent effort to verify them.
As for "Quiz Show," briefly:
Yes, Herbert Stempel was obsessive in the pursuit of Charles Van Doren and the Congressional investigator.


Libraries Aid New Authors By Holding Onto Books
To the Editor:
With reference to the Oct. 23 article, "Author, Author: Neither Starving Nor Star," I would like to point out that public libraries make two important contributions to new novelists.
To begin with, they buy books, making the publication of novels by little-known authors possible.
Also, they keep these authors' books on their shelves -- unlike most bookstores, which return slow-selling books to publishers rather quickly.
That means potential readers who hear about a new book through reviews or word-of-mouth will be able to find the book -- at the library.


Let's Play Two: Expansion and Creation
Baseball will have a doubleheader Tuesday.
That's not Major League Baseball.
Major League Baseball, which hasn't played a real game since Aug. 11, will play only one of the games.
That's the one in Chicago.
The other game, baseball with a small "b," is scheduled for New York.
Against the backdrop of what on that day will be an 82-day-old strike in Major League Baseball, a committee of some of the employers of the striking players will listen in Chicago to presentations from four groups seeking expansion franchises for three areas that aren't in the major leagues.


Should UConn Football Go Big Time?
IN the classic Marx brothers movie "Horse Feathers," Groucho Marx as Professor Wagstaff, the new president of Huxley College, faces with a dilemma.
Professor Wagstaff wants to field a football team to draw attention to the school.
But that would necessitate the building of a stadium.
When told by the trustees that the school can't afford both a stadium and a college, Wagstaff replies, "Well, then let's tear down the college."
No one has suggested that the University of Connecticut, in its zeal to upgrade its football team to major-power status, take a similar tack.
But at least some members of the UConn faculty think that the proposed upgrade, if implemented, could cause a university already hard-pressed for funds even more serious financial problems.


Rockets Get No Respect, but They're the Best
Western Conference contenders fall into two disparate categories.
Those with dominating centers and questionable supporting casts, and those with superior casts except for their lack of a center.
Put Denver's shot-blocking Dikembe Mutombo with Seattle, Phoenix and Golden State, perhaps even Utah, and there really wouldn't be much left to discuss.
If Houston had cactus and low humidity, maybe Danny Manning would have taken $1 million to help Hakeem Olajuwon win his second title, instead of signing on to help Charles Barkley get his first.


Somebody Had to Win: It's Holy Cross Over Fordham
Holy Cross 30, Fordham 21
Two teams, zero victories. Something had to give.


DARING RESEARCH OR 'SOCIAL SCIENCE PORNOGRAPHY'?
The opening of Jason DeParle's article on my husband, Charles Murray, is technically truthful: it features his subject sipping Champagne and commenting on the condition of the poor from 30,000 feet up.
Yet, if your writer had been less bent on caricature, how different that interview would have looked.
I was there when the travel arrangements were made.
It was during a particularly crowded week.
Charles had upgraded his Colorado flight with frequent-flier miles; he upgraded DeParle's ticket with miles from his own account so that your writer could have several hours to interview him in peace.
I was not on the plane, so I don't know whether DeParle himself saw fit to decline the Champagne, or the glass of red.
I do know that he transformed a nice and helpful guy into a careless plutocrat.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SHORT STORIES  KNEELING ON RICE  By Elizabeth Denton.
University of Missouri, paper, $14.95.


Stephanie Weiner, L. H. Geismar
Stephanie Fay Weiner, the daughter of Lois M. Weiner of DeWitt, N.Y., and Dr.
Irwin M. Weiner of New York, was married last evening to Lawrence Hugo Geismar, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Geismar, also of New York.
Rabbi J. Rolando Matalon performed the ceremony at the Palm House in the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The bride, 32, graduated from Smith College.
She is an equity trader at Neuberger &amp; Berman, an investment management firm in New York.
Her father is the dean of the College of Medicine at the State University Health Science Center in Brooklyn.


Through This Portal, It's a Whole Other Scene
Stargate Kurt Russell, James Spader, Jaye Davidson Directed by Roland Emmerich PG-13 125 minutes


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
FLUSHING For Lovers (and for Others), A Weekend of Gershwin
The Marcus Roberts Trio, a hot young jazz group, will be performing selections from their latest recording, "Gershwin for Lovers," at the Colden Center for the Arts at Queens College on Friday.
And again on Saturday, at Lehman College in the Bronx.


Word for Word/Epitaphs; Reflections for Halloween: Messages From the Grave, if Not Beyond It
TOMORROW being Halloween, people of a certain age will dress up as ghosts and goblins and other beings from the spirit world (wherever that is) while they collect apples and candy from friendly neighbors.
Some suburban lawns are decorated with mock tombstones.
The sight of real tombstones is solemn and poignant -- seldom festive.
We may know in our hearts that the people who sleep beneath them were like us, in many ways, but who wants to reflect for long on the forever lying just down the road?


Debunking the Derivatives Bogyman
To the Editor:
"Derivatives as the Fall Guy: Excuses, Excuses" (Oct. 2) was refreshing after months of commentary that threatened some vague and ill-defined financial apocalypse caused by derivatives.
It was, in fact, these panicked cries for drastic regulation that prompted the Economist Intelligence Unit, research arm of the Economist Group, to study how companies worldwide are handling the explosion of complex financial instruments.


City Aid, Country Fun, Music and Art
Encouraging a settlement house, summer camps, an opera company and a museum.


Border Stories
LETTERS FROM THE HORSE LATITUDES Short Fiction.
By C. W. Smith. 205 pp.
Fort Worth: Texas Christian University Press. $19.95.


Aimee Ventura and Theodore Angelus
Aimee Sinclair Ventura, the daughter of Aileen and Jules Ventura of Port Washington, L.I., was married last evening to Theodore Louis Angelus, a son of Nancy Connor of Fairfield, Conn., and Theodore Angelus of New York.
Rabbi Richard Chapin officiated at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Mrs.
Angelus, 30, is a vice president of CS First Boston, the investment bank, in New York.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
Her father is the president of Durlacher &amp; Company, a women's accessories manufacturer in New York.
Her mother is a kitchen and bath designer in New York.


The Head Of Harrods Has Other Heads Fall
Mohamed Al Fayed is the owner of Harrods, one of the great British institutions.
The Egyptian-born businessman has called Britain home for three decades, and he has donated hundreds of thousands of dollars to the Conservative Party.
From Mr.
Al Fayed's perspective the only reward for his zeal was to be branded a liar by the British Government, which issued a report in 1990 saying that he and his brother Ali had "dishonestly misrepresented" their backgrounds and wealth during a takeover battle for Harrods in the mid-1980's.
He fought to have the report withdrawn or declared improper by the courts, but lost his last appeal, to the European Court of Justice, in September.


The Cone Sisters: Shoppers or Connoisseurs?
FOR ANYONE INTERESTED IN experiencing the punch and variety of avant-garde European art, the city of Baltimore was surely not the place to be during the first decades of this century.
Or was it?
In 1905, a city native, Etta Cone, went with her friend Gertrude Stein -- another Baltimorean, by adoption -- to Picasso's Paris studio and, on impulse, bought an etching.
It was the first purchase of what turned out to be a vast, decades-long shopping spree.
By the time Etta bought her last Picasso 44 years later, she and her older sister, Claribel, had filled their Baltimore apartment with some 3,000 art objects, among which were now-legendary masterpieces of 20th-century art, including Matisse's "Blue Nude" (1907), Gauguin's "Woman With a Mango" (1892) and Cezanne's drop-dead "Mont Sainte-Victoire Seen From the Bibemus Quarry" (circa 1897).


Mortgage Outreach Efforts
EVERY now and then the mortgage lending community rolls out the impressive dollar amounts it intends to set aside to help inner-city, immigrant and minority families buy homes.
Until recently, however, these families had good reason to be cynical.
Despite the fanfare, they were still being asked to demonstrate the kind of employment and borrowing history that bore little resemblance to the way many really lived their lives.


Explosive Vacation
Ahh!
A winter holiday in the Bahamas.
Palm Trees.
Pina coladas.
And all the fireworks you can touch a match to.
John Shepard, a pyrotechnics enthusiast, feared his "shoot your own" tours might be too offbeat.
But he received 36 inquiries within a day of placing an ad in the hobbyist publication American Fireworks News. (Also advertised: fireworks posters, videos, old firecracker labels, courses and consultation.)
Three five-day-four-night pyro tours are scheduled.
There'll be complimentary cocktail parties and pig roasts, but it's B.Y.O.F. -- Buy Your Own Firecrackers.
Fireworks can be shipped in advance or bought in the Bahamas.


Couple of the Moment in New York Theater
SITTING ACROSS FROM each other at a living room coffee table in their comfortable, creaky-floored walk-up in the Chelsea section of Manhattan, Jon Robin Baitz and Joe Mantello, playwright and actor-director, are telling a story to illustrate how their personal relationship colors their work.
The story has to do with a play Mr.
Baitz agreed to write for an evening of one-acts to benefit Amnesty International.
Mr.
Mantello would direct, but as the deadline approached, Mr.
Baitz hadn't written anything.
Moreover, as someone who grew up witnessing the cruelty of South African apartheid, he became rankled by the very notion of such a benefit and began waxing holy.


Canadian Family's Feud
THEIR public feud has been conducted with all the decorum of an adolescent food fight, but the scuffling siblings are a couple of sexagenarians who together founded one of Canada's most successful businesses.
The brothers McCain -- Harrison, 66, and Wallace, 64 -- have quarreled for three years now over who will succeed them at the helm of McCain Foods Ltd., a $2.3 billion-a-year enterprise.
Courts have tried to settle the dispute and failed.
And their wrangling has occasionally disrupted the business, including embarrassing the big Canadian food processor in dealings with one of its biggest customers, McDonald's, the fast-food giant.


The Examined Guy
INHERITANCE OF HORSES By James Kilgo. 145 pp.
Athens: The University of Georgia Press. $19.95.


Scholarships for the Genuinely Special
WHEN a Federal appeals court ruled last week that the University of Maryland could no longer maintain a scholarship program limited to black students, it raised the question of how far the courts might go in doing away with awards for narrowly defined groups.
What now, for example, for the needy left-handed folks at a small college in Pennsylvania?
There really is a scholarship for them, and for other categories you probably never thought about.
This sort of insult to meritocracy is, after all, a college tradition.


Eagles and (No) Defense Sends Cadets Into Full Retreat
Army, whose last five games had been decided by a total of 13 points -- the last two of them 1-point victories -- made it close for one quarter today against Boston College.
After that, the game was never in doubt as the heavily favored Eagles overwhelmed the Cadets, 30-3, before a near-capacity crowd of 39,304 at Michie Stadium.
Apart from a 78-yard drive that ended with an 18-yard field goal by Kurt Heiss to tie the score at 3-3 in the first quarter, Army (3-5) could not move the ball against a Boston College team that came into the game ranked 12th in the nation in overall defense.


The President's Brain is Missing
FATHER'S DAY By John Calvin Batchelor. 528 pp. New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $23.


A Show Brings On A Severe Case Of Period Envy
ARCHITECTURE GETS A somewhat desiccated treatment in "The Italian Metamorphosis, 1943-68," the Guggenheim Museum's epic survey of postwar Italian culture.
Rows of somber little black-and-white photographs, lined up on racks that look like stylized gutters, scarcely throb with the poetry that architects like Carlo Scarpa, Pier Luigi Nervi, Gio Ponti and Franco Albini brought to modern architecture at midcentury.
Still, the show (on view until Jan. 22) can bring on a serious case of period envy.
What is most enviable about the presentation is not the quality of individual buildings designed in the postwar decades.
It is the extent to which the period produced a sense of itself as a period: an era when architects believed that they were collectively shaping a time and place.
That faith, a cornerstone of the modern movement, has largely disappeared from architecture today.
Where architects once drew meaning from being part of something larger than themselves, many now derive it from the distance they can place between themselves and their contemporaries.
Certainly there has been no shortage of architectural movements since 1968; indeed, so many have come and gone that even the tireless chronicler Charles Jencks has grown weary of tracking them.
But these movements have tended, on the whole, to splinter architecture rather than unify it.


Where the Turtles Hang Out
LAST spring I hiked to a remote shore on the island of Culebra, down a milelong trail edged by thorny branches and lighted by fireflies, to be midwife to a reptile.
Situated 52 miles east of San Juan and 12 miles west of St.
Thomas, Culebra is a lovely, rather rustic part of the Puerto Rican commonwealth consisting of 7,000 acres (including surrounding cays) and 1,600 inhabitants.
Like Vieques, a sister island nine miles to the south, Culebra attracts sun worshippers from the continental United States in winter and vacationers from the "big island" of Puerto Rico in summer.
Its powdery beaches also lure several varieties of sea turtle, including the giant leatherback, the largest of all marine reptiles.
Between February and July, leatherback females, averaging 6 feet and weighing as much as 1,000 pounds, clamber onto Culebra's shores at night to deposit their eggs before returning to the water to undertake a long and (to humans) mysterious migration from the Caribbean Sea to colder waters.
Unlike other sea turtles, of which there are seven species in all according to the Center for Marine Conservation in Washington, leatherbacks venture into open ocean and frigid latitudes.
They dive more than 4,000 feet -- even deeper than whales -- to procure jellyfish, their major food source.
The carapace that gives them their name also sets them apart from greens, hawksbills, loggerheads, and ridleys, turtles whose carapace is made of bone.


Air Fares in Europe Dip a Bit as Rules Ease
FOR Americans, airline deregulation, bringing no-frill flights and lower ticket prices, if also a degree of turmoil, is by now old hat.
But in Europe, airlines were until recently under the tight control of governments that not only owned the national flag carriers, but also dictated where they should fly, how often and at what fare.


Oct.23-29; Oh, You Mean That Oil Spill . . .


Paid to Panic
When I went off to college, I never thought I would end up selling my body to pay my rent and buy my groceries, but that's what happened.
I'm not talking about the sex trade.
I'm talking about researchers who buy the use of your body to test new treatments for various disorders.
I discovered this form of employment when I was struggling through my junior year, trying not to ask my father for another loan.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Antonio Corso is a new breed of postmaster, determined to put the service back in the Postal Service.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 How the Odeon, downtown restaurant icon of the 80's and "relic" of the early 90's, became hot once again.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 15 "Gershwin for Lovers" in Flushing; the 19th century's bravest in Brooklyn.
MOVIE CLOCK 16 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 18 Affordable pleasures on the Upper West Side: rotisserie specialties at Amsterdam's; homey fare at Jerry's.
SOAPBOX 19 Conjuring the ghosts of old New York.
Plus, Photographer's Journal and a meditation on the meaning of "power."


Gunman Shoots at White House From Sidewalk
A 26-year-old Colorado man carrying a Chinese-made semi-automatic rifle sprayed the north face of the White House with a score or more of bullets today, piercing both a window and the mansion's remaining aura of invincibility, but injuring no one.
It was the second uncontested attack on the executive mansion in less than six weeks, and it immediately raised anew questions about the safety of a President living not just in the midst of a major city, but barely 50 yards from its six-lane main street.


Shooting Leaves a Man Dead and a Woman Hurt
A man was shot to death and a woman who was eight months pregnant was critically wounded yesterday in an East Harlem apartment that they shared, the police said.
The man, Domingo A. Gonzalez, 28, was shot once in the chest.
The woman, Veronica Palanco, 23, was shot once in the right leg and once in the stomach, which killed her unborn child, said Sgt.
Edward Caro, a Police Department spokesman.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  FINANCING HAITI'S GOVERNMENT  The United States and international financial agencies are trying to help Haiti put its Government back on a firm financial footing, and they are urging higher taxes on the rich.  1  CUBAN HEALTH CARE ERODING  The economic crisis in Cuba set off by the collapse of its Soviet allies has affected its once-model health care system, and with shortages of almost everything, the quality of care has fallen.  1


By the Way, There's No Taunting Either
The new rule changes, and new rule interpretations, involve more than a clampdown on the use of hands.
Here is a guide to all the revisions, with occasional comments from Rod Thorn, the N.B.A.'s vice president of operations.
1.
The 3-point line, which was 23 feet 9 inches at its farthest point, has been moved to 22 feet.


Barbara L. Barna, Steven L. Abel
Barbara Louise Barna, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Barna of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday at the Church Center for the United Nations, in Manhattan, to Steven Lloyd Abel, the son of Janet Abel of Kew Gardens, Queens, and Larry H. Abel of Manhattan.
The Rev.
Dale R. Lind, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony, in which Cantor Daniel Rous took part.
Mrs.
Abel is the manager of talent and program development at VH-1, the cable-television music network in New York.
She graduated from Scripps College.
Her father retired as a partner in KPMG Peat Marwick, an accounting firm, in New York.


Ms. Pisani and Mr. Kirchgaessner
Christine Marie Pisani, a vice president of I/B/E/S Inc., an equity-research concern, was married yesterday to Judge William Kirchgaessner, an administrative law judge at the United States Social Security Administration.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
David Stevens, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the City Midday Club in New York.
Ms.
Pisani, 45, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the College of Mount St.
Vincent and received an M.B.A. degree from Fordham University.
She is a daughter of Alfred F. Pisani of North Plainfield, N.J., and the late Virginia G. Pisani.


Kuwaiti Tank Unit Casts Leery Eye Toward Iraq
Capt.
Jassim Abdullah al-Bagri, a burly Kuwaiti tank commander, swept a callused hand across the sun-bleached desert one afternoon toward a pink-tinted hulk shimmering in the distant haze.
"You see that mountain?" he said. "That is Iraq."


Charles E. Stewart Jr., 78, Federal Judge for 22 Years
Charles E. Stewart Jr., who presided over the criminal trials of racketeers and shady Wall Street manipulators and a host of tangled civil cases during 22 years as a Federal judge in Manhattan, died on Friday at Vassar Brothers Hospital in Poughkeepsie.
He was 78 years old and lived in Pawling, N.Y.
Judge Stewart, who retired last July 1, had been in failing health for more than a year and suffered heart attacks last November and December.
He entered the hospital with phlebitis on Oct. 20 and died of heart failure, said his son, Charles E. Stewart 3d.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
IT'S HALLOWEEN DAY-O
Halloween, Caribbean style, will be celebrated today from 1 to 4 P.M. at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers with Nakeem, the weirdly costumed stilt dancer from St.
Thomas, V.I., and Kemo, his likewise stilted 8-year-old son, stalking visitors in the courtyard to the rhythms of a calypso band.
Children younger than 12 in costume and accompanied by an adult will be admitted free and are eligible for a prize for best or scariest costume in the costume parade at 3:15 P.M.
Workshops will focus on making imaginative Caribbean masks, beginning every half-hour from 1:30 to 3.


As Political Ads Slither Into Negativity, the Real Venom Is Not Found on TV
Dennis C. Vacco's television commercials describe his Democratic opponent for attorney general, Karen S. Burstein, merely as "ultra-liberal." But on the radio, his ads go further, dubbing her "the most liberal person ever to run for statewide office in New York."
Also running for office this year, according to their opponents' radio spots, are "New Jersey's No. 1 biggest spender in Congress," "the highest spender in the entire U.S. Senate," and "a member of the worst Congress in history."


Moynihan's At-Ease Race Is Still Costing $3 Million
By the unforgiving omens of this anti-incumbent year, Daniel Patrick Moynihan should be vulnerable.
Instead, New York's three-term Democratic senior Senator finds himself by far the most popular politician in the state, and his Republican challenger, Bernadette Castro, is struggling to come within 30 percentage points of his lead in the polls.
It is an old story for the professor-politician, who has made a career of confounding conventional wisdom and who is old-fashioned enough to have described himself in a debate with Ms.
Castro on Friday as "an Al Smith Democrat," in tribute to the legendary New York Governor whose name is not even a footnote in current political playbooks.


H.O.V. Lane Fulfills Goals In Peak Time
BOLSTERED by a barrage of free publicity and radio advertising, the campaign to increase use of the five-month-old high-occupancy-vehicle lane on the Long Island Expressway is meeting expectations, transportation officials and the police say.
The lane has proved popular with peak-hour riders, there have been few major enforcement problems, and the use of the lane, which cost $50 million to put in place, has helped ease congestion at some locations, the officials say.


BENEFITS
'Stomp' with the Big Brothers  TODAY -- The Big Brothers/Big Sisters of New York City will benefit from a 3 P.M. performance of "Stomp," a show by the percussion troupe Stomp, at the Orpheum Theater, 126 Second Avenue, near St.
Mark's Place.
An auction will be held, featuring a chance to appear in the Broadway cast of "Damn Yankees" for an evening, as well as vacation trips, jewelry and other items.
Tickets, $40, at the door.
Information: (212) 686-2042.
Halloween With Rick Moranis  TODAY -- The actor Rick Moranis will entertain at a Halloween party that will raise money for the pediatric cardiology and treatment programs at the New York University Medical Center.
The party, noon to 3 P.M. at the Toy Center, 200 Fifth Avenue, will include a magic show, carnival games and a raffle.
A costume parade begins at 2:30 P.M.
Tickets, $90 for adults, $45 for children, at the door.
Information: (212) 263-5823.
A Holocaust Remembrance  TODAY -- The American and international societies of Yad Vashem, an overseas fund-raising organization for the Holocaust museum complex in Jerusalem, will give a tribute dinner for the Nobel laureate Elie Wiesel at the New York Hilton.
The event begins with a 4:30 P.M. reception.
Dietary laws observed.
Tickets, $300, at the door.
Information: (212) 564-9606.
Performance Artists Celebrate  TONIGHT -- A gathering of performance artists including David Greenspan will benefit Here, an arts center at 145 Avenue of the Americas, at Spring Street.
The event, 7 P.M. to midnight, includes cocktails and hors d'oeuvres.
Tickets, $25, at the door.
Information: (212) 647-0202.
Celebrity Cook-Off  MONDAY -- Rex Reed will pair off with the cabaret singer Liliane Montevecchi while Dr.
Ruth Westheimer teams up with the designer Mario Buatta in a gourmet cook-off at 7 P.M. at the Plaza.
The event will also feature the culinary skills of Joan Rivers and many others.
The evening, which will benefit the Greater New York March of Dimes, will also include a formal dinner and dancing.
Black tie.
Tickets, $750, from (212) 353-8353.
For Endangered Wildlife  MONDAY -- A Halloween party with an African safari theme will benefit the African Fund for Endangered Wildlife and several other conservation organizations.
The entertainer Geoffrey Holder and the singer Roberta Flack will be the hosts of the event, which begins with cocktails at 7 P.M. at the Roundabout Theater Company, 1530 Broadway.
Jim Fowler, the wildlife correspondent for the "Today" show on NBC, will present some of his animal friends, the actress Ali MacGraw will speak, Peter Beard will display some of his wildlife photographs, and Batoto Yetu, a Harlem-based dance company, will perform.
A box supper will be served.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 935-5568.
Aldrich Museum Costume Ball  MONDAY -- The Aldrich Museum of Contemporary Art in Ridgefield, Conn., will benefit from a costume ball at the Pierre beginning with cocktails at 7 P.M.
Dinner and dancing will follow.
Costume or black tie.
Tickets, $375, from (203) 438-4519.
A Masked Hunt Ball  MONDAY -- The National Horse Show Foundation will host a ball at the Waldorf-Astoria to honor William Steinkraus, an Olympic gold medalist in show jumping, and others.
A 7:30 P.M. cocktail party will be followed by dinner and dancing.
White or black tie.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 486-4949.
Halloween for the New City  MONDAY -- The Theater for the New City's 18th annual Halloween costume ball begins at 5:10 P.M., with performances by jugglers, vaudevillians, musical groups and others at the side entrance of the theater, 155 First Avenue, at 10th Street.
At 7:30 P.M., guests will move inside the theater.
Refreshments will be sold.
There will also be a series of cabaret performances by Penny Arcade, Taylor Meade and others.
At 9 P.M. there will be dancing to the Park Swing Orchestra, followed by a costume parade at 11:30 P.M.
Tickets, $15, (212) 254-1109.
A Boutique for St.
Vincent's  TUESDAY -- The Auxiliary of St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center will hold a cocktail party and preview of its eighth annual Christmas boutique, from 6 to 10 P.M. at Wallace Hall, 980 Park Avenue, at 84th Street.
An auction will also be held, featuring tickets to the theater and other events, and vacation trips to London, Bermuda and Los Angeles.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 604-8584.
Lar Lubovitch Turns 25  TUESDAY -- The Lar Lubovitch Dance Company will celebrate its 25th anniversary with an 8 P.M. performance at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street.
It will be followed by a buffet supper at the Metronome Restaurant, 915 Broadway, at 21st Street, where Miss Baby Jane Dexter, a cabaret singer, will perform.
Tickets, $225, from (212) 242-0633.
A Royal Gala and Concert  TUESDAY -- The Duke of Kent, Sir David Attenborough and Brooke Astor will be among those serving as hosts of the first annual royal gala and concert sponsored by the American Friends of the Royal Society for Nature Conservation.
The evening, which is to raise money for several conservation projects in the United States, begins with a 7:30 P.M. performance at Carnegie Hall by the Hanover Band.
A supper with caviar and champagne will be served at the Metropolitan Club, 1 East 60th Street.
Black tie.
Transportation from the theater to the supper is included.
Tickets, $200; (212) 838-2660.
Sports Hall of Fame Dinner  WEDNESDAY -- The 19th annual Boys' Club of New York All-Sports Hall of Fame Dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria will honor Tony Dorsett, the Dallas Cowboy running back; Harry Watson, a forward for the Toronto Maple Leafs; Jackie Smith, the former tight end for the Washington Redskins, and many other sports figures.
Following the 6:30 P.M. cocktail party, Brooks Robinson, the former third baseman for the Baltimore Orioles; Julius Erving, the former guard for the Philadelphia 76ers, and others will join the guests at their tables for dinner.
Black tie.
Tickets, $600; (212) 997-0100.
An Indoor Street Fair  WEDNESDAY -- Big Apple Greeter, an organization that seeks to improve New York City's image by providing visitors with local guides, will hold its third annual "street fair," from 6:30 to 9:30 P.M. in the New York Hilton.
It will feature street performers, tarot-card readers and a buffet featuring food from all over.
Donna Hanover Giuliani is scheduled to speak.
Tickets, $85, from (212) 669-8281.
A Wine Auction for Kips Bay  WEDNESDAY -- The Kips Bay Boys and Girls Club will benefit from a wine tasting and an auction of vintage wine and other items from 6:30 to 10 P.M. at the Racquet and Tennis Club, 370 Park Avenue, at 51st Street.
Tickets, $75, from (718) 893-8600.
Spanish Dance  WEDNESDAY -- The American-Spanish Dance Theater will have its annual benefit at the Yale Club, 50 Vanderbilt Avenue, at 44th Street, from 6:30 to 8:30 P.M.
Members of the troupe will perform excerpts from the 1994-95 program.
Cocktails and hors d'oeuvres will be served, and there will be a raffle of trips to Spain, Brazil and the Caribbean.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 674-6725.
Poets Share Their Strength  WEDNESDAY -- Poetry readings by Joseph Brodsky, Marilyn Hacker, Paul Muldoon and other writers, at St.
Bartholomew's Church, Park Avenue at 50th Street, will benefit Share Our Strength, a hunger-relief organization.
A reception with cocktails and hors d'oeuvres will follow.
Tickets, $10, at the door.
Information: (212) 254-9628.
For the Alzheimer's Association  THURSDAY -- The 10th annual Rita Hayworth Gala, which benefits the Alzheimer's Association, begins with cocktails at 6:30 P.M. at Tavern on the Green.
Dinner and dancing will follow.
Princess Yasmin Aga Khan will be the host for the evening.
Flamenco-inspired formal wear is suggested.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 735-0712.
A 'Sunset Boulevard' Preview  THURSDAY -- A 5:30 P.M. champagne reception and dinner at the Harmonie Club, 4 East 60th Street, will precede an 8 P.M. preview performance of "Sunset Boulevard" at the Minskoff Theater.
The event will benefit the Play School Association, which operates after-school and summer programs for homeless and abused children.
Tickets, $350, or $200 for the show alone, from (212) 725-6540.
Honoring Thomas Hoving  THURSDAY -- Thomas Hoving, the former director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, will be honored at a black-tie dinner that will benefit the Mary Buckley Endowed Scholarship Fund at the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn.
The event at the Carlyle begins with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $300, from (718) 636-3464.
Chefs Cook for a Cause  THURSDAY -- More than a dozen chefs from New York restaurants will prepare dishes at a benefit for the Momentum Project, a service organization that provides food, clothing and counseling to people with AIDS.
The evening, from 7 to 10 P.M. at the Puck Building, 295 Lafayette Street at Houston Street, includes an auction featuring vacations in France, Jamaica and St.
Martin.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 268-2610, extension 309.
An Evening with Yogi Berra  THURSDAY -- Yogi Berra will be honored at Lee Mazzilli's Sports Cafe, 208 West 70th Street, at a sports legend dinner for Reviving Baseball in the Inner Cities, a youth program in Harlem that offers baseball training and encourages educational advancement.
Len Berman, a sports reporter on WNBC-TV, will be the master of ceremonies, and many sports figures will be at the event, which begins with cocktails at 6:30 P.M. and is followed by a buffet supper.
An auction of sports memorabilia will also be held.
Tickets, $129, from (718) 617-3294.
For Boys Harbor  FRIDAY -- A preview performance of "Sunset Boulevard" at the Minskoff Theater will benefit Boys Harbor, an educational and recreational center for inner-city children.
A 6 P.M. cocktail buffet at Jimmy's Neutral Corner, 125 West 43d Street, at which the Yale Whiffenpoofs will perform, will precede the 8 P.M. show.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 838-5944.
For the Big Apple Circus  FRIDAY -- A party and a performance by the Big Apple Circus will be given in Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center.
The evening will benefit the circus as well as its Clown Care Unit, which tours hospitals in New York, and its Circus Arts in Education Program, which teaches circus skills to inner-city children.
The event starts at 6 P.M. in a tent where cocktails, hors d'oeuvres and a box supper will be served.
The performance begins at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $75 for adults, $50 for children 12 and under, from (212) 268-2500.
Casino Evening  FRIDAY -- The 37th annual Paradise Ball for the Sheltering Arms Children's Service will be held at the Racquet and Tennis Club, 370 Park Avenue, at 53d Street.
It will begin at 7 P.M. with a champagne reception, followed by dinner, games of chance and dancing to Lester Lanin and His Orchestra.
There will also be a raffle and an auction that will include hotel stays in France and Los Angeles.
Black tie.
Tickets, $250, or $125 for people under 35, from (212) 679-4245, extension 890.
A Musical for Housing Works  FRIDAY -- The actors Ruby Dee and Ossie Davis will be the hosts of an opening-night benefit performance of "Release Me," a rock-gospel musical, to raise money for Housing Works, which provides housing and services to those with AIDS and H.I.V.
The 8 P.M. performance, at St.
Peter's Church, 619 Lexington Avenue at 54th Street, will be followed by a reception with the cast.
Subsequent performances on Nov. 4 to 6 and 11 to 13 will also benefit the organization.
Tickets, $50, or $15 for subsequent performances, from (212) 279-4200.
Marking the Marathon's 25th  FRIDAY -- The New York Road Runners Club will mark the 25th anniversary of the New York City Marathon with a dinner at Tavern on the Green.
The event will raise money for the establishment of a research chair at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center named for the club's founder, the late Fred Lebow.
Paula Zahn of the "CBS This Morning" program will be the host of the black-tie event, held from 7 P.M. until midnight.
Dinner and dancing will follow the opening cocktail reception.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 472-3135.
For Arts and Sciences  FRIDAY -- A black-tie ball at the Excelsior, a catering hall at 2380 Hyland Boulevard, in New Dorp, S.I., will benefit the Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences, a museum in St.
George.
A 7:30 P.M. cocktail party will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $125, from (718) 727-1135.
A Reading for the Roundabout  NEXT SUNDAY -- Julie Harris and several other actors will present a free reading of "The Glass Menagerie" in celebration of the 50th anniversary of the first production of the Tennessee Williams play.
The program, from 7 to 8 P.M. at the Barnes &amp; Noble store at 2289 Broadway, at 82d Street, will benefit the Roundabout Theater Company.
The store will contribute a portion of the day's sales to the theater organization.
Information: (212) 362-8835.
Television Industry Leaders  NOV. 7 -- Sam Donaldson of ABC News will induct Dan Rather, Diane Sawyer, Merv Griffin and other television industry leaders into the Broadcasting and Cable Hall of Fame at a black-tie dinner-dance at the Marriott Marquis.
The fund-raiser is for the minority scholarship fund of the International Radio and Television Society Foundation.
The event begins with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $450, from (212) 686-2200.
A Monopoly Challenge  NOV. 7 -- A Monopoly tournament, from 6 to 9:30 P.M. at the 200 Fifth Club, 200 Fifth Avenue at 23d Street, will benefit the Food and Hunger Hotline and its nonprofit restaurant, One City Cafe, scheduled to open in December on 14th Street.
Cocktails, hors d'oeuvres and a buffet supper will be served.
A raffle for sporting and video equipment is included.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 533-7600.


'The Fragile, Delicate Ties That Must Be Broken'
IN 1945, "THE GLASS MENAGERIE," Tennessee Williams's third play, opened to glowing reviews on Broadway.
It would run for 561 performances and make the early reputation of its author, who was 31.
On Nov. 15, the Roundabout Theater Company's 50th-anniversary production of the play opens on Broadway.
Now in previews at the Criterion Center, it stars Julie Harris as the mother, Amanda Wingfield; Calista Flockhart, as her daughter, Laura; Zeljko Ivanek as Amanda's son, Tom, and Kevin Kilner as Jim, the Gentleman Caller.
The director is Frank Galati.


Gasoline Dreams
THE GAS STATION IN AMERICA By John A. Jakle and Keith A. Sculle.
Illustrated. 272 pp.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. $32.95.


Data Bank/October 30, 1994
Data Bank/October 30, 1994
Consumer Confidence
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
1985=100
87.6
89.5
90.4
New Orders for Durable Goods
Monthly percent change
0.1
6.4
-3.9
Gross Domestic Product
III Q'94
II Q'94
I Q'94
1987 dollars, in percent
3.4
4.1
3.4
Weekly Jobless Claims
Oct. 21
Oct. 14
Oct. 7
In thousands
323
324
329
3-Month Treasury Bills
Oct. 28
Oct. 21
Oct. 14
Rate in percent
4.99
4.98
4.84
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
5.42
5.42
5.25
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
7.95
7.97
7.83
Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
Friday spot price, per barrel
$18.23
$17.44
$16.97


Oakley's In Search Of a Magic Sneaker
Charles Oakley spent most of Thursday afternoon making sure that the shoe fit.
The Knicks' power forward wasn't shopping for just any type of sneakers.
Or at any store, for that matter.
Oakley was in Beaverton, Ore., -- a small town outside of Portland best known for being the headquarters of Nike.
He was there to offer his right foot to science -- and to a team of specialists -- so that they could design a shoe that would allow him to play relatively pain-free this season with a partially dislocated toe.


Bruce Reedy Sarah T. Guinan and Robert H. Nixon
Sarah Thorsby Guinan, the daughter of Kathleen Guinan and J. Edward Guinan of Washington, was married yesterday to Robert Henry Nixon, the son of Agnes Nixon and Robert H. A. Nixon of Rosemont, Pa.
The Rev.
Joseph Lacey performed the ceremony at Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church in the Georgetown section of Washington.
Mrs.
Nixon, 24, is the director of Marsh Hill Productions, a film production company in Washington.
She is also studying for a degree in communications at George Mason University.
Her father, a writer and lecturer, is a founder of the Community for Creative Non-Violence, an advocacy group for homeless people, based in Washington.
He is also the director of Wellspring, a residential program for the mentally disabled in Washington.


IN SHORT: FICTION
JAPANESE-AMERICAN LITERATURE  SONGS MY MOTHER TAUGHT ME  Stories, Plays, and Memoir.
By Wakako Yamauchi.
Edited by Garrett Hongo.
Feminist Press at the City University of New York, cloth, $35; paper, $14.95.


What Do Women Earn?
To the Editor:
In her letter (Oct. 9) responding to my review of Judy Mann's book "The Difference: Growing Up Female in America," Valerie J. Lofland takes me to task for the statement that "the wage gap . . . has almost closed for young women," and reels off some statistics to prove me wrong.
Yet most of her statistics have nothing to do with young women (to whom I specifically referred); the only one that is age-specific proves my point: "Among workers between the ages of 15 and 24, women earn 93 percent of what men make." (In fact, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the 1993 figure was 94.8 percent; for women between the ages of 20 and 24, it was 95.4 percent.)


Beard Hopes His Values Will Rub Off on Nets
The new coach was walking back from the Basketball Hall of Fame Friday afternoon, a few hours removed from the game between Boston and New Jersey.
The new coach has old values, and this bastion of basketball along the Connecticut River was rife with them.
"I just wish the guys would understand where the game was when it got started and where it is now," Butch Beard, the new Nets coach, said.
"I think they would appreciate it a little bit more."


DARING RESEARCH OR 'SOCIAL SCIENCE PORNOGRAPHY'?
If Charles Murray really believes that merit should determine social status, he should propose abolishing inheritance (the monetary kind) rather than welfare.
Only then could we be sure that those who occupy elite positions have earned them.


Debunking the Derivatives Bogyman
To the Editor:
Your commentary on the use of derivatives before the recent run-up in rates was right on!
When these positions were used to hedge interest or currency exposures and made money, no one complained.
One can only hope that the recent debacles will encourage those who don't understand to learn and the inappropriate trading that went under the guise of hedging to disappear.
This should help restore some semblance of appropriateness to the market.
Of course, this does not make the derivatives traders and marketers happy; they're all crying in their tea about the boring plain- vanilla market.
Of course, with that boring market comes very thin spreads -- and lower profits for the derivatives professionals.
MARY S. LUDWIG  Port Washington, N.Y., Oct. 2  The writer is the editor of the newsletter IOMA's Report on Building Corporate Cash and author of "Understanding Interest Rate Swaps" (McGraw-Hill, 1993).


Miami Turns On the Heat And Virginia Tech Wilts
Today was just the kind of day the University of Miami's football players hoped it would be -- sunny and 88 degrees.
Hurricane weather, they called it.
Into this Orange Bowl pressure cooker came a Virginia Tech team with new-found muscle, but the Hokies were no match for the twin avalanche of superior manpower and draining conditions.


Wall Street; Fear of Mutual Fund Flows: Relax
THERE are ghouls and ghosts and things that go bump in the night.
And then there is the most frightening specter of them all (at least on Wall Street): the Mutual Fund Death Spiral.
This is the fear that a decline in the stock market will cause investors to bail out of equity mutual funds.
That would force fund managers to sell stocks, driving prices down.
That would spook more fund investors into fleeing into money markets, forcing fund managers to sell more stocks, driving prices down still more, spooking more fund investors and -- well, you get the picture.


Held Over: Russian Politics
LEV DODIN HAS A PROBLEM WITH politics.
Or, more particularly, with the way it interferes with his work as artistic director of the Maly Drama Theater in St.
Petersburg.
Not that it keeps him from saying what he wants anymore.
But politics, he feels, still prevents audiences from seeing what he wants them to see: themselves.
Just let him stage a production like "Gaudeamus," with its brutal vignettes of the pettiness, absurdity and evil of Soviet Army life, and his audiences bring politics into it.
Some praise him for telling the truth about a corrupt system; some denounce him for defacing a national icon, even though the Soviet Army, as such, no longer exists.


Through This Portal, It's a Whole Other Scene
Little Giants Rick Moranis, Ed O'Neill, with a cameo appearance by John Madden Directed by Duwayne Dunham PG 90 minutes


Christina D. Lohr, John S. Ablon
Christina Darcy Lohr, a daughter of Christina and George Lohr Jr. of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to John Stuart Ablon, a son of Drs.
Gridth and Steven Ablon of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.
James Kowalski performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Ablon, 25, is a marketing consultant at Romac, a personnel recruiting firm in San Francisco.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father retired as the director of channel management at the International Business Machines Corporation, in White Plains.


F.Y.I.
Die-Hard Pointillism Q.  What will happen to the seven-story Georges Seurat "Sunday in the Park" mural on Maiden Lane and William Streets that was painted across from Chase Plaza for "Die Hard 3"?


Seeking Tranquillity in Song
MICHELLE EKIZIAN is a composer inspired by poetry; Richie Havens is a folk singer who writes poetry.
The two understand each other's allusions, which might waft over the heads of more mundane beings.
The connection lends a richness to their current common project: the world premiere performance next Saturday of Ms.
Ekizian's First Symphony, in which Mr.
Havens will sing a lengthy solo.
The work is the fourth part of the Mamaroneck composer's ongoing orchestral series, "The Exiled Heart," which is based on works by the American poet Theodore Roethke.
The journey of the exile, Ms.
Ekizian says, is a metaphor for living and represents humanity's search for tranquillity and peace.


Fishing in Brooklyn: The Lore and the Lure
Brooklyn's Marine Park is rarely mistaken for Vietnam or Siberia.
There are flounder in the creek and stripers and blues which chase baitfish right up to the shoreline.
Dave Azar, a dentist who has set himself the task of learning the fly fishing opportunities of the Brooklyn shore of Jamaica Bay, catches blues and stripers in the creek among the old pilings that dot the inlet.
When he took me there one recent morning at 7 A.M., blues were working the middle of the channel, penning up bunker and slashing through them.
But they were too far out to reach with a flyrod.
We tried small streamers in the pilings for stripers and had a few tentative takes but no hook-ups.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
CHRISTMAS IN JULY: The Life and Art of Preston Sturges By Diane Jacobs.
University of California, $18.
This book celebrates one of Hollywood's first writer-directors, a man who supervised the filming of his own screenplays long before Woody Allen.
Sturges's heyday in the 1940's produced "The Lady Eve" and "Hail the Conquering Hero" as well as the film that gives the book its title.
This is "by far the best critical biography . . . of one of America's most treasured makers of film comedy," Peter Bogdanovich said here in 1992.
BAND OF ANGELS


A Reminder
Standard time resumed at 2 A.M. today. Clocks were set back on hour.


What if They Held an Earthquake and Nobody Came?
Here's one theme idea you never thought you'd see: Making a nightclub shake like a California earthquake.
Two club-concept designers brought this idea to Roger Louis Marolda, owner of the Octagon, at 555 West 33d Street.


Oct.23-29: Death in Colombo; A Shrewd Political Player Plays No More in Sri Lanka
Like many a campaigning politician, Gamini Dissanayaka had a habit of ignoring security advice.
When a suicide bomber approached the Sri Lankan opposition leader at an election rally in Colombo last Sunday night, she drew almost close enough to touch him.
More than 50 others died in the ensuing blast that killed him.


A New Round For Legal Aid and Giuliani
A month after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani crushed a short, furious walkout by Legal Aid Society lawyers, he has proposed budget cuts that the society says could force layoffs of 25 percent of its staff and set off costly, trickle-down chaos within the criminal-justice system.
But even as judges and some politicians joined Legal Aid's doomsday view, a city official said that the society could well afford to lose some fat and still maintain its current caseload.


Locksmith Stickers Drive Sticklers Loco
The squeegee wielders are in retreat.
The Chinese-menu leafleters are on the defensive.
But now another pervasive menace to the urban commonweal has emerged: locksmiths who illegally plaster little advertising stickers on doors, windows, walls, lampposts, pay phones, mailboxes and just about any other eye-level object that doesn't move.
"It's another form of graffiti, an irritant that somehow only New Yorkers are subjected to," says Joie Anderson, co-chairwoman of the 300 East 77th Street Block Association.
"It's one of those little things that make you want to scream and wonder why do you live here."


Jennifer Watters, Jonathan D. Gibbs
Jennifer Ruth Watters, the daughter of Lynn Edwards Hendricks of Charlestown, Mass., and the late John L. Watters, was married yesterday to Jonathan Drew Gibbs, a son of Carolyn Gibbs of Wenham, Mass., and the late Joel Gibbs.
Marcia Bertrand, a notary public, officiated at the Black Point Inn in Prouts Neck, Me.
Elizabeth Gibbs, a sister of the bridegroom and a lawyer, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Gibbs works in Boston as the New England account manager for the vaccine division of Merck &amp; Company, the pharmaceuticals concern.
She graduated from the University of Connecticut.
Her father was a marketing executive at the Eastern Company, industrial equipment manufacturers in Naugatuck, Conn.
Her mother is the associate director of development at Tufts University School of Dental Medicine in Boston.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Florham Park; Good Schools, Yes, but Low Taxes, Too
THE Morris County borough of Florham Park has accomplished what every municipality strives to do: It has coupled one of the lowest tax rates in New Jersey with one of its finest school systems.
Its tax rate is just $1.87 for each $100 of assessed property valuation, the second lowest of the county's 39 municipalities, after Harding Township -- despite the fact that large tracts are owned by tax-exempt nonprofits such as the 200-acre Roman Catholic College of St.
Elizabeth, for women, and Fairleigh Dickinson University.


Jocelyn King, Steven Cohen
Jocelyn King, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael J. King of Miami Beach, Fla., was married last evening to Steven Michael Cohen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Cohen of Nesconset, L.I.
Rabbi Jory Lang officiated at the Grand Bay Hotel in Coconut Grove, Fla.
Mrs.
Cohen, 26, is a speech pathologist at Beth Abraham Hospital in New York.
She graduated from the University of Florida and received a master's degree in speech pathology from New York University.
Her father is a cardiologist in Miami Beach.
Her mother, Anita King, is the director of sales and marketing for the Spa at the Fontainebleau Hilton in Miami Beach.


Can't You Hear the Whistles Blowin'?; The N.B.A. Cracks Down in Bid to Get the Offense Cranked Up
Even a league that has Reggie Miller to shoot jumpers, Shaquille O'Neal to deliver dunks and Kenny Anderson to make dazzling passes has worried about offense.
On many nights in the National Basketball Association, particularly during the playoffs, end-to-end action has given way to players grappling in the low post like Sumo wrestlers or struggling to get away from defenders allowed to hold them.
Scoring in the N.B.A. has declined in 9 of the last 10 seasons, and physical contact has increased.
For the league's hierarchy, it has been a situation getting out of hand, hurting the game and its appeal.


Jackson Heights Bedeviled By Out-of-Town Shoppers
To the Editor:
In the Sept. 4 issue you have a chart -- "What Makes Us Angry? How Queens Defines the 'Quality of Life' " -- that doesn't begin to tell about the horrendous, dangerous situation in Jackson Heights on 37th Avenue between 72d and 76th Streets and 73d Street between 37th Avenue and 35th Avenue.


When Others' Suffering Serves as Entertainment
To the Editor:
The Oct. 16 article, "Through a Lens Darkly," shocked me.
It is appalling that St.
Vincent's Hospital in Greenwich Village would allow a camera crew into its emergency room to tape a live trauma for a TV show.
Whatever happened to privacy and sensitivity to people in pain?
Today private citizens use hand-held cameras to tape a crime in progress or a horrendous accident.
The networks buy these videos and broadcast them on the news.


Nancy Rambusch, 67, Educator Who Backed Montessori Schools
Nancy McCormick Rambusch, an expert on early childhood education and an advocate of the Montessori method, died on Thursday at the Medical Center at Princeton, N.J.
She was 67 and lived in Manhattan and Wallkill, N.Y.
The cause was cancer, said her husband, Robert.


Correction
An article on Sept. 25 about a walking tour of Vienna referred imprecisely to Austria's borders.
In a letter received on Oct. 14, a reader pointed out that in 1827, when the screw propeller was invented by an Austrian, the Austrian Empire was not landlocked; modern-day Austria is.


It's Glasson Operating: Now, It's on the Course
Bill Glasson glides down life's fairways with the sinewy ease of an athlete in his prime.
Unless you already knew, there would be no way to tell that his knees have been operated on four times, three times on the left, once on the right.
Or that he is still rehabilitating from surgery to his right elbow, performed in April.
Or that he has a bad back.
Or that he has undergone four sinus operations.
"For me, breakfast is a bowl of Advil" he says with a deadpan delivery that is a cross between Stephen Wright and Clint Eastwood.


The Cone Sisters: Shoppers or Connoisseurs?
FOR ANYONE INTERESTED IN experiencing the punch and variety of avant-garde European art, the city of Baltimore was surely not the place to be during the first decades of this century.
Or was it?
In 1905, a city native, Etta Cone, went with her friend Gertrude Stein -- another Baltimorean, by adoption -- to Picasso's Paris studio and, on impulse, bought an etching.
It was the first purchase of what turned out to be a vast, decades-long shopping spree.
By the time Etta bought her last Picasso 44 years later, she and her older sister, Claribel, had filled their Baltimore apartment with some 3,000 art objects, among which were now-legendary masterpieces of 20th-century art, including Matisse's "Blue Nude" (1907), Gauguin's "Woman With a Mango" (1892) and Cezanne's drop-dead "Mont Sainte-Victoire Seen From the Bibemus Quarry" (circa 1897).


Tulips and Crocus for New Year's Eve?
WITH memories of last winter's violence lingering, one way to make this winter easier on the soul is to force a few spring bulbs into bloom.
This is easy to do, but it does take a bit of planning, as a few weeks of cold storage are required before even a shoot will appear.
Forcing means exactly what it says.
Hardy spring bulbs are potted up and made to bloom indoors well ahead of their alloted season.
Also, they can be planted in the garden in spring to recover, though they may not bloom again outdoors for a year or two.


POSTINGS: New Owners for New Haven's Teletrack; A Horse Racing Theater Bets on Bettors
For two and half years, the drum-shaped Teletrack horse racing theater in New Haven, one of the most visible sites along Interstate 95, has been empty.
In August, however, Autotote Enterprises of New Haven bought the three-story, 83,000-square-foot building from General Instrument for $4.7 million.
It intends to expand and reopen the 1,800-seat theater by early 1995.
"Connecticut likes to gamble," said Rick Cowan, president of Autotote.
"There is a real market out here for this."


Tower Air Flight
To the Editor: My husband and I booked a flight to Paris-Orly with Council Charter to fly on Tower Air, departing June 25, returning from Paris-Orly on Aug. 6.
When we arrived at Tower Air's terminal for departure we were engulfed in a screaming mob attempting to get through the doors.
These were people taking a flight to Athens.
Eventually we got inside, and finally found the correct line for check-in for Paris.
We were told to go wait in the lounge.
However, guards refused to let us in, saying the lounge was for Athens passengers only.
After standing for some time, holding hand luggage, with some others, we pushed our way past guards and found a bench in a corridor.
The guards attempted to evict us but we refused to move.


Ovid, Meet Wile E. Coyote
CHUCK JONES A Flurry of Drawings.
By Hugh Kenner.
Illustrated. 114 pp.
Berkeley: University of California Press. $16.


Rail Europe Offering First-Class Discounts
Rail Europe, a North American distributor of European train packages, is offering a discount on some first-class Eurailpasses this winter for two or more people traveling together.


'Laughing Wild' in Chappaqua Run
IF the toils of life are so arbitrary that tuna in a supermarket or a taxi to the Metropolitan Museum of Art are interchangeable sources of high anxiety that cause one to make a public spectacle of oneself, then "Laughing Wild" may be saying something.
Or then again, it may not.
Even the two characters in Christopher Durang's three scenes -- it seems more apt to refer to "Laughing Wild" as three scenes, not one play -- become interchangeable in this Coyote Theater production.


Candidate Seeks Job She Would Cut
State Treasurer Martha Whitehead may have hit on an ingenious way to inoculate herself against Texas voters' kick-'em-all-out mood.
If the people will just return her to office, she pledges, she will do her best to disappear.
"I've decided to do what no Texas politician has ever done before -- abolish an entire state agency and my own job," Mrs.
Whitehead, a Democrat, says solemnly in a recent television advertisement.
In it, she slowly vanishes from the screen even as she speaks: "Fewer bureaucrats, less waste, starting with me."


Campaigns' Tenor Disappoints Black Voters
T.
J.
Smith is a lifelong resident of west Philadelphia who eagerly voted for Bill Clinton in 1992, thinking a new administration would bring him a better job and a safer neighborhood.
But he is still doing odd jobs, and Mr.
Smith now fears that he and his wife will be unable to provide properly for their first child, due in May.
Disappointed in President Clinton and put off by hostile television commercials in which the statewide candidates seem to talk about nothing but locking up criminals, Mr.
Smith and his wife, Bernadette, said they would not vote this year.
And they complained that no one was trying to change their minds.
The politicians, they say, are more interested in courting white middle-class voters than blacks like them.


Failure Calls Illinois City Home Turf
Here, in one of the United States' worst school districts, this is what children could expect this fall: Classes led by janitors or other students.
An hour wasted in a gym every day because a math class had no teacher.
Kindergarten classes with 50 children, and a hot-lunch choice of bologna or hot dogs.
Substandard schools were tolerated here for years, but this fall the the system completely broke down, leading the State of Illinois to take financial control of it on Oct. 20, as it had of City Hall several years ago.
And if the takeover of the East St.
Louis School District promised some relief, it also raised two questions: Does it take a total collapse, as occurred here, to be seen as educational malpractice?
And will the solution go much beyond a return to the merely substandard?


The City Seen Through Artists' Eyes
IN the 1950's, Peter Berent, a painter, watched from his apartment in Washington Heights as the lower level of the George Washington Bridge was being built.
It inspired a painting in which he tried to emphasize the grandeur of the project by using a labor-intensive technique of cutting lines at various angles into a Masonite panel and then applying oil paint.


A School District Continues to Expand, but Its Population Is Expanding Even Faster
The public schools in Inwood and Washington Heights are so crowded that some students sit 37 in a classroom.
So crowded that some students eat lunch in 20-minute shifts.
So crowded that even when three new schools open next year, some students will still have to be bused outside the district.
School population has risen from 21,000 to 26,000 in seven years and is expected to keep growing by 1,200 to 1,500 students a year.
"Our projections now would outstrip any construction that we could possibly get our hands on," said Anthony Amato, the superintendent of Community School District 6.


Regulators Join Banks in Protesting U.S. Discrimination Suits
Banks have been complaining for months about the Justice Department's zeal in trying to stamp out racial discrimination in lending.
Now bank regulators are making some of the same complaints, creating a rift in the Clinton Administration.
Some bank officials say the Administration's aggressive enforcement approach is an effort to pursue social goals at the banks' expense, at a time the Government is strapped for money for Federal programs.


Campaign Finance Is Key Single Issue
To the Editor:
If there was ever a single-issue election, this is it.
Voters are fed up with the Government, with good reason, and the most popular sentiment is to throw the bums out.
Unfortunately it won't help, because the corrosive influence of special-interest money will remain.
We'll just have new bums.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
'VITA &amp; VIRGINIA'
Vanessa Redgrave and Eileen Atkins are the co-stars of "Vita &amp; Virginia," opening at the Rich Forum in Stamford tomorrow through Nov. 13.
The two-character play, directed by Zoe Caldwell, was written by Ms.
Atkins, drawing on the contents of some 500 letters that Vita Sackville-West and Virginia Woolf, two of this century's more controversial writers and personalities, exchanged during the decades from the early 20's until Woolf's suicide in 1941.
The work is an examination of their intense relationship and its impact on the separate lives they led with their respective husbands and families.


Einstein Memorial
Princeton, N.J., where Albert Einstein lived for many years, recently turned down a proposal for an Einstein memorial, feeling that it would not be in the proper spirit.
Einstein had not wanted any great memorials.
Nonetheless, he did sit for sculptures during his life (at right, in Berlin, for instance).
There is an Einstein bust on exhibit in Princeton University's Math-Physics Library and an identical one in the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton.
Several physicists, when asked what celebration of Einstein would be appropriate, suggested a museum, a display of Einstein's writings or nothing at all.
The town was right, argued Abraham Pais, author of the Einstein biography "Subtle Is the Lord." "There should be no plaque anywhere," he said.
"No sign on his office."


Streetscapes/75 Murray Street; Bought for Its Site, the Rundown Loft Is a Gem
BEGINNER'S luck?
George and Christiane Aprile buy a rundown loft in Manhattan to be near their son's school and discover it is one of the city's most important cast-iron buildings.
Things have not gone as scheduled since they started planning to move three years ago: Moving in is months away and their son is now a junior at nearby Stuyvesant High School.
But 75 Murray Street is full of surprises.
In 1991, when their son Matthew applied to Stuyvesant, the Apriles got the idea of selling their house in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn and moving near his intended school.
They weren't looking for anything special, just something west of City Hall.
In the spring of 1992, when their son passed the admissions test, they settled on an old five-story building "with no windows, no water, no electricity -- just a facade," says Mr.
Aprile, who owns a courier service in Manhattan and who also went to Stuyvesant.


Splendors in the Grass
Whether inspired by ancient kimonos or bolts of fiery lighting, carpets are taking off in bold directions.


What Makes Brooklyn Angry: The 'Quality of Life,' West of Flatbush
IN August, The City began an examination of how residents defined the "Quality of Life," a political mantra that has no single meaning.
The first installment focused on Manhattan; the second on Queens.
Because it is so large, Brooklyn has been split in two, with Flatbush Avenue as a natural divider.
Taken as a whole, the area west of Flatbush has distinct characteristics, with less of the sweeping poverty of several neighborhoods to the east -- Bushwick, East New York and Brownsville.
The emphasis of concerns differs by neighborhood -- traffic and parking in the northwest; loitering by youths in the southwest; flooding in Coney Island and Brighton Beach.
Illegal dumping is raising anger; drugs keep people in fear, particularly around housing projects.
Not all issues are mentioned in the map.
It is simply a sampling of views of residents, merchants, police and community board officials.
East of Flatbush will be examined next.
BROOKLYN HEIGHTS, DOWNTOWN, BOERUM HILL 1.
PARKING Lack of parking coupled with aggressive enforcement. 2.
LOITERING Residents complain about residents of the St.
George Hotel at Clark and Henry; some panhandling. 3.
PANHANDLERS A frequent problem for the shoppers at the Fulton Mall 4-6.
DRUGS Street activity at (4) Willoughby and Flatbush; (5) Bond and Livingston, and (6) Bond and Wyckoff. 7.
FLOODING Serious conditions at Third Avenue and Atlantic Avenue during rains. 8.
TRAFFIC Congestion and a lack of parking spaces throughout Boerum Hill.
Double-parking prevalent.
COBBLE HILL/CARROLL GARDENS 9.
TRAFFIC Congestion in Cobble Hill. 10.
MAIL Slow mail delivery.  11.
SUBWAY F Train sometimes bypasses Carroll Street stop without adequate notice during construction and track work.
RED HOOK 12.
SUBWAY Frequent escalator breakdowns at Smith-Ninth Street station. 13.
PARKS At Coffey Park, deteriorating restrooms, inadequate equipment, illegal parking. 14-15.
TRAFFIC (14)Van Brunt Street: Noise and fumes from heavy truck traffic. (15) Columbia Street: Still designated as a truck route despite heavy residential population in the Red Hook Houses. 16.
DRUGS Drug sales and related violence in and around the Red Hook Houses. 17.
ILLEGAL DUMPING Misuse and abuse of vacant lots and other tracts throughout area.
PARK SLOPE 18.
PARKING New aggressive ticketing of cars that double park on alternate-side days.
Residents say this violates a traditional accommodation made necessary by brownstones' lack of driveways and carports, as well as a dearth of commercial parking facilities in the area. 19.
GRAFFITI Seventh Avenue and Fifth Avenue from Flatbush Avenue west. 20.
SANITATION Debris on commercial streets, especially Seventh Avenue.
But merchants claim they are being ticketed for debris that they have nothing to do with, even after they've cleaned up. 21.
TREES Poor maintenance on residential blocks. 22.
CRIME Thefts of flowers, trees, plants and planters from private property.
SUNSET PARK 23.
TRAFFIC Double-parked trucks cause congestion between 24th and 26th Street and other locations along Fourth Avenue. 24.
ILLEGAL DUMPING A problem at Third Avenue at the Prospect Expressway. 25.
PROSTITUTION Street trade along Third Avenue between 55th and 65th Streets. 26.
DRUGS Still some street activity at various points on Third and Fourth Avenues in the 40's and 50's, though enforcement has forced a number of operations to move indoors.
BOROUGH PARK 27.
SANITATION Inadequate cleaning of streets throughout, especially on major thoroughfares.
28-29.
ILLEGAL DUMPING Dumping of chicken parts, dead flowers, factory materials along 61st Street from (28) 8th to 14th Ave and at (29) 37th Street between 14th and 15th Avenue.
30.
DRUGS Street sales on 42d Street, between 8th and 10th Avenues.
BAY RIDGE 31.
PUBLIC DRINKING Overflow from bars creates problems of noise and litter at night from 71st to 90th Street on Third Avenue. 32.
TRAFFIC In vicinity of 86th Street and Fifth Avenue, a lack of parking spaces results in double-parked cars and congestion during the day. 33.
PARK Many complaints about disorderly youths at Shore Road Park; also: complaints about unleashed dogs. 34.
GRAFFITI Serious problem on commercial streets throughout area.
Also a problem: illegal posting of bills. 35.
ILLEGAL DUMPING At Second Avenue entrance to Belt Parkway. 36.
HOMELESS CONGREGATING Owl's Head Park near Gowanus Expwy. and 68th Street.
DYKER HEIGHTS 37.
PUBLIC DRINKING Complaints about disorderly youths congregating at night at McKinley Park.
BENSONHURST/BATH BEACH 38.
FLOODING Bay Parkway and Shore Parkway: Outflow pipes backing up during storms causing flooding. 39.
LOITERING Underage drinking and disorderly youths congregating in commercial areas and on steps of houses of worship.
Lack of youth programs. 40.
PARKS Parks and playgrounds are dirty and in disrepair. 41.
GRAFFITI 86th Street, 18th and 20th Avenue commercial districts, and in commercial areas throughout. 42.
ILLEGAL DUMPING A problem along the entire waterfront.
FLATBUSH/KENSINGTON 43-44.
DRUGS Street activity at (43) McDonald Avenue and Ave.
C: (44) Story St.-Dahill Rd. 45.
PROSTITUTION Street trade at McDonald Avenue and Avenue C. 46.
GRAFFITI A persistent problem along Church Avenue, between East 2d and 5th Streets. 47.
CROWDING Church Avenue to Flatbush: Storeowners putting out wares beyond legal limits. 48-49-50.
VANDALISM Vandalism of decorative brick stanchionson streets along (48) Albermarle Road, (49) Beverly Road and (50) Foster Avenue, between Coney Island and Ocean Avenues.
MIDWOOD 51.
TRAFFIC Nostrand and Flatbush (the junction) traffic and pedestrian congestion, street crime, chain snatching, drug sales, street rubbish. 52.
DRUGS Street sales and crime trouble spot at Kings Highway and Flatbush Avenue. 53-54.
LOITERING On Kings Highway around Ocean Avenue: Disorderly youths hanging out at (53) Kings Highway around Ocean Avenue and on (54) Kings Highway and Quentin Road, where there is public drinking, double-parked cars and traffic congestion.
GRAVESEND 55.
ILLEGAL DUMPING People throwing garbage in lots along Avenues X and Z, near Shell Road. 56.
RATS A noticeable recent increase.
Many say the nests are emerging because of illegal dumping.
SHEEPSHEAD BAY 57.
LOITERING Complaints about homeless people defecating and urinating around Avenue Z and Nostrand Avenue. 58-59 DRUGS Street crime and narcotics sales prevalent at the (58) Sheepshead-Nostrand Houses -- Ave.
V to Ave.
X on Nostrand Avenue and (59) Avenue V and Batchelder Street. 60.
GARBAGE Proliferation of fruit and vegetable stands, leading to accumulation of smelly garbage, particularly at Nostrand Avenue and Avenue U. CONEY ISLAND 61.
FLOODING All shore points on Atlantic Ocean and Coney Island Creek.
Severe unchecked coastal flooding and erosion during storms; lack of a sea-wall at residential areas. 62.
SCHOOLS Areawide: No after-school centers for children.
Also: busing of children out of Coney Island because there is no junior high school. 63.
TV No cable television anywhere on the western peninsula. 64-66.
DRUGS (64) Sales along 24th St. from Neptune to Mermaid Avenues: (65) Drugs, street crime are prevalent in the Carey Gardens development; (66) 2007 Surf Avenue.
Loitering, crime and drugs around this public housing facility. 67-68.
ILLEGAL DUMPING (67) Along the creekfront at Coney Island Creek and (68) beneath the parkway at Belt Pkwy at Stillwell Avenue.
BRIGHTON BEACH 69.
FLOODING Inadequate protection along Brighton Beach shorefront. 70.
CROWDING Merchants place goods too far out on sidewalk along Brighton Beach Avenue, from Ocean Pkwy to Coney Island.


THE GREENING OF THE CRRIBBEAN
FIVE hundred years after Columbus sailed to the Caribbean, blundering upon one island paradise after another, and decades after sun-seekers invaded the stunning white beaches, the islands are trying to attract a different kind of traveler, the sort who may never lie on the sand except to watch turtles and birds.
On many Caribbean islands, the wonders beyond the beaches are considerable -- rain forests, mountains, volcanoes, rich bird life and vast reefs among them.
But in too many cases, natural attractions have been ignored, trampled or destroyed in the race for development.


Is There a Niche for a Home of Just 225 Square Feet?
IN 1992 the Connecticut division of Trammel Crow, one of the nation's largest builders, obtained approvals in Stamford to build 240 mini-apartments of 270 square feet to rent for around $500 a month.
The project never materialized because of problems in acquiring the downtown site, which was in foreclosure.
But the point had been made.
The state's most urbane city had acknowledged a need for very small living spaces to accommodate people on limited incomes.


Residents Shrinking as Freedom Place Is Slowly Sinking
Most people probably don't even know there is such a street as Freedom Place.
But the tiny, residential, four-block street tucked behind West End Avenue seems to have more than its share of problems.
For one thing, residents have been watching in terror as the street gradually sinks away from the sidewalk, generating fears that the pavement may collapse.
But transportation officials have told residents that there is no safety threat on Freedom Place.
Using radar, the officials determined that the street is indeed pulling away from the curb, but is not likely to cave in.
Over the summer, the officials fenced off one quarter of the street that was deemed too weak for traffic, and now they say they plan to fix the street, probably within a year.


On the Root Canal
To the Editor: While waiting in the departure lounge in San Francisco for our flight to Singapore, a sip of hot coffee produced that distinctly painful sensation that signaled only one thing: root canal!
The 19-hour flight was one of much fear and trepidation.
Where in Southeast Asia could I find an endodontist?
In Singapore I was informed that all general dentists did the procedure.
As was the case with Julia Duffy Ward ("World Tour via the Root Canal," Oct. 2), my Chinese dentist had also trained in Melbourne.
He was in one of Singapore's ubiquitous malls, between a haberdashery and a souvenir shop.
Upon my return, my endodontist commented upon the professionalism and expertise of the work.


A Long Line of Optimists
MOUNTAIN OF FAME Portraits in Chinese History.
By John E. Wills Jr.
Illustrated. 403 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. $24.95.


Breaking Taboos By Finding Joy In Frills and Fun
LINDA EVANGELISTA in feather bodice, with spun-sugar tulle skirt and matching Marilyn Monroe hair, was whisking her lemon mousse of a dress in front of Steven Meisel.
In an adjacent tableau at John Galliano's show, Kate Moss was competing with a 1950's Oldsmobile to see who had the most streamlined curves.
And Nadja Auermann, moonbeam-blond head touching the floor, was holding a dying-swan pose.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $875,000
361 West 19th Street  1870 3-family brownstone with garden; 3 bedrooms, 2 1/2 baths, den in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in others; terrace in one, fireplace in each; taxes $8,284, listed at $995,000, 22 weeks on market (Broker: Douglas Elliman)


The Ocean's Zither
HALF ASLEEP IN FROG PAJAMAS By Tom Robbins. 386 pp. New York: Bantam Books.


Filling the Void and the Bases in Panama
AMERICAN opponents of the 1979 treaty giving Panama control of the Panama Canal have long raised fears that this banana republic of 2.5 million people cannot possibly manage the waterway and its vast military bases and properties.
Driving down Gaillard Highway, the Canal Zone's main thoroughfare, it is easy to understand their trepidation.
To the left of the roadway, on the property that has already reverted to Panama, are weeds seven feet high.
To the right, on land still overseen by the United States, are beautifully manicured lawns and gardens.


Shlomo Goren, 77, Is Dead; Rabbi Opposed P.L.O. Pact
Rabbi Shlomo Goren, a former Chief Rabbi of Israel who opposed Israeli cooperation with Yasir Arafat and the evacuation of Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, died early yesterday in Israel.
He was 77.
Rabbi Goren had suffered a heart attack on Monday and was taken to Ichilov Hospital in Tel Aviv, The Associated Press reported.
Yoel Amichai, the director of the rabbi's seminary in Jerusalem, said, "He was studying Torah until the last minute."


Correction
An article on Oct. 16 about the recasting of roles in television series misstated the given name of the executive producer of "Lois and Clark." He is Robert Singer, not Michael.


Lawyers' Bill In King Case Stirs Wonder
The 23 lawyers who formed Rodney G. King's legal team have submitted their bill to the City of Los Angeles, and it's a whopper: $4.4 million in legal fees for 13,000 hours of work, at up to $350 an hour, including time spent on talk shows, taking Mr.
King to movie and theater premieres, attending his birthday party and coaching him for the news conference where he pleaded, "Can we all get along?"
The bill is $600,000 more than the $3.8 million that Mr.
King received in his judgment against the city.


For Syrians Now, Talk of Peace Has Fewer Perils
Even in his book-lined study, on a quiet Damascus side street, Dr.
Suheil Zakkar says it is not easy to imagine what peace will be like with Israel, after nearly 50 years of bloodshed and war.
"If I said I were talking about friendship with Israel, I would be lying," said Dr.
Zakkar, a gentle medieval historian whose works on the Crusades and Islamic history have won the special patronage of President Hafez el-Assad.
"Let others here go and visit Jerusalem," he said, but at the age of nearly 60 "I cannot change overnight."


New York Stories: The View From Behind the Camera
POUNDING beefsteak, bawling out her drunken husband, dodging his punches and sobbing to a police officer, Aida Ayala is the star of "Un Viernes Social" ("A Social Friday"), a film about domestic violence that is her debut on public-access television.
It is her own story, the tale of how she overcame the abuse at the hands of her first husband.
In a voice-over at the end, Ms.
Ayala (who also helped write, direct and edit the film) tells the outcome of her story as the camera pans across family snapshots, including a particularly haunting Polaroid of a sad-faced Aida with her son, who was also physically abused.


Wisconsin Has Its Way In Upset at Michigan
Wisconsin 31, Michigan 19
The return of tailback Brent Moss gave Wisconsin the spark that had been missing for two weeks.
Moss's running opened things up for Darrell Bevell, who was 18 for 26 for 161 yards passing and 3 touchdowns, as the Badgers upset Michigan, 31-19, yesterday.
It was the Badgers' first victory at Ann Arbor, Mich., since 1962.
They had lost 11 straight games at Michigan Stadium.
Moss rushed for 106 yards on 26 carries, including a 3-yard touchdown for Wisconsin (4-3-1 over all, 3-2-1 Big Ten).
The Badger defense had three interceptions and three sacks against Michigan, ranked No. 10 in both The New York Times computer ranking and in The Associated Press writers' poll.


Catherine Censor, Thomas E. Shemo
Catherine Lillian Censor, the features editor of Weight Watchers magazine, and Thomas Edward Shemo, a senior manager of strategic services of Andersen Consulting, are to be married today.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Richard Chapin is to perform the ceremony at the St.
Regis.
The bride, 26, graduated from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Linda and Walter Censor of New York.
Her father is an associate general counsel of Time Inc. in New York.
Her mother is an assistant manager of Time-Life Films and HBO Enterprises, also in New York.


Pierce Watches His Daughter Play
JIM PIERCE, banned from Women's Tennis Association-sanctioned events, showed up to watch his daughter, MARY, play yesterday in the Chris Evert/Ellessee Pro-Celebrity Tennis Classic in Boca Raton, Fla.
Pierce said he entered the private hotel grounds with his ticket.
Mary Pierce, who was told of her father's visit, completed her second set, posed for photographers and signed some autographs before being whisked off the grounds through a side entrance and to an awaiting car.
She refused to talk to reporters and did not speak to her father.
About 100 yards away, Jim Pierce was surrounded by a cordon of security guards and police officers, who escorted him to a shuttle bus and took him to his car. (AP)


Cremona Arts Trio to Play
CHAMBER concerts mark another busy week, starting tonight at 8 when the Cremona Arts Trio plays Haydn and Shostakovich at Sarah Lawrence College in Yonkers.
The number to call for further details is 395-2220.
An unusual recital follows on Tuesday at 1:45 P.M. at the Will Library in Yonkers.
The English horn player Susan de Camp and the pianist Roger Davidson will play works for horn and piano by Telemann, Faure, Gordon Jacob and others.
The program is sponsored by the Chaminade Club of Yonkers.
The library can be reached by calling 337-1500.


Teamsters Seeking to Form Bicycle Messengers' Union
Alexander Williams was dismissed from his job as a bicycle messenger for taking three days off to care for his ailing wife and newborn daughter.
When Eric Sabo's arm was gashed in a collision with a taxi, he said, his dispatcher's main concern was that blood might have been spilled on the package he had delivered.


At Election Time, the Gubernatorial Candidates Truly Believe in the Masses
This is the land the campaign forgot.
Although there are 39,921 registered voters here in the rolling hills of Tompkins County, neither Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo nor his Republican opponent, State Senator George E. Pataki, has managed to drop by while hopscotching from New York City to Syracuse to Rochester to Buffalo to Albany and back to New York again.
The people of Tompkins County, some of whom feel a bit neglected, are hardly alone.
Since Labor Day, 38 of New York's 62 counties -- with 16 percent of the state's registered voters -- have gone without a public appearance by either candidate.
Two years after Bill Clinton and Al Gore stopped their bus in Utica, Ohio (pop. 2,000), Mr.
Cuomo has yet to campaign this fall in Utica, N.Y. (pop. 68,000).


Does It Take a Nobel Prize To Get the City's Attention?
To the Editor:
I was interested to learn from the Oct. 16 article, "Bus Route Stirs an Elegant Street's Ire," that residents of Claremont Avenue -- including a judge, a Nobel Prize winner and Columbia University professors -- have succeeded in getting the Transit Authority to rethink a new bus route on their street.


Through This Portal, It's a Whole Other Scene
Only You  Marisa Tomei, Robert Downey Jr. Directed by Norman Jewison PG 128 minutes


Polly J. Holt, Robert Flanigan
Polly Jeanne Holt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Holt of Minneapolis, was married yesterday to Robert White Flanigan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter M. Flanigan of Purchase, N.Y.
The Rev.
Michael Sehler performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Flanigan, 28, was until recently a pharmaceuticals representative for G. D. Searle &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father is an account executive at Motivaction, an incentive-program planning company in Minnetonka, Minn.


Borders and Barriers -- A special report.; Black Officers in I.N.S. Push Racial Boundaries
Kellogg Whittick was the pioneer, the first black officer to break into the senior ranks of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, a Federal agency notorious as a bastion for good old boys.
It was 1979, and Mr.
Whittick got a rude welcome as the new district director in Washington: I.N.S. employees smeared his car with excrement.
Mr.
Whittick suffered this hostility silently, hoping that he could carve a path through what he terms the service's "blatant, invidious racism." But when he retired in 1983, and for another decade still, not a single black followed him into the agency's leadership.
Even today, only one black holds a senior post -- Equal Employment Opportunity director -- at I.N.S. headquarters.


DARING RESEARCH OR 'SOCIAL SCIENCE PORNOGRAPHY'?
Intelligence quotient and economic status have nothing to do with anything.
What are truly important are food and music.
The Japanese, for instance, probably have the highest I.Q.'s and economic status.
But what do they eat?
Sushi -- cold, raw fish.
And what kind of music have they produced?
Little five-note tunes played on bamboo flutes.
We, on the other hand, have gumbo and jazz -- music and food produced by low-I.Q. types, living in squalid circumstances.
Murray pines for his lily-white town in Iowa.
But Iowa?
Corn shows and loose-meat sandwiches?
Give me a break.
JOE KERR New York


3,000 Watch Styles, but Can Anyone Tell Time?
To the Editor:
Will we really be better off with 3,000 watch styles, 100 varieties of Walkman devices and 80 frame styles for sunglasses ("Why Seiko Has 3,000 Watch Styles," Viewpoints, Oct. 9)?
The writers contend that companies will profit handsomely and consumers will have more choices -- like $250 sunglasses.
But it must be wasteful in the total economic picture to produce and market a vast number of different models that are really not all that different but do increase the cost to consumers and probably contribute to inflation.
The wise consumer would do better to check out the product in an independent publication; sometimes the simple and the inexpensive is judged to be equal or better than the fancy and expensive.
And wouldn't the world be a lot better off if those creative minds worked on improving schools and the environment and the other problems of our times rather than dreaming up 3,000 watch styles?
LEO GOLDMAN  Manhattan, Oct. 10  The writer is a retired psychology professor.


DARING RESEARCH OR 'SOCIAL SCIENCE PORNOGRAPHY'?
Although any number of Charles Murray's perspectives could set a person's teeth on edge, there were two in particular that irked me: first, his wanting society to say to an unwed mother, "You did wrong," without going on to address women's abortion rights, sex education or the complex societal reasons for an upsurge in single parenthood ("Daring Research or 'Social Science Pornography'?" by Jason DeParle, Oct. 9).
Second, his smug assertion that, yes, he does draw "conclusions" about Africa's shortage of ancient literature.
As any eighth grader could tell him, Africa is steeped in a rich oral tradition of storytelling.


Ashley Warwick, Marc Hanrahan
Ashley Dale Warwick, a daughter of Margaret and Bruce Warwick of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Marc Patrick Hanrahan, a son of Margaret Hanrahan of Bakersfield, Calif.
The Rev.
Jeffrey H. Walker performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church.
Mrs.
Hanrahan, 30, is a project manager in New York with Boston Properties, the real estate development concern.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is a vice chairman of the Galbreath Company, a real estate developer in New York.


Kathleen Butler, James Smith 3d
Kathleen Anne Butler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James D. Butler of Jersey City, was married yesterday to James Patrick Smith 3d, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Smith of Englewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Leo O'Donovan, the president of Georgetown University, and the Rev.
Joseph P. Parkes performed the ceremony at St.
Catherine's Roman Catholic Church in Spring Lake, N.J.
Mrs.
Smith, 25, graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.
Mr.
Smith, 26, graduated from Georgetown University, from which the couple received law degrees.
She is a lawyer in the Hudson County Prosecutor's Office in Jersey City.
He is an associate at Dewey Ballantine, the New York law firm.


Should the Way Back From the Mommy Track Be Smoother?
"Back From the Mommy Track" (Oct.9), Deborah L. Jacobs's look at professional women whose careers were set back because they left work to care for their children, drew an unusually large response from readers.
Following is a sample of those letters: To the Editor:
Moving to a mommy track or opting out of the labor force is expensive.
It is no surprise to learn that employers give child-care experience a negative value.
Women who chose to move off the fast track by completely leaving the labor force or chose a flex/part-time arrangement in order to raise their children should expect to lose from monetary and career perspectives.


Sports of The Times; Jackie Robinson, Warrior Hero, Through Spike Lee's Lens
Lost in the tears and anger of a failed baseball season was an announcement earlier this month that Rachel Robinson and Spike Lee had formed a partnership to produce a motion picture on the life and times of Jackie Robinson, the first African-American to break the color barrier in Major League Baseball.
This was big news: Lee, in his first foray into sports, had chosen Jackie Robinson, the classic American hero, the embodiment of so many of the complex social themes that define our culture.


Correction
An article in New Jersey editions last Sunday about developers entering the South Jersey market misstated the number of bedrooms planned for houses at the Short Hills development in Cherry Hill.
They are to have four or five bedrooms, not two or three.


Oct.23-29; That's a Long Prison Head Count
The Justice Department said last week that the number of inmates in America's prisons topped a million last summer for the first time, reflecting the national clamor to get tough on criminals.
One million is a lot of prisoners -- and that's not counting city and local jails, just state and Federal prisons.
In June, there were 373 people in prison for every 100,000 United States residents.
This is a record, more than two and half times the 1980 rate, and it places the country second in the world behind Russia.


Q. &amp; A.
Making Repairs After a Fire Q. We sustained broad damage in our rent-stabilized apartment when an electrical fire ignited in the co-op unit next door.
In search of cause and origin, firefighters hacked their way through our interior wall, ceiling, flooring and a light fixture.


On the Edge
Elizabeth Drew's new, highly insidery book about the Clinton Presidency is titled "On the Edge," from a quote attributed to a close friend of the Clintons: "Bill has always been someone who has lived on the edge, politically and personally." The reporter treats it to mean "in the aura of danger."
On the edge is where it's at, metaphorically speaking.
A blurb for Mark Olshaker's new novel, "The Edge," reads: "a thriller that stretches the limits of the genre  [ ? ]  and takes readers to the terrifying edge of human behavior and medical science."


Balzac on the Bus
"Anybody here his wife? He's looking for his wife." A pink-cheeked, white-haired man was pacing the sidewalk.
Maybe his wife was on the downtown tour bus.
This was the uptown tour bus, destined for the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Grant's Tomb, Harlem and what the guide called "Millionaire's Row." Oh, yes, the guide.
Call him Balzac.
Because traveling Manhattan's streets with him was like dipping into "La Comedie Humaine" and its vast cast of human creatures.
So it seemed to one passenger, a New Yorker who spent a sun-struck autumn afternoon seeing the town through a tourist's eyes.
What she saw most clearly were Manhattan's people, all of them summoned by the Balzac at the front of the bus.


Tone Frescoes by an Old Master
WHEN, IN 1508, POPE Julius II commissioned Raphael to decorate his private library at the Vatican, the painter provided a comprehensive vision of philosophy and theology from the perspective of a supreme artistic mind of the Renaissance.
In a series of frescoes that include "The School of Athens" and "The Disputation Over the Holy Sacrament," Greek philosophers and Christian prophets are depicted for posterity.
Few artists in any field have produced work of comparable scope.
In music, the closest parallel may be found in the oratorios of George Frideric Handel -- some 20 works in which he breathed life into a vast historical panorama, treating biblical and classical subjects with deep humanity and clothing them in the most glorious musical language of the 18th century.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Mon.
Personal income, Sept., pct. change
0.4
0.5
Tues.
Purchasing managers' index, October
58.2
58.3
Wed.
Leading indicators, Sept., pct. change
0.6
0.2
Factory-goods orders, Sept., pct. change
4.4
0.2
Thurs.
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
323
325
New-home sales, Sept., thous., ann. rate
703
680
Auto sales, October, millions, ann. rate
7.2
7.4
Fri.
Nonfarm payroll, Oct., chg., thous.
239
240
Unemployment rate, October
5.9
6.0
This Week's Numbers
Wed.
Federal Reserve releases beige book
Thurs.
Chain stores release October sales data


Big, Bold and Unbeaten: Nebraska and Penn State
This was college football stripped like an abandoned car of any ornament or excess; a game distilled to the smash-mouth essence of beefy linemen, who looked as if they were inflated for the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade.
What Nebraska (9-0) did to inept Colorado (7-1) in today's 24-7 victory was not particularly attractive or even imaginative, but it was devastating to the Buffaloes' national title hopes, not to mention the Heisman Trophy candidacies of the panicked quarterback Kordell Stewart and the handcuffed running back Rashaan Salaam.


A Fondness for Herbs: Flavor, Fragrance and Bits of Legend
IT was just after midnight when the narcotics squad sped toward the Willows, a mansion in Morristown where Caroline Rose Foster lived.
A raid at the home of a pillar of the community in her 90's?
Something was very wrong.
What happened was connected to Miss Foster's dedication to the Herb Society of America, particularly the northern New Jersey branch, said Mary Taylor, a herbalist who started the chapter.


Bob Detmer, a Visionary Video Maker
THERE is a television production company in Armonk, Detmer Enterprises, which is producing high-quality videos for nonprofit organizations, programs that are then distributed to local cable stations.
It is the cost of the programs, said Bob Detmer, the owner of the company, that initially shocks people.
"At first, no one believes me when I tell them that if I do a professional video of their organization, it will cost them nothing; that I do the work for free," he said.
And thereby hangs the news.


A Venture on the Brink: Do Education and Profits Mix?
Three years after promising to combine entrepreneurial razzle-dazzle with cutting-edge education, the Edison Project of for-profit schools envisioned by the media entrepreneur Christopher Whittle has come to this: either the project raises $25 million to $50 million within two months or it dies a very noisy, public death.
And besides the stripped-down plans that bear little resemblance to Mr.
Whittle's original vision of 1,000 private schools, built from scratch, there is one other major change as the company searches for financing.
With the collapse or forced sale of Mr.
Whittle's other ventures and the ensuing harsh publicity, it has become clear that to attract financing, Edison must almost surely persuade potential investors that the man who gave Edison life will have little or no ability to shape its future.


Maryellen Tseng and Stephen Hulburt
Maryellen Tseng, the art director for advertising and sales promotion at Viking Penguin Publishing in New York, and Richard Stephen Hulburt 3d, the sales manager for Yale University Press in New Haven, were married yesterday in Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas Brunkow performed the ceremony at the Concord-St.
Andrew's United Methodist Church.
The bride, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Syracuse University.
She is a daughter of Margaret Tseng of Brevard, N.C., and the late Paul Tseng.


Campaign Finance Is Key Single Issue; Voters Target Liberals
To the Editor:
It's remarkable how this election is being cast as an anti-incumbent movement when so many incumbents across the country are doing quite well in their polls.
From Massachusetts to California, governors, senators and representatives seem set to win re-election.


Jewel Thieves Hammer Through Store Door
Using a sledgehammer and a club two men broke into a jewelry store on Madison Avenue yesterday, held two employees at gunpoint and stole merchandise, the police said.
The police said later that they had not determined what merchandise was stolen.
Besides jewelry, the store sells antiques and sports and historical memorabilia.
The manager, Neil Nelson, said that only jewelry was taken, with a value "in the $1 million range."


Talking Politics in a Municipal Bad Mood
EVEN after 17 years in the city, Timothy Tate feels "politically transient"; he probably won't vote in this election.
But Carol Roberto can't wait to vote for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, "twice if you can figure out how I can do it." Eleanor Papa will be voting for George E. Pataki, because "a new broom sweeps pretty good at first, until it loses its fibers." Johnny Colon thinks "yelling in the streets" may be at least as effective as voting.
And Daphne Maloney senses a confusion that she hopes won't translate into people sitting this one out, and then not even in her restaurant.
This pre-election poll may be as shallow as it is narrow -- only middle-aged or older registered Copers who have appeared at least once in this column were surveyed about the cityside impact of the gubernatorial election -- but it seems to echo the deep concern and the broad loss of optimism in current urban life.
Nevertheless, most Copers say they will citizen on.
What's the choice?
Move?


Ms. Hairston And Mr. Martin
Stephanie P. Hairston, the daughter of Elissa and Aaron Hairston of East Brunswick, N.J., was married yesterday to the Rev.
Cornelius Wesley Martin, the son of Bernice Martin and the Rev.
Isaac Martin of Newark.
The Rev.
James R. Kirk, assisted by the bridegroom's father, officiated at the Sharon Baptist Church in New Brunswick, N.J.
Mrs.
Hairston-Martin, 32, and her husband, 36, work at the William H. Brown Jr.
Academy in Newark, where she teaches seventh grade science and he is a special education teacher.
She graduated from Hampton University.
Her father retired as the special markets coordinator at Anheuser-Busch in Newark.
Her mother retired as the director of day-care services for Middlesex County in North Brunswick, N.J.


In the Region/Westchester; Coffee Bars Bringing New Life to Downtown Areas
SEVERAL downtown areas in the county have been jolted out of their somnolence lately by the opening of coffee bars, those bistro-like establishments that serve espresso, cappuccino and other specialty coffees.
A fairly new phenomenon in Westchester, the bars have been enlivening downtown streets, especially during evening hours, when previously there had been little activity.
On any given night in the village of Bronxville, for instance, young people in trendy clothes can be seen trooping down Pondfield Road on their way to Slave to the Grind, a 16-month-old coffee bar.


Memoir of a Plagiarist
HIMMELFARB  By Michael Kruger.
Translated by Leslie Willson. 203 pp.
New York: George Braziller.


Oct.23-29; Rabies and a New England Town
When the rabies emergency of Concord, N.H., was declared over, its only casualties were four kittens.
But the news that the fatal disease had struck a household pet -- to wit, a black and white kitten named Lucy -- sent fear through the city of 36,000 on the banks of the Merrimack River.
Health officials say that three other kittens, which died before Lucy's illness was diagnosed, were probably rabid as well.


Upper West Side: Affordable Nights
AMSTERDAM'S BAR &amp; ROTISSERIE * (212) 874-1377; 428 Amsterdam Avenue, near 80th Street; $$; all major cards


Clean Sweeps for Streaky Glass
WINDSHIELDS and wipers may be perpetually on a driver's center stage, but they usually get no more attention than a bit player.
This benign neglect stems partly from the fact that windows that seem reasonably clear on a sunny day may turn streaky and greasy in a late-night rainstorm -- when it is hard to do anything about it.
Windshield wipers suffer particularly from a lack of attention.
In winter, rock salt dumped on icy roads leaves a residue that eats away rubber wiper blades.
"Salt is very abrasive and will wear down rubber-wiping elements no matter what brand," said Ron Privette, marketing manager for the Anco Division of Cooper Industries, a leading wiper maker.


Airlines Vs. Eardrum Lobby
For residents of northern Jackson Heights, perhaps no topic elicits more bitterness than the eardrum-tearing, conversation-interrupting, sermon-stopping, teacup-rattling roar of jets flying in and out of La Guardia Airport.
"No more! No more!" pleads Mary Sarro, the district manager of Community Board 3.
But there might be more soon.


Debunking the Derivatives Bogyman
To the Editor:
As the attention given to derivatives by the media in recent months has not always been objective, nor for that matter accurate, I found it particularly refreshing to read your article.
In particular, you raised some key points: that derivatives are very useful tools for risk management; that they should not be confused with complex securities when in fact they are basically a new structure for traditional instruments, and that the risk involved is no different than the risk corporations and banks have been undertaking all along -- credit risk.
DENNIS WEATHERSTONE  Manhattan, Oct. 5  The writer is the chairman of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company.


Housewife Read. Housewife Want. Housewife Buy.
MAGAZINES FOR THE MILLIONS Gender and Commerce in the Ladies' Home Journal and the Saturday Evening Post, 1880-1910.
By Helen Damon-Moore.
Illustrated. 263 pp.
Albany: State University of New York Press.
Cloth, $54.50.
Paper, $17.95.


Neighborhood Stirring to Life
The neighborhood The Daily News will move into next year is best known for, well, being the future home of The News.
Planners and neighbors say the newspaper's arrival at the Hancock building at 450 West 33d Street will bring new identity to an area that is only beginning to show signs of commercial life.
"Getting The Daily News is a real coup for them," said Robert E. Flahive, the Manhattan director of the City Department of Planning.
"I was surprised to see The News going that far west." Plans to extend the commercial expansion of the 80's into the area, he said, never materialized "because the market fell apart."


Panic Everywhere
THE COMING PLAGUE Newly Emerging Diseases in a World Out of Balance.
By Laurie Garrett. 750 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.


Q and A
Mexican Celebrations
Q.
My husband and I are planning a trip to Guaymas, in Sonora, Mexico for the whole month of November.
Can you tell me about any events planned for that time in and around the Hermosillo and Guaymas areas? -- G. J., Port Richey, Fla.


IN SHORT: FICTION
JAPANESE STORIES  YOUTH AND OTHER STORIES  By Mori Ogai.
Edited by J. Thomas Rimer.
University of Hawaii, $38.


Love the House -- But Can We Afford It?
BUYING a house concentrates the mind, and not least on matters of money.
In the current housing market, the experience of recession appears to have led buyers into more conservative financial planning than their predecessors practiced a decade ago.
The recession retarded the pace of sales and frustrated the ability of many people to make long-term decisions on a house or a community or both.
Slower sales and lower prices made it difficult -- and for many still do make it difficult -- to recover the cash applied to one purchase to make another.
It even affected the attitudes of those who had never bought.


The Hem Line
A moot point, if ever there was one.


Hot Nobodies
It was a warm autumn evening in New York, and members of the fashion industry had turned out to honor one of their own.
Flashbulbs popped, announcing the arrival of the beautiful and the famous.
The crowd cleared a path for those singled out by the cameras, whispering judgment on the clothes or the hairdos.
Passers-by who stopped to stare soon got discouraged and left, unable to identify the designers, models, magazine editors and department-store executives getting out of their limousines.
But to those of us who are in the fashion business, the celebrities were familiar, as colleagues with whom we rub elbows in the course of a day's work.
Their pictures would appear in the trade papers the next morning.
Sporting elaborate outfits and the attitude required to carry them off, they looked -- many of them -- as if they'd gotten dressed with a photo op in mind.
Some 20 blocks uptown and a few avenues west, where the MTV Video Music Awards were in full swing, a fleet of photographers had stationed themselves at the door, scanning the audience as it entered, picking out record-company executives, V.J.'s, directors, agents and managers.
In general, the clothes were skimpier here, the hair was bigger and the jewelry more conspicuously fake.
The desired effect, it seemed, was disheveled, though no less studied.
"Who's that?" I asked a friend repeatedly as we watched a succession of strangers smile obligingly for the cameras.
The people at the MTV awards would probably have recognized Linda Evangelista or Calvin Klein; chances are that fashion types could have identified Steven Tyler or Bruce Springsteen.
Everybody knows Madonna.
But apart from the rock stars and the supermodels and a handful of designers, fame that evening seemed provisional, and the famous important only in context.
There was no mistaking them, whoever they were: their clothes and their manner telegraphed their status.
New York, of course, is made up of dozens of worlds unto themselves, which overlap slightly around the edges.
A tourist on a brief vacation from the land of fashion, I contemplated the parade of music-business dignitaries, who wore their celebrity the way I wore the dress I'd borrowed for the occasion -- with concertedly offhanded arrogance and pride, as if to persuade people that I owned it.


QUEENS MINUTE
HELP FOR H.I.V.: After five years of trying, the Momentum Project opens an AIDS-service center in Jackson Heights, its first in Queens.
The neighborhood is believed to have the highest concentration of high-risk gay Hispanic men in the city.
The center operates every Tuesday out of St.
Mark's Episcopal Church, on the corner of 82d Street and 34th Avenue, providing food, clothing, counseling and other services.
So far, it has 40 clients.
The organization, which has seven other centers in the city, can be reached at (212) 268-2610. . . .
CHEAP TUITION: A bureaucratic misunderstanding is cleared up, and Queens College, along with the other campuses of the City University, will continue to allow the elderly to register for classes with empty seats at a cost of $52 a semester. . . .
SHRINKING HOURS?: Mayor Giuliani, facing a budget gap of more than $1 billion, has proposed to cut financing for the Queens Borough Public Library by 2.9 percent.
If the cuts take effect, the library's director, Gary E. Strong, says he will have to start closing 10 branches on Sundays.
The borough's library system is considered the busiest in the United States.


Sports of The Times; Checking The N.F.L.'s Alignment
WHEN the National Football League club owners meet Tuesday in Chicago to debate realignment, it would seem sensible to create an annual Giants-Jets rivalry by putting both teams in the same division.
And create an annual Dallas-Houston rivalry the same way.
Or at least re-slot Arizona in a West division.
But when it comes time to vote, the only topic sure to get the required 75 percent approval by the owners is that it's time for lunch.


Wave of Migration Is Altering East Timor
The exiled leader of an independence movement in East Timor, Jose Ramos-Horta, said on Friday that growing numbers of non-Timorese migrants were changing the character of the territory, which Indonesia annexed by force in 1975.
Mr.
Ramos-Horta, the civilian face of the guerrilla movement Fretilin, which continues to wage a low-level war in East Timor, said that as many as 1,000 Indonesians from other islands in the huge archipelago are arriving each week.
He said that the numbers are larger than at any time in the past.


PAYING FOR KEEPS
At first, I mistook John Tierney's article recommending the privatization of Central Park for a satire on the order of Jonathan Swift's "Modest Proposal." Then I realized that Tierney was serious about charging an entrance fee.


U.S. Tightens Rules On 'Events' Packages
The Federal Government is expanding its regulation of tour companies that sell packages that include tickets to events, especially sports events.
The Department of Transportation, which has regulated Super Bowl packages since 1980, has now drafted similar rules to cover tours organized to attend "sporting, social, religious, cultural, political or other events of a special nature and limited duration."
The rules affect air tours advertising admission to the event as part of the tour.
The definition covers events ranging from the Rose Bowl and the basketball Final Four to the Oberammergau passion play in Germany.


Publishing Venture Teaches Harvard a Hard Lesson
JAMMED between the books in William A. Sahlman's office on the Harvard Business School campus is evidence of one of his biggest blunders: eight hulking plastic cases containing four hours of management-advice videos.
The $10,000 price was daunting -- as was the heft: 45 pounds.
Drop it, and "it might kill someone," Mr.
Sahlman now jests.
The market couldn't have agreed more.
"Customers told us they couldn't use it," recalled Mr.
Sahlman, a finance professor who has presided over the school's publishing activities since 1991.
"They'd have to shut down their entire company for two weeks to absorb it all."


'I Just Didn't Care,' Pippen Says
A new book about the Chicago Bulls says SCOTTIE PIPPEN knew he was making a controversial decision when he decided to sit out the final 1.8 seconds of the third game of the 1994 Eastern Conference semifinals against the Knicks.
"I knew it as soon as I did it. I just didn't care." Pippen said in "Transition Game," a book by a Chicago Tribune sports reporter, MELISSA ISAACSON.
"If I'm put in that position again and I'm still considered the team leader, and we're down 2-0, I'm going to voice my opinion again."
Pippen said he was angry because coach PHIL JACKSON wanted him to pass the ball inbounds to TONI KUKOC for a last-second shot.
"What was going through my mind is that I wanted to be there. Not to take the last shot, necessarily, but just to be an option," Pippen said.
Kukoc made the basket, and the Bulls won the game.
Also described was the emotional reaction of the usually quiet BILL CARTWRIGHT, a 15-year N.B.A. veteran.
After hyperventilating in the shower, Cartwright addressed the team with tears in his eyes.
"Scottie, I can't believe you would let us come so far, to bust our tails, and then be so selfish," Cartwright said. (AP)


Corrections
The Good Eating column last Sunday omitted the rating for the restaurant La Boheme on Minetta Lane in Greenwich Village.
It received two stars when it was reviewed on May 15, 1992.


Tech Notes; A Can Top for a New Day?
HENRY DAVID THOREAU described new technology as "improved means to unimproved ends." The Ball Corporation has not addressed the ends Mr.
Thoreau had in mind but it has come up with Touch Top, a potential successor to the pull-tab lids now used on the nation's sodas and beer.
Ball has moved the can opening to a slightly raised, round crater in the center of the can lid.
Ball claims that the design gives aluminum and steel cans the "same drinking characteristics as glass bottles" -- corporate-speak for easier chugging.
Ball says the Touch Top is also safer than existing cans because there is a rounded lip instead of an edge when the metal seal is pushed inward with a fingertip.
And after it is open, the seal remains attached to the can by a small, unscored section of the opening that acts as a tiny hinge.


Artists of Their Own Time
THE COMMON WISDOM IS THAT every era has its own esthetic.
Broadly speaking, one could say that Picasso did not paint like Rembrandt, and Rembrandt did not paint like Picasso.
Dance, until now, has also furthered the impression that a dominant trend defines choreographers who are contemporary with one another.
Merce Cunningham and George Balanchine had opposite views about music.
But beginning with the 1960's, their formalist vision, at odds with the dance-dramas of the 1940's and 1950's, held sway for three decades.
How, then, can one explain that two visiting troupes in New York earlier this month seemed worlds apart?
"Noiject," the latest premiere by Saburo Teshigawara and his Karas company from Tokyo, performed in the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave Festival during the same week that Smuin Ballets/SF, a new troupe that Michael Smuin founded in San Francisco, made its New York debut with "Dances With Songs" at the Joyce Theater.


On Fishing The Farmington
In regard to "A Wild Rushing River Awaiting the Unwary," Oct. 9, on the Farmington River and the impact of Wild and Scenic designation, while we were pleased to see our home river receive the attention it deserves, we were bothered by the article's treatment of trout fishing on the Farmington.
First, it failed to mention that the only stretch of the Farmington open to year round fishing is the Trout Management Area, which is regulated for catch and release only.
The section below the Route 219 bridge in New Hartford and above the markers .9 miles above the Route 318 bridge in Barkhamsted are managed for put and take, or trout harvest.
The sections managed for trout harvest are closed from Feb. 28 to the third Saturday in April each year.


College Gets Grant For Nurses
THE College of New Rochelle has been awarded a three-year, $578,819 grant from the United States Department of Health and Human Services to establish an acute-care nurse practitioner program.
The grant is the largest in the 18-year history of the college's School of Nursing.
Karen E. Forbes, assistant professor of nursing, said there are 33 students in the college's nurse practitioner program, which began this year, and that enrollment will be able to expand next year.


The Wicked Witch
To the Editor:
In the letter you published on Oct. 16, "The Old Elevator on Gramercy Park," Scott Meserve neglects to mention who his wonderful grandmother was.
She was Margaret Hamilton, the wicked witch in "The Wizard of Oz"!
This fine woman helped to create a yearly tradition at 34 Gramercy Park when I lived there with my daughter and husband (1980-1984).


Hollie L. Bowles, Sean Reddington
Hollie Lynn Bowles, an assistant treasurer at Credit Lyonnais, the French bank, and Sean Patrick Reddington, an assistant vice president at Banque Francaise du Commerce Exterieur, were married yesterday in Syracuse.
The Rev.
Robert S. Meyer performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception.
The bride and bridgegroom work in New York.
Mrs.
Reddington, 27, graduated from Cornell University.
She received an M.B.A. from Columbia University, as did her husband.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David L. Bowles of Syracuse.


Should the Way Back From the Mommy Track Be Smoother?
"Back From the Mommy Track" (Oct.9), Deborah L. Jacobs's look at professional women whose careers were set back because they left work to care for their children, drew an unusually large response from readers.
Following is a sample of those letters: To the Editor:
Am I missing something?
Is the supposed plight of the mommies who took 5- to 10-year holidays from the work force that they were not compensated at the same rate as those professionals, male or female, who stayed in the work force?


Bertrand And Conner Renew Rivalry
After John Bertrand of Australia won the America's Cup in 1983, a plaque appeared on the house he rented that summer in Newport, R.I.
The inscription said, "John Bertrand House."
If he became a household name in Newport, he was an idol when he went home to Australia.
In defeating the team led by Dennis Conner, Bertrand and his Australia II crew divested the New York Yacht Club of the trophy it had kept for 132 years.


E. A. Brainard, John R. Maier
Elizabeth Ann Brainard, a daughter of Richard R. Brainard of Schenectady, N.Y., and the late Beatrice H. Brainard, was married yesterday to John Richmond Maier, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John Maier of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
James L. Kidd performed the ceremony at the Asylum Hill Congregational Church in Hartford.
The bride, 38, is keeping her name.
She is a lawyer at Aetna Life &amp; Casualty, the Hartford insurance company.
She graduated from Cornell University, from which she also received her law degree.
Her father retired as a patent lawyer with the General Electric Company in Schenectady.
Her mother was a music teacher in the public schools in Ithaca, N.Y.


And the Winning Numbers Are: 5, 6, 19, 37, 41, 54


Q. &amp; A.
Making Repairs After a Fire Q. We sustained broad damage in our rent-stabilized apartment when an electrical fire ignited in the co-op unit next door.
In search of cause and origin, firefighters hacked their way through our interior wall, ceiling, flooring and a light fixture.


PAYING FOR KEEPS
All New Yorkers, regardless of economic class, are poor when it comes to trees and fresh air (The Big City: "Paying for Keeps," by John Tierney, Oct. 9).
Central Park has been providing a bit of nature to rich and poor alike as part of its mandate since its inception, this despite many historical attempts to restrict its use.
While the park's restoration funding may come from private sources, this has never compromised its access, remarkable in a city that sets standards for high-priced luxuries and services.


An Old C.I.A. Plot Casts a Long Shadow
In a small clandestine operation three decades ago, President Kennedy ordered the Central Intelligence Agency to depose the leader of the South American colony of British Guiana.
The leader fell, and the C.I.A.'s men quietly left town.
The cold war ended, and with its end the deposed leader, Cheddi Jagan, was elected President of an independent and democratic Guyana.


Behind the Zaleski-Council Feud
LAST week's announcement by Jeanine Pirro, the County District Attorney, that her office was investigating illegal campaign practices by someone in the re-election campaign of Mayor Terence M. Zaleski follows growing difficulties in recent months for the chief executive of the state's fourth-largest city.
In a letter sent to Yonkers officials on Wednesday, the District Attorney said that the Mayor's wife, Lynn M. Zaleski, who is her husband's campaign treasurer, had sole responsibility for the fund-raising but had stymied the investigation.


What's Up, Doc? Jewelry
"I'm a comic-book freak," said Robert Lee Morris, the jewelry designer whose elegant silver link bracelets and sensual pendants have graced many a fashionable wrist and neck.
"I just love Batman and Superman and Wonder Woman."
Mr.
Morris was talking about his latest venture, designing jewelry based on DC Comics superheroes and Looney Tunes cartoon characters for the Warner Brothers stores.
The first collection, completed in less than two months, includes sterling-silver rings, bracelets, pendants and belt buckles.


Friends Gather at an Italian Newcomer
IL GIARDINO in Commack is jumping.
Even in its first few weeks the bar was jammed with local residents waiting for tables.
It looked like a neighborhood reunion.
The arrival of each new group set off a round of waves, hellos, hugs and kisses.
We seemed to be the only outsiders.
Unfortunately, we, too, were recognized.
Not by fellow diners, but by a waiter who had previously worked at other restaurants.
With our cover blown, we were given fawning service.
Waiters hovered, ready to fill water glasses, replace silver and replenish the breadbasket.
Our table was decrumbed after every course.
To be fair, though it is difficult to gauge, service looked quite good at other tables, as well.


Attack Shows Security Vulnerabilities and Strengths
Last month, security officials looked rattled when a small Cessna airplane breached the closely guarded White House compound and without warning crashed under the President's bedroom.
But the same security officials took today's shooting in stride, declaring only a few hours afterward that the gunman was so inept that his barrage could not even be considered a serious threat on the President's life.


Caught!
"This was not a case of cheap labor," Arianna Huffington told reporters.
"This is a case of a family falling in love with another human being . . ." Ms.
Huffington is, of course, the wife of California's Republican Senate candidate, Michael Huffington, who has made getting tough with illegal aliens his battle cry.
The human being referred to is the family's former nanny -- herself an illegal alien.
Seldom do politics offer up such sweet moments.
The unmasking of monumental hypocrisy is always a wonderful present to the public, and Mr.
Huffington's exposure for employing an illegal alien while making his name as an alien-alarmist deserves some kind of award in the annals of campaign duplicity.


Despite Critics, Dairy Farmers Increase Use of a Growth Hormone In Cows
Despite consumer wariness about milk produced by cows injected with a genetically engineered hormone, thousands of dairy farmers across the country are adopting the new drug to increase production in their cows.
The drug's manufacturer, the Monsanto Company, estimates that 7 percent of the nation's roughly 150,000 dairy farmers are using the drug and says it has been satisfied with sales.


The View From: Norwich; Graffiti Off, Garbage Gone, Welcome to the Yantic's Upper Falls
FOR much of his life, Alec Kusek has lived across the Yantic River from a circa 1910 powerhouse next to what is called the Upper Falls.
In recent years that meant living across from a dilapidated, graffiti-covered building sitting amidmud, muck and a maze of litter, including cast-off tires, couches and refrigerators.
But not anymore -- not since Norwich citizens transformed the mess into the Upper Falls Heritage Park and Museum, which opened early this month.


Why a Duck
Roast a duck and you can smell the wild.
Hunters take a whiff and they're back in the marsh, listening to the whistling flap of wings.
The rest of us catch the aroma and are instantly transported to those wild and crazy days when fat was eaten with abandon, when duck breast was served with a drizzle of its own fat and a crackling of fried skin, when duck legs were stewed in their own fat to make confit, when potatoes were roasted in duck fat and cabbage braised in it, when fat still signaled well-being.
Talk about living dangerously.
Even now, there are chilly autumn nights when only an act of dietary wantonness will suffice, when a duck dinner serves to coat the nerves and grease the spirits.
But having made the decision to indulge, you must pick your poison.
Duck meat varies widely from breed to breed, and so does the method for cooking it.


Joan Ann Kaplan, Marc S. Schulz
Joan Ann Kaplan, the daughter of Betsy Kaplan of Miami and the late Dr.
Robert Kaplan, was married last evening to Dr.
Marc Stewart Schulz, the son of Ann Chwatsky of New York and Robert Schulz of Baldwin, L.I.
Rabbi Rex Perlmeter performed the ceremony at Gedney Farm in New Marlborough, Mass.
The bride, who is 31 and is keeping her name, is a fellow in psychology at the Judge Baker Children's Center in Boston.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a master's degree in psychology from the University of California at Berkeley, where she is a doctoral candidate in that field.
Her mother is the chairwoman of the Dade County School Board in Miami.
Her father was a dentist in Miami Beach.


The Nation: Slo Mo; Changing the Wiring Takes Time
ONCE upon a time, the word "revolution" conjured up images of bloody peasant uprisings in China or of ragged guerrillas in Cuba overthrowing a dictatorship of the rich.
A revolution was an angry upheaval of the power structure, a word usually associated with violence.
But that's history.
In America today, "revolution" has become a marketing buzzword most often invoked by buttoned-down business executives at telephone companies and movie studios and computer companies.
They blather on and on about the information revolution and the communications revolution, and say, in effect, if you thought sliced bread was something, wait'll we really transform people's lives and in the process make lots and lots of money.


Power Play


Results Plus
BASKETBALL Walters Sparks Nets in Last Warmup  New Jersey jumped out to an 11-point lead in the first quarter and beat the Atlanta Hawks, 101-89, in the last pre-season game for both teams last night in Mobile, Ala.
In so doing, the Nets (2-6) snapped a four-game losing streak under the first-year head coach, Butch Beard.
Rex Walters, starting at point-guard in place of the idled Kenny Anderson (tight hamstring), led a balanced New Jersey attack.
Walters finished with 20 points; Chris Morris had 17 in what was his second preseason game. (AP) BASEBALL Giants Beat Lions to Win the Japan Series  The Tokyo Yomiuri Giants -- Japan's winningest team -- celebrated their 60th anniversary by capturing the Japan Series for the 18th time, beating the Seibu Lions, 3-1, in the Tokyo Dome yesterday.
The Giants took the series four games to two, beating their crosstown rivals for the first time in four attempts.
It was the Giants' first Series victory in five years.
Right-hander Hiromi Makihara, winner of Game 2, went the distance in the clincher, scattering seven hits.
Henry Cotto, a former major leaguer, was 3 for 3, hitting his second homer of the series. (AP) TENNIS Becker Defeats Sampras in Stockholm  Boris Becker played one of his best matches of the year in beating top-ranked Pete Sampras, 6-4, 6-4, yesterday in the Stockholm Open semifinals.
In today's final, the sixth-seeded German will face second-ranked Goran Ivanisevic, who defeated Yevgeny Kafelnikov, 7-5, 6-4.
Becker's victory on the fast carpet at the Globe Arena snapped a four-match losing streak to Sampras, dating back to 1992. (AP) GOLF Ballesteros Takes Lead in Volvo Masters  Seve Ballesteros fired a three-under-par 68 in the third round yesterday and took a two-stroke lead over Bernhard Langer and Colin Montgomerie in the Volvo Masters in Sotogrande, Spain.
Ballesteros has a total of 204.
Approaching the finish line at Table Bay off Cape Town Auguin, the defending BOC champion, was about 50 miles ahead of David Adams on True Blue, the Class II leader (40-50 feet).
CROSS-COUNTRY Silva Wins the Individual Title  Hamilton Silva of the College of St.
Rose from Albany upset Marty Ryan of C. W. Post yesterday in winning the individual title at the Collegiate Track Conference Cross-Country championships at Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx.
Silva broke away about 3 1/2 miles into the 5-mile race and was timed in 25 minutes 48.4 seconds.
Ryan, a two-time winner of the event, finished second in 26:00.5.
Trenton State, with four runners in the top 20, took the team title with 82 points.
Albany finished second with 84. (AP)


Lisa I. Friedman, Adam D. Glick
Lisa Ilene Friedman, the daughter of Jan and Dr.
Raymond Friedman of Brentwood, Calif., was married there last evening to Adam Daniel Glick, the son of Vivian and Dr.
Robert Glick of Tenafly, N.J.
Rabbi Allen Freehling officiated at University Synagogue.
The bride, 26, is an associate director of public affairs at the Constitutional Rights Foundation in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Tufts University and received a master's degree in European history from the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her father is a psychoanalyst and her mother is a psychotherapist, both in Los Angeles.


In 2 Bellwether States, Republicans See the Chance to Relive a Landslide
Michigan Republicans still talk about 1966.
George Romney won a third term as Governor, Bob Griffin was elected to the Senate, beating former Gov.
G.
Mennen Williams, five incumbent Democrats in the House were ousted, and Republicans captured both houses of the state legislature.
"The year the elephants got loose," an old party retainer calls it.


After the Sri Lanka Violence: A Sense of Despair
As Sri Lankans struggled this week to cope with the suicide bombing that killed the country's main opposition leader and dozens of others at a political rally, many found a focus for their grief in a moment that one newspaper called the "gathering of the widows."
In an encounter that encapsulated the melancholy that has settled on this country like a shroud, three women who lost their husbands in previous political killings met on Wednesday by the rainswept bier of Gamini Dissanayake, the slain opposition leader, to console his widow, Srima.
The brief meeting, at an open-air pavilion at the country's parliamentary complex, was wordless.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Florham Park; Good Schools, Yes, but Low Taxes, Too
THE Morris County borough of Florham Park has accomplished what every municipality strives to do: It has coupled one of the lowest tax rates in New Jersey with one of its finest school systems.
Its tax rate is just $1.87 for each $100 of assessed property valuation, the second lowest of the county's 39 municipalities, after Harding Township -- despite the fact that large tracts are owned by tax-exempt nonprofits such as the 200-acre Roman Catholic College of St.
Elizabeth, for women, and Fairleigh Dickinson University.


Sweden Adds to Its Cultural Attractions
An opera house in Goteborg and a new room at a major Stockholm museum are two cultural sites inaugurated this month in Sweden.
On Oct. 15 the Goteborg Opera House opened its doors with a performance of Karl Birger Blomdahl's "Aniara." Situated at the city's harbor, the hall will serve as a venue for theater, opera, music and ballet.


Pumpkin Stars in Some Nontraditional Roles
THERE is more to pumpkin than the perennial jack-o'-lantern or pumpkin pie.
Pumpkin puree, made fresh by baking or boiling fresh pumpkin or cooking it in a microwave oven -- then mashing it or processing it in a blender or food processor -- can be added to enrich a host of dishes, notably risotto and pasta sauce.
Chunks of pumpkin can make a savory stew to spoon over couscous, rice or other grains to serve as a vegetarian main dish or alongside grilled meats.


Keepers of the Flame


Silver Protest Reunion For Yesteryear's Yippies
Still defiant, still organizing for change, still, as they would be the first to say, revolting after all these years, several survivors of the 1969 Chicago conspiracy trial gathered in Manhattan Friday night for a 25th reunion of the courtroom melodrama that in many ways defined the rebellious 60's.
"It's not over," Tom Hayden, a founder of Students for a Democratic Society and now a California State Senator, told an audience of several hundred, some with their children, gathered in a school auditorium on the Upper West Side.


Carroll's Division Mark Has a Legendary Flavor
When the season began, they had 60 years of head-coaching experience to his zero.
But in his first go-round against the Jets' four American Conference East Division rivals and their coaches, Pete Carroll came up with a 3-1 record.
Now, Round 2 against the East -- and, by extension, Don Shula, Bill Parcells, Marv Levy and Ted Marchibroda -- begins on Sunday.
And Carroll's opponent will be the 64-year-old Marchibroda and his up-and-down Indianapolis Colts.


The Voice of British Jewry
THE JEWISH CHRONICLE AND ANGLO-JEWRY, 1841-1991  By David Cesarani.
Illustrated. 329 pp.
New York: Cambridge University Press. $59.95.


Honor Grant's Wish to Be Buried at West Point
To the Editor:
In light of the deplorable condition of Grant's Tomb in Riverside Park in New York City, and the threat by President Ulysses S. Grant's descendants to remove his remains and those of his wife unless the National Park Service cleans up the tomb site, I suggest that Grant's original burial plans be reconsidered.


I.R.A. Chief Eases Stand on a United Ireland
Gerry Adams, the political leader of the Irish Republican Army, said today that he could agree to a compromise solution of the conflict in Northern Ireland that falls short of the I.R.A.'s ultimate goal of a united Ireland.
In perhaps the most conciliatory statement he has made since the I.R.A. began a cease-fire two months ago, Mr.
Adams said that as president of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political wing, he still wanted a "unitary state," combining the North, a Protestant-dominated British province, with the Irish Republic, which is overwhelmingly Roman Catholic.


Sharper Scrutiny of White House Safety
The President's house, at 16th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue N.W., is already protected by metal detectors, sharpshooters, electronic sensing devices, concrete barricades, guard dogs and earthen berms.
Yet none of that stopped a gunman from spraying the White House with bullets on Saturday.
As a result, the shooting -- which caused no injuries but left pockmarks where bullets had hit the facade of the White House -- has set off a new round of official discussions on what can be done to tighten security.


A Step Backward for Ndeti As Samuelson Goes Ahead
Cosmas Ndeti of Kenya dropped out of the Chicago Marathon today as Joan Benoit Samuelson, the 1984 Olympic champion, dropped back into competitive distance running.
There had been talk of an assault on the world record by Ndeti, the winner of the Boston Marathon in 1993 and 1994, but the 24-year-old Kenyan developed a blister on his left instep and retired after 20 miles.
Luis dos Santos of Brazil repeated as the Chicago champion with a time of 2 hours 11 minutes 16 seconds.


Barrios Is Definitely No Stranger to U.S. as He Logs Miles to Prove It
With chinook winds blowing out of the Rockies and thin clouds scudding across a robin's egg sky, Arturo Barrios cast his line into the backyard lake of a friend and hauled out a bass the size of his running shoe.
"I caught the first one," Barrios said triumphantly to his training partner, Mark Coogan, on a recent afternoon.
"I'm winning."


A Little Run by Sanders Goes the Full Nine Yards
The fourth quarter and the overtime in the Detroit Lions' 28-25 victory over the Giants today produced scintillating plays.
One was Dave Meggett's 56-yard punt return for a Giants' touchdown.
Another was Barry Sanders's 62-yard burst that set up a Lions' touchdown.
But if you appreciate the subtleties of football and recognize the skills of the best players, the play of the game was a 9-yard pass completion to Sanders that kept the Lions' winning drive moving.
It was Barry Sanders at his best.


Consider the Pumpkin
Anyone who has driven the back roads this fall knows that the farmer markets are loaded with pumpkins.
This calls for a little research into the natural history of, and a mild tribute to, an attractive and serviceable fruit.
Not surprisingly, the pumpkin was earning its keep long before pies and Halloween made it a seasonal symbol.
When Curcurbita pepo was first cultivated, it was for its seeds, which were a prized snack among the sixth-millennium B.C. cave dwellers of the Tamaulipas Mountains in Mexico.


Los Angeles Mayor Crosses Party Line to Back Feinstein
Representative Michael Huffington suffered another hard political blow to his reeling Senate campaign today when his Democratic opponent, Senator Dianne Feinstein, won the endorsement of the state's second-most-powerful Republican, Mayor Richard J. Riordan of Los Angeles.
Mr.
Riordan, whose political prominence as a California Republican is overshadowed only by that of Gov.
Pete Wilson, said he was supporting the Senator rather than Mr.
Huffington because she had shown "an amazing ability to work with Republicans and Democrats to help solve the problems of Los Angeles and California."


Cav and Pag Reunited, All's Right in the World
The B before the P just doesn't work.
"Tab/Pag" possesses neither the fluid connection nor the easy separation of "Cav/Pag." So a minor upset in the cosmic scheme, inflicted by two glitzy early-season couplings of Puccini's "Tabarro" with Leoncavallo's "Pagliacci" at the Metropolitan Opera, was set right last week, when Mascagni's "Cavalleria Rusticana" displaced "Il Tabarro" for the rest of the run.
The Franco Zeffirelli productions of the two operas, from 1970, were last seen together two seasons ago.
In "Cavalleria," at least, whatever realism may be achieved by Mr.
Zeffirelli's scenic rendering of an Italian village square (live animals included) is fatally undercut by the fluffy carryings-on of the villagers, currently directed by Fabrizio Melano.


Amid Calm, Anger Lingers On 125th St.
Two weeks after the Giuliani administration moved to clear peddlers from 125th Street in Harlem, the buzz of shoppers there has returned.
The police presence, once more than 500 officers, has dwindled dramatically and the angry, displaced vendors have cut back their calls for a boycott and moved to find new sites.
But if 125th Street seems to have settled down to some degree of normalcy, all sides in the confrontation seem to be wrestling with what normal will now mean.


Campaign Choices; One More for Mr. Moynihan
In a season when incumbent legislators are being attacked as self-serving know-nothings, it is a pleasure to be able to identify rather quickly a politician who not only says he cares about good governance but has the record to prove it.
That description fits Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
He is running for a fourth term and he deserves it.
Bernadette Castro is the latest in a lengthening line of sacrificial lambs served up by the G.O.P. to fight an impossible battle.
Six years ago, an industrious fellow named Robert McMillan volunteered for this suicide mission, stumped the state in his own car and made a lot of good suggestions.
He was swamped.
Six years before that, Florence Sullivan, a scrappy conservative, gave it a shot with a meager budget that supported one press aide, one administrative assistant and one speechwriter -- all of whom seemed to be the same person.


Paradox of '94: Gloomy Voters In Good Times
The ornery and ill-tempered voters who will sit in judgment on Election Day cannot exactly put a finger on why they are so disgusted with Washington and politics.
They know that inflation is low and unemployment is down.
They know that the country is not at war, that even the disparaged expedition into Haiti turned out better than many of them expected.
Sure, some were disappointed that no health care plan was voted on.
But others were relieved because they did not want to lose their own coverage or pay any more for it.


Can Quantum Mechanics Explain Consciousness?
SHADOWS OF THE MIND A Search for the Missing Science of Consciousness  By Roger Penrose  Illustrated. 457 pages.
Oxford University Press. $25.
Is the digital computer merely a simpler version of the human brain, as many theorists contend?
If in fact it is, the implications are scary.
For then, as Roger Penrose points out in his profound new book, "Shadows of the Mind: A Search for the Missing Science of Consciousness," "all thinking is computation; in particular, feelings of conscious awareness are evoked merely by the carrying out of appropriate computations." And it is only a matter of time before the fabricators of artificial intelligence will be producing minds that make human beings obsolete.


G.O.P. HOLDING ON IN TIGHT CONTEST TO RULE SENATE
After a tumultuous week of campaigning in which Democrats proclaimed that they were gaining steam, statewide polls published yesterday showed that the fight for control of the Senate was still neck-and-neck.
Indeed, the two Republican Senators whom the Democrats say they have the best chance of picking off -- William V. Roth Jr. of Delaware and Conrad Burns of Montana -- have opened wide leads over their Democratic challengers, according to polls conducted for major newspapers in those two states.


Amid All the Boos, a Halloween Chorus of Yeas
Call it a howling success. Or a frightfully successful season.
Retailers and manufacturers say Halloween is bigger commercially than ever before.
Sales of Halloween candy -- including roughly 10,000 tons of candy corn -- have grown rapidly in the last year, and costumes, greeting cards and especially home decorations are also much in demand.


Cleanup Keeps a Frat House Open After It Is Declared Unfit
By all accounts, the members of the Pi Lambda Phi fraternity at Stevens Institute of Technology are not a particularly rowdy or debauched bunch.
The only animals in this house, in fact, were of the four-legged variety.
Nonetheless, there were a lot of them -- mostly mice, judging by the evidence.
And that, combined with the brothers' lax housekeeping habits, was enough for the city's Department of Health to declare the ornate beige brick building at 802 Castle Point Terrace unfit for human habitation on Wednesday.


Ex-Bloomingdale's Chief To Join Investment Bank
Two eminent figures in New York retailing are teaming up in an alliance that marries merchandising panache with financial acumen.
Marvin S. Traub, the merchant who established Bloomingdale's as one of the country's most dynamic stores, is joining Financo Inc., the investment banking firm headed by Gilbert Harrison, who has had a hand in many retailing deals.


Bridge
When an opponent opens the bidding, one generally assumes that a slam is out of reach.
But there are exceptions, and the diagramed deal played in January at the Town Club, 9 East 86th Street, is one of them.
North and South were Lee Koppel and David Berah, who climbed to seven clubs in the face of a one-spade opening bid.
The grand slam proved to be a good contract because, and only because, the opening bid marked East with all the missing high-card strength.
After winning the spade lead with dummy's ace, there were two ways to find a 13th trick.
One was to ruff a spade, cross to the club ace and ruff another spade.
Then the A-K of hearts would be cashed, and when the queen did not fall all the trumps would be run, saving one spade and three diamonds in the dummy.
East would then be squeezed.


Limits on Welfare Won't Make Jobs Secure; Wanted: Job-Readiness
To the Editor:
You miss a fundamental point in your Oct. 24 article on welfare mothers and jobs: While many of those on public assistance can and do find jobs, a far greater portion is not yet capable of doing so.
They suffer from debilitating and chronic poverty, which prevents them from getting and keeping a job.


Bid Raised In Duel of Railroads
Heating up a bidding war among giant railroads, the Union Pacific Corporation said yesterday that it had increased its offer for the Santa Fe Pacific Corporation to $3.74 billion, well beyond a revised bid of $3.2 billion that Burlington Northern Inc. had made on Thursday.
Union Pacific also said that its chairman and chief executive, Drew Lewis, a Transportation Secretary in the Reagan Administration, had taken a leave of absence to enter an alcohol treatment center.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Personal Income . . .
Sept.
Tuesday  Construction Spending . . .
Sept.
Wednesday  Leading Indicators . . .
Sept.
Factory Orders . . .
Sept.
Thursday  New-Car Sales . . .
Oct.
New-Home Sales . . .
Sept.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Employment . . .
Oct.


DANCE
Undulations of the Sea, On a Precisely Charted Voyage  Kaye Playhouse
As a company director, Rebecca Kelly pays careful attention to details of costuming and lighting, and she regularly commissions new music for her dances.
Yet too often her choreography is the least interesting feature of her productions.


In Giuliani-D'Amato Race, G.O.P. Sees Albany Drifting Away
In the crucial final days of the New York governor's race, a long-simmering feud between Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato has re-emerged, threatening to drag down the Republican candidate, George E. Pataki, as the party's leaders and even its nominees choose up sides.
Having decided to cross party lines and support Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, Mr.
Giuliani has set his sights on his old nemesis as well, throwing barbs and darts at Mr.
D'Amato and the Republican Party leadership.
"You have to be in some other state not to realize the Republican Party is in great dispute," Mr.
Giuliani said Saturday as he hit five upstate cities in support of Mr.
Cuomo.
"That happens when there's a lack of leadership, or perhaps the wrong leadership."


BBDO West Chief To Move to Ogilvy
Steve Hayden, chairman and chief executive at BBDO West, said he was leaving to join Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York in the new position of president of worldwide brand services on Ogilvy's I.B.M. account, effective Dec. 5.
To replace Mr.
Hayden, BBDO named David Lubars, president and executive creative director at BBDO West, to assume his responsibilities as head of the Los Angeles and San Francisco offices.


It All Began on a Hot Summer Sunday in 1970
Gary Muhrcke, winner of the first New York City Marathon, nearly missed his date with history.
"I only signed up 15 minutes before the race started," Muhrcke, then a 30-year-old New York City fireman, recalled recently.
"I hadn't trained for three weeks because of a leg injury, but I felt O.K., so I decided to run.


No Headline
"I don't know who won, but if I knew I would keep the guy in my house and not let him out." -- MOHAMMAD A. KHAN, proprietor of a store where one of the winning lottery tickets was sold.  [ B2:3. ]


Accounts
*
Ammirati &amp; Puris/Lintas, New York, has resigned from two accounts: Sterling Health U.S.A., New York, with billings estimated at $10 million for brands like Phillips' Milk of Magnesia, because of a conflict with the agency's Johnson &amp; Johnson account, and Smart Money magazine, New York, because of its small size, with billings estimated at $500,000. *
McDonald's Restaurants of Venezuela, Caracas, to Leo Burnett/Caracas, to handle its account, previously at McCann-Erickson Publicidad, Caracas, and to open restaurants in Colombia and Ecuador.
Billings were not disclosed.
Also, Leo Burnett's office in Uruguay, Nucleo Publicidad, Montevideo, was awarded the McDonald's account in Uruguay, previously at McCann-Erickson/ Uruguay, Montevideo.


Suspect Charged in White House Shooting
Federal officials today charged a Colorado man with two felony counts in Saturday's riddling of the White House with rifle fire but after considerable debate declined to charge him with trying to assassinate the President.
The decision to bring criminal charges came after investigators abruptly stopped questioning Francisco Martin Duran early this morning, when he requested a lawyer.


Remembering Crown Heights, Hopefuls Focus On Jewish Vote
Allies of State Senator George E. Pataki slashed at Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo with the double-edged sword known as Crown Heights yesterday, as both Jewish and black supporters of the Republican gubernatorial candidate criticized Mr.
Cuomo's role in the 1991 racial unrest and its aftermath.
The attacks came as Mr.
Cuomo and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani also toured Jewish neighborhoods, telling voters that a Pataki administration would hurt New York City.
The day ended with United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato appearing at a Pataki fund-raiser in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, re-emerging after an absence of several days from the Pataki campaign.


Corrections
A front-page article on Thursday about a new measurement of the distance to a remote galaxy, which bears on the question of the universe's age, misstated the equivalent of a speed, 80 kilometers per second.
It is about 180,000 miles an hour, not 60,000.


Film Noir of Open Spaces, Not Mean Streets
The fine art of murder is a simple one, and John Dahl, the director of "The Last Seduction," intends to keep it that way.
"I've always liked films with just a couple of characters in which things get twisted around," he said in a recent interview in New York, where his latest exercise in film noir opened on Wednesday.
With just three films under his belt, Mr.
Dahl, at 38, has acquired a growing audience that thrills to his distinctive, updated style of film noir.
Like the great practitioners of the genre, like his hero Billy Wilder, Mr.
Dahl starts with a basic premise.


Treasury Offering Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.99 percent, and for the six-month bill, 5.42 percent.


Two PC Pioneers Discussing a Rapprochement
A "grand rapprochement" between two of the personal computer industry's most visible and volatile pioneers, Steven P. Jobs, a co-founder of Apple Computer Inc., and William H. Gates, the chairman of the Microsoft Corporation, might be at hand.
People familiar with the discussions say Mr.
Jobs's faltering Next Inc. has quietly been negotiating with Microsoft for financing of Next's software development.
A deal for Next to create a version of its highly regarded software for Microsoft's Windows 95 and Windows NT operating systems was close to being announced this week, people familiar with the talks said, but snags delayed any immediate agreement.
The discussions are continuing.


Long Shot on Casinos Is Taken Seriously in Florida
Half an hour after setting out from Fort Lauderdale, the cruise ship Discovery I crosses into international waters and the casually dressed crowd scatters among the gaming tables and slot machines that suddenly come to life.
For the next four hours they will float on this 490-foot "boat to nowhere," one of several cruise ships that operate off Florida to give gamblers access to the casinos they could have back home but have twice rejected at the ballot box.
Next week, Florida residents will vote a third time on whether to allow casino gambling in the state.
While casinos have proliferated elsewhere in the country, opposition here remains strong, if not overwhelming.
Polls consistently show that the ballot measure, the Proposition for Limited Casinos, does not have the votes it needs to pass, even after an expensive campaign by pro-casino interests.
But the anti-casino forces are not writing the measure off.


Corrections
A picture caption on page 33 of the Television section yesterday, about the movie "Coma," misidentified the author of the novel on which it is based.
The book was written by Robin Cook, not Michael Crichton.


Israel to Relax Blockade On West Bank and Gaza
Israel said today that starting on Tuesday it would relax the blockade it imposed on the West Bank and Gaza Strip after the suicide bombing of a Tel Aviv bus 11 days ago.
At the same time, Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization worked out arrangements to station Palestinian police officers for the first time at the border crossings from Gaza into Egypt and from the West Bank into Jordan.
They may take their posts as early as Monday.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
One Big Noise Deserves Another  Avery Fisher Hall
Say this for Aaron Jay Kernis: he can stir up an orchestral ruckus.
If he had purposely set out in his "New Era Dance" (1994) to outdo in sheer volume the famous eruptive opening of Richard Strauss's "Also Sprach Zarathustra," which was also on the New York Philharmonic program on Thursday evening, he could hardly have done better.
"New Era" amounts to a Bernstein dance with Varesian bells and whistles.
And sirens, since it is meant to evoke riotous urban life.
But it did seem epochal when the Philharmonic players rapped (well . . .) the words "new era" to an electronic rhythm.


Campaign Choices; New York Congressional Races
Strong anti-incumbent sentiment and the struggle for control of the House of Representatives infuse this year's Congressional races in New York with unusual drama.
Here are our recommendations in some of the livelier races in New York City and surrounding suburban districts.
First District (Suffolk County): George Hochbrueckner, the Democrat running for a fifth term in this two-to-one Republican district, is battling a strong Republican challenge from Michael Forbes, a former member of Senator Alfonse D'Amato's staff now on leave from the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce.
Mr.
Forbes has an appealing, friendly style.
But his opposition to abortion rights and his decision to sign Newt Gingrich's disingenuous "Contract With America" suggest that his manner is more moderate than his politics.
Mr.
Forbes says he would be more tenacious in getting jobs for a district hit hard by defense cuts.
But it is difficult to see how he would be more effective than Mr.
Hochbrueckner, a member of the Armed Services Committee, who has been working aggressively to promote civilian uses of military technology.
Mr.
Hochbrueckner earns our endorsement.


Pope Appoints 30 Cardinals, 2 From U.S.
Pope John Paul II appointed 30 new cardinals today, cementing his influence on the uppermost ranks of the Roman Catholic Church for years to come and broadening the field of possible successors.
The addition of the cardinals means that Pope John Paul II appointed 100 of the maximum 120 cardinals eligible to vote in the secret ballot to elect a successor when a Pope dies.


A Diva in Progress Travels the Road to Fame
"A diva," declares Jenifer Lewis in a voice brimming with sass, "is someone who pretends to know who she is and looks fabulous doing it." And in her snappy and amusing one-woman show, "The Diva Is Dismissed," at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, Ms.
Lewis fits that definition to a T.
Imperious and sharply funny, with a brassy pop-gospel voice and hard-edged good looks, Ms.
Lewis suggests a composite of Tina Turner, Grace Jones and Bette Midler.
Why isn't she as famous as they?
That's a nagging question that Ms.
Lewis, who played Ms.
Turner's mother in the movie "What's Love Got to Do With It?," addresses in a show that deals with lofty career expectations that have yet to be fulfilled.


G.M. Success in an Unlikely Place
On a foundation laid by Communists, the General Motors Corporation has built a model of efficiency for the automobile industry in this reviving hamlet of the former East Germany.
When G.M. began assembling small cars here two years ago, skeptics predicted that it would struggle to train and motivate workers enervated by decades under a Communist Government.
But as G.M. has steadily increased volume and quality at this factory it has found the reverse.
Not in spite of, but because of, their experience and lingering ideals, the East Germans embraced what G.M. is straining to teach workers worldwide -- the Japanese approach, with its emphasis on teamwork and constant improvement.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  For Langer, Title and a Bonus  Bernhard Langer of Germany shot a one-under-par 70 yesterday and won the Volvo Masters tournament in Sotogrande, Spain, by one shot when Seve Ballesteros of Spain bogeyed the final hole.
Langer, who earned $204,000, finished at eight-under 276.
With the victory, he leaped past Ballesteros into second place on the final European money list -- worth a bonus of $135,500.
Ballesteros, with a 73, finished in a second-place tie with Vijay Singh of Fiji at 277.
Singh's 66 was the low round of the day.
The defending champion, Colin Montgomerie of Scotland (72), and Miguel Angel Jimenez of Spain (71) tied for fourth at 278. (AP) U.S.
Beats Japan: Michelle McGann and Donna Andrews shot 66's as the United States won 11 of 18 individual matches yesterday against Japan to take the Nichirei International L.P.G.A. event in Ami, Japan, for the 10th straight time.
The final score was 22 1/2-13 1/2. (AP) AUTO RACING  Slick 500 Title Goes to Labonte  Terry Labonte, dominating in the desert sun, raced away with yesterday's Slick 500 at Phoenix International Raceway.
The 1984 Winston Cup champion led 112 of the final 120 laps on the one-mile oval in picking up his third victory of the season.
It wasn't much of a contest after the halfway point of the 312-lap race.
Most of the leaders fell back into the pack, and Labonte put all except two drivers -- the runner-up Mark Martin and the pole-starter Sterling Marlin -- a lap down. (AP) YACHTING  Frenchman Advances in Class I  There was a surge in finishes yesterday in the BOC round-the-world race.
Christophe Auguin of France, the race's defending champion, arrived first, for third-place in Class I. Next was David Adams of Australia, the Class II winner for boats of 40-50 feet.
Following him was Jean Luc Van Den Heede of France, for fourth in Class I. Also expected were Giovanni Soldini of Italy and David Scully of Chicago.
CROSS-COUNTRY  Make It Four in a Row for Iona  Martin McCarthy, who covered the five-mile course at Van Cortlandt Park in 25 minutes 28 seconds, led Iona to its fourth straight team cross-country title with 16 points in the Metro Atlantic Conference Championships.
McCarthy, the fifth consecutive Gael to take the gold medal, finished 160 yards ahead of a teammate, Declan O'Callaghan, who ran a 26:00.
Manhattan College, behind Margaret McParland's first-place finish of 19:27 over 3.1 miles, won the women's team crown with 45 points.
TENNIS  Stockholm Agrees With Becker  Boris Becker, convinced that Stockholm is his kind of town, beat Goran Ivanisevic in a four-set, serve-and-volley duel yesterday to win the Stockholm Open for the fourth time.
"It must be something in the air that makes me play great here," the German said after a 4-6, 6-4, 6-3, 7-6 (7-4) victory in the $1.72 million event on the Globe Arena's fast carpet.
During the weeklong event, Becker beat the top three players in the world. (AP)


N.F.L. at Midseason: Don't Count the Bills Out
Once again, the Buffalo Bills proved how proud they are.
Once again, the Bills showed how good they can be.
On a National Football League weekend where near ghoulish things were happening on nearly every field all over the league, the Bills pitched in with a 44-10 pounding of the Kansas City Chiefs.
The last time they met, Buffalo whipped Kansas City in the A.F.C. championship game by 30-13.


20 Months After Bombing, Vista Hotel to Finally Reopen
After more than 20 months and $65 million in renovation and repairs, the Vista International Hotel -- near the epicenter of the World Trade Center explosion -- is reopening tomorrow with a new look, a new conference center and tougher competition than ever.
The 820-room Vista has rebuilt the underground areas damaged in the bomb blast of Feb. 26, 1993, which killed six people and injured hundreds.
The soot and smoke in the guest rooms and common areas have been cleaned up.
And guests are coming back: more than 200 reservations are on the books for opening day, and the hotel has thousands of confirmed bookings from individuals and groups through March and "a lot of interest from meeting planners and conventioneers," said Franz Zeller, the hotel's general manager.


Ewing Says He's Fine, Any Time
It doesn't matter to Patrick Ewing when the regular season begins.
All he knows is that he is confident he will be ready when it does.
"I'll be fine for Sunday, Saturday, whenever we play," the Knicks' center said today after going through his first all-out workout of the preseason with his teammates.
"I'm a little sore, but I feel all right."


Unions Impose Stability on a Turbulent Construction Industry
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 24 news article about the difficulties encountered by a nonunion builder on Long Island does not address the larger crisis now gripping the entire construction industry.


Time Warner Expected to Name a President
Time Warner Inc. is expected to name as its president today Richard D. Parsons, the chairman and chief executive of Dime Bancorp, according to several people close to the media company.
The news came as something of a surprise to media executives who follow Time Warner because the company did not have a president under either its late chairman Steven J. Ross or its current chairman Gerald M. Levin.
While Bert W. Wasserman, Time Warner's chief financial officer, has said he will retire at the end of this year and rumors have circulated of a replacement for him, there has been no talk of creating the post of president.


For Russians, Literary Loot Turns Awkward
Fifty years after Russia and Germany savaged each other's cultural heritage with looting and bombing, Russia has yet to return most of the millions of books it stole from Germany at the end of World War II.
Germany destroyed nearly 200 million Russian books in the war, a record almost impossible to comprehend.
But it long ago returned most of the books it had left and has sent millions of dollars to Russia in partial compensation.


U.N. Challenge: U.S. Pushes for New Ideas on Bosnia
In introducing a resolution to lift an arms embargo against the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Clinton Administration has done more than meet its own deadline for action if the Bosnian Serbs continued to reject a three-month-old peace plan.
The United States is also challenging its European allies and Russia to come up with some better way to break the stalemate as Sarajevo and other parts of Bosnia face a third bleak winter of war.


Accused Had Been Missing a Month
At least from the outside, the home of Francisco Martin Duran here fits the portrait of American suburban tranquillity: a tidy brick-and-frame house on Albion Street with festive Halloween decorations in a window.
But inside the garage is a large American flag, hanging upside down.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, an article on Friday about a reporter whose articles resulted in manslaughter charges in an assisted suicide case misspelled part of the name of a law firm that represents news organizations.
It is Gibson, Dunn &amp; Crutcher, not Dunne.


An Acquisition By Interpublic
The Interpublic Group of Companies has acquired Western International Media, the nation's largest media-buying service company, its chairman said yesterday.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
Western, with 33 offices in the United States, purchases more than $1.6 billion in television, radio, print and outdoor advertising for more than 1,600 clients, including L. A. Gear and the Walt Disney Company.
Western is expected to continue operating as an independent unit, while gaining access to Interpublic's resources -- including those of McCann-Erickson Worldwide, Lintas Worldwide and the Lowe Group.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  HAITIAN 'SECTION CHIEF' RULES
Despite the President's return, authoritarian and often abusive rural magistrates still control much of rural Haiti, but the peasants have been emboldened and are beginning to fight back.
A1


League and Players Still Skating in Circles
One month gone, five months and nine days to go.
The National Hockey League officially completes the first month of its season-delaying lockout today with no solution or path to solution in the foreseeable future.
Instead of games, this week's N.H.L. schedule has a secret bargaining session and an announcement of cancellation of additional games.


30 New Cardinals Named by the Pope
Pope John Paul II appointed 30 new cardinals, including two from the United States.
The appointments cemented his influence on the top ranks of the Roman Catholic Church and broadened the field of possible successors.


Dividend Meetings


POP
Feinstein Mixes the Comic With a Broad Range of Singing  Carnegie Hall
When Michael Feinstein made his New York debut at the Algonquin Hotel eight years ago, this singer and pianist presented himself as a reverent archivist of a bygone musical era when the Gershwins, Irving Berlin and Harry Warren ruled America's songwriting roost.
Since then, the pious nostalgist has blossomed into an engaging all-round entertainer.
At his Carnegie Hall solo debut on Saturday night, Mr.
Feinstein suggested a composite of Victor Borge, Danny Kaye and Al Jolson as well as a romantic pop crooner situated stylistically somewhere between Eddie Fisher and Art Garfunkel.


Kaboom!


CHRONICLE
Vice President AL GORE met his worst nightmare on Saturday afternoon.
Right in his front yard in Washington.
Standing in front of the Vice President's mansion was a fellow who looked like Newt Gingrich, the House minority leader, down to the gray hair parted in the middle, wearing a "Newt" T-shirt and a sign that said Speaker of the House, which is what Mr.
Gingrich will be if the Republicans win control of the House of Representatives Nov. 8.


Charles E. Stewart Jr., 78, Federal Judge for 22 Years
Charles E. Stewart Jr., who presided over the criminal trials of racketeers and shady Wall Street manipulators and a host of tangled civil cases during 22 years as a Federal judge in Manhattan, died on Friday at Vassar Brothers Hospital in Poughkeepsie.
He was 78 years old and lived in Pawling, N.Y.
Judge Stewart, who retired last July 1, had been in failing health for more than a year and suffered heart attacks last November and December.
He entered the hospital with phlebitis on Oct. 20 and died of heart failure, said his son, Charles E. Stewart 3d.


Seoul Wishes for Prosperous North Korea
To the Editor:
Selig S. Harrison argues in "Beware the Hawks in Seoul" (Op-Ed, Oct. 21) that the defect in President Clinton's agreement with North Korea about nuclear nonproliferation is the South Korean Government.


Sense of Dread Now Pervades Frantic Search
Five days after they were reported to have disappeared with the red taillights of their mother's stolen car down a dark rural road, there is still no sign of the two little boys.
The town is draped in yellow ribbons and its people still pray for miracles, but here in Union there is a growing sense of dread over the fate of 3-year-old Michael Smith and his 14-month-old brother, Alexander.
"Look for a merciful God to deliver us," said the Rev.
Mark Long, a pastor in Union, during a weekend vigil for the boys.


Patents; Stockpiling technologies that allow telephones and computers to talk to each other.
THERE is much speculation these days about what the interactive technology of the future will look like.
For now, two of the most familiar pieces of office equipment around -- the telephone and the computer -- are increasingly popular conduits for the exchange of information between companies and customers.
By pressing buttons on their touch-tone phones, customers can ask a computer on the other end of the line what their bank balance is, when the next flight from Chicago is expected or whether that burgundy handbag currently being peddled on the television screen is also available in chartreuse.


Market Place; An ambitious cruise ship operator seeks a comeback.
THANKS to the growing popularity of its Delta Queen Steamboat cruises on the Mississippi and its tributaries, American Classic Voyages was enjoying smooth sailing when it went public in March 1992 (then, and until May of this year, it was known as the Delta Queen Steamboat Company).
With expansion in mind, it signed a contract for construction of the $60 million American Queen, its third and largest vessel, which will increase the line's capacity by about 70 percent when it goes into service in June.
Then, in August 1993, American Classic paid $2.5 million in cash for American Hawaii Cruises and its two cruise ships, thus becoming the owner of the only two cruise lines that fly the United States flag.


A Magazine Seeks to Push the On-Line Envelope
In a fourth-floor industrial loft overlooking a freeway here, Wired magazine has just begun an experiment that some people believe represents the future of publishing.
Already something of a phenomenon, the two-year-old magazine has captured a following of more than 160,000 readers by tapping into an obsession with digital technology and computer networks.


Under Fire, Mandela Calls For Austerity
Stung by images of high-living officials and pressed by inherited debts, President Nelson Mandela's Government has announced austerity measures including cutting the pay of top elected officials, whittling the Civil Service and selling some state-owned businesses.
The changes, announced late Saturday night by Thabo Mbeki, Mr.
Mandela's first deputy, were a response to growing public disillusionment with South Africa's first freely elected Government.
Many people feel the Government has preached patience and discipline to the public while reveling in the new comforts of power.


In Rural Haiti, 'Section Chief' Rules Despite U.S. Presence
Jean-Bertrand Aristide may once again be President of Haiti, but in this poor but verdant valley, Jean Lacoste Edouard is still the boss, and he enforces his will with fists, clubs, machetes and guns.
As one of Haiti's 565 "chefs de section," or rural magistrates, Mr.
Edouard is the sole representative of the central Government in a lush, rice-growing section of the Artibonite region a three-hour drive north of Port-au-Prince.
Mr.
Edouard, gruff and muscular with piercing eyes and a commanding demeanor, has wielded power since 1986, outlasting more than half a dozen military and civilian Governments and inspiring fear and dread among the 10,000 or so people whose lives he controls.


Taking Over Is as Natural as a 26.2-Mile Run
After years of playing second fiddle to a one-man band, Allan Steinfeld finds himself conducting the New York City Marathon all by himself -- if you don't count the loyal support of a dedicated staff, more than 10,000 experienced volunteers, a cadre of powerful municipal and civic leaders and the continuing inspiration of Fred Lebow, the visionary who relied on Steinfeld to make his own marathon dreams come true.
Three weeks after Lebow died of brain cancer at the age of 62 and a week before the 25th marathon draws more than 25,000 runners to the city's premier athletic event, the race Lebow created in 1970 seems to be in very capable hands.


Make No Bones About It, It's the Ghoul Season


POLL FINDS CUOMO HAS EDGED AHEAD OF PATAKI IN RACE
With a combination of patient strategy and unforeseen events, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has edged ahead of State Senator George E. Pataki as New York's gubernatorial race enters its final week, according to a New York Times/WCBS-TV News Poll.
The new poll, which was conducted from Wednesday through Saturday, shows that Mr.
Cuomo's lead -- between 6 and 10 percentage points, depending on how it is measured -- has little to do with any new-found affection by New Yorkers for the 12-year incumbent.
Instead, Mr.
Pataki, the Republican nominee, has fallen behind because of the impact of B. Thomas Golisano's third-party candidacy and because Mr.
Cuomo's campaign strategy of attack has convinced some voters that Mr.
Pataki is an unacceptable alternative to the Governor.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball League
DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Waived Daimon Sweet and Greg Sutton, guards.
DENVER NUGGETS -- Waived Abdul Fox and Ryan Yoder, guards.
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Signed Clifford Rozier, forward, to a four-year contract.
UTAH JAZZ -- Signed Antoine Carr, forward.


Martin W. Frey, 73, Educator in Harlem
Martin W. Frey, retired superintendent of Community School District 4, in East Harlem, died on Thursday at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
He was 73 and moved recently from Rye, N.Y., to Larchmont, N.Y.
The cause of death was leukemia, said his daughter, Amy Kashchy.


Man, Hit by a Thrown Egg, Kills a Youth in Brooklyn
A pre-Halloween egg fight among a dozen children on Saturday night led to the death of a 12-year-old Brooklyn boy when one of the eggs accidentally struck a passing man who became enraged and stabbed him, the police said.
As the youth, Pedro Ramos of Bushwick, staggered away, mortally wounded in the groin and pleading for help, the man's companion kept kicking and punching him, witnesses and the police said.


Essay; Glory of Competition
How can the government best help propel us along the information superhighway?
In most of us, that question induces an instant MEGO (my eyes glaze over).
I recall a moment in the Nixon White House when Diane Sawyer and I were earnestly briefing Ron Ziegler on an arcane point likely to generate questions after an economic speech; the press secretary absorbed all he could and finally said: "Stop. Any new fact you tell me now means I'll forget something else."


Review/Fashion; Lots of Sugar, With Some Pinches of Spice
Designers in the opening shows of the spring 1995 collections here have been asking their abstemious fashion audiences to indulge in a lot of sweets.
The sugary, countrified, rose-colored retro spirit that seems to be sweeping New York this season brought forth picnic tablecloth dresses at Donna Karan's DKNY show , skirts made from potato sacks at Lawrence Scott, and 1950's debutantes in tulle and cashmere sweaters at Michael Leva.
At Miu Miu, the diffusion line of Prada, models wore little jackets like those favored by manicurists in the 1950's and patent leather shoes the color that in nail enamel is called cotton candy.
Russell Bennett offered tiny floral prints on white pique dresses with crinolines beneath.


Long-Term Oil Strain Is Seen
Military maneuvers in the Persian Gulf, pipeline damage and spills in Texas and the news Friday that two oil companies had temporarily taken refineries off line have ruffled the oil markets in recent weeks, and prices are now at their highest levels since midsummer.
But in the great scheme of energy supplies, these are mere blips.
Of far greater concern, experts say, is that by the end of the decade billions of dollars will be needed to improve the oilfields, pipelines and ports in the Middle East to provide oil-consuming nations with increased supplies.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Single Sensibility For an Orchestra and Its Leader  Carnegie Hall
The Israel Chamber Orchestra and Shlomo Mintz offered a comfortable, if single, point of view on Thursday night.
The program at Carnegie Hall was half 20th century, half 18th, but the message was uniform: a warm, cushioned way of playing stringed instruments that both orchestra and Mr.
Mintz, its conductor and violinist, shared to the utmost.


7 Contemporary Pieces For a Festive Occasion
"A Concert of Contemporary Dances," presented in honor of Judith R. Shapiro, Barnard College's new president, featured a wide range of familiar and emerging choreographers on Saturday afternoon at the Miller Theater at Columbia University.
Alexandre Proia, a former soloist and choreographer with the New York City Ballet, presented "Dawn to Dawn," a premiere inspired by Kahlil Gibran's "Prophet"; its mellow images of spiritual quest were a far cry from the hard-edged, angular choreography Mr.
Proia had shown in the past.
Emma Diamond, until recently with the Merce Cunningham Dance Company, offered a new work that had the individuality and spark of her own dancing.


CHRONICLE
When a mother speaks, partygoers listen.
Some 600 people, including the Rev.
JESSE JACKSON and CORETTA SCOTT KING , gathered at the corporate headquarters of TLC Beatrice International Holdings on West 57th Street last week to celebrate the publication by John P. Wiley &amp; Sons of "Why Should White Guys Have All the Fun?"
The book, by BLAIR S. WALKER , is a biography of Reginald F. Lewis, the lawyer, corporate takeover dealer and philanthropist who bought the international operations of the Beatrice Company in 1987 in a $985 million leveraged buyout.


Vacco Faults Burstein on Using Convicted Felon in Campaign
Dennis C. Vacco, the Republican candidate for New York State attorney general, continued yesterday to press his attack on his Democratic opponent, Karen S. Burstein, for allowing a convicted felon to work in her campaign.
Mr.
Vacco, who is trailing in the polls, said campaign-disclosure statements filed on Aug. 30 showed that the worker, Ellen O'Meara, had received $1,800 from Ms.
Burstein's campaign for fund raising and provided the candidate with $3,845 in "in-kind contributions."


London Brings an Edge to the G.O.P. Ticket
Herbert London is a professor who speaks like a preacher, a high-volume conservative raised on a rigid code he jokingly calls Jewish Calvinism.
He has more than a little edge in his manner, which comes through in forums like his appearance on a call-in show in Syracuse the other day on WHEN-AM radio, which concerned reducing taxes, trimming welfare and, most important, restoring dignity to "the forgotten New Yorker."
"You have this huge seductress called government," he barked into the microphone on a campaign swing through central New York.
"People want the services but they don't want to pay the taxes. You can't run a society in that fashion. It creates the politics of resentment."


METRO DIGEST
CUOMO PULLS AHEAD IN LATEST POLL
With a combination of patience and unforeseen events, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has edged ahead of State Senator George E. Pataki as New York's gubernatorial race enters its final week, according to a New York Times/WCBS-TV News Poll.
The new poll, conducted from Wednesday through Saturday, shows that Mr.
Cuomo's lead -- between 6 and 10 percentage points depending on how it is measured -- has little to do with any new-found affection by New Yorkers for the 12-year incumbent.
Instead, Mr.
Pataki, the Republican nominee, has fallen behind because of the impact of B. Thomas Golisano's third-party candidacy and because Mr.
Cuomo's strategy of attack has convinced some voters that Mr.
Pataki is an unacceptable alternative.
A1.


3-Way L.I. Race Gives a Democrat a Rare Chance
A few months ago, Philip M. Schiliro, at work in Washington, got a call from his mother, Jean, on Long Island.
She had a feeling that the local Congressman, David A. Levy, a freshman Republican, was in trouble in his primary race.
Why, she demanded, wasn't Phil back here, running for the seat on the Democratic line, as he did in 1992?
Mrs.
Schiliro proved prophetic.
Mr.
Levy lost the Republican primary in September, a defeat that transformed the Fourth Congressional District race from a yawner into a three-way tossup.
By late September, the Republican nomination belonged to a political maverick; the incumbent was running as a third-party candidate, and Mr.
Schiliro had taken a leave of absence from his Capitol Hill job, a last-minute replacement for a weaker Democrat in the race.


4 Winners to Share A $72 Million Prize From State Lottery
New York Lottery officials broke a zillion hearts with their little air-blown numbered balls late Saturday night, but announced yesterday that four new millionaires had beaten the dizzy odds and would share a $72.5 million Lotto jackpot, the richest regular strike since the state lottery began 27 years ago.
By last night, the officials said, only one winner had come forward -- a man who bought his ticket at a grocery in Galway, a tiny Saratoga County village.
But his name was not released and all four winners were still anonymous -- safe, for the time being, from the frenzied attentions of the news media and investment advisers, the dream merchants and long-lost relatives.


Limits on Welfare Won't Make Jobs Secure
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 24 front-page article reports that many women leave welfare for insecure low-wage jobs only to return to welfare when these jobs fall through.
You state that the policy implications of these findings are "up for grabs." In fact, the implications are clear: current welfare reform proposals are misdirected and will harm many women struggling to support themselves and their children through low-wage jobs.


PRO FOOTBALL: Giants and Jets Hit the Same Numbers in a Losers' Lottery; A Miss Is as Good as a Mile As Esiason Is Inches Short
No wonder the Jets were angry.
And, if they were honest, they were disappointed in themselves as well today.
They were out of it. They fell back in. They were out. They crept back.


Proof Lacking for Ritual Abuse by Satanists
Tales of satanic ritual abuse, with well-organized cults sacrificing animals and babies and engaging in sexual perversion and cannibalism, is the stuff of tabloid television.
Now the first empirical study of its actual prevalence, based on information from district attorneys, social service workers, police officials and psychotherapists, suggests that these tales are usually just that -- figments of imagination.
Athough the survey found occasional cases of lone abusers who used ritualistic trappings, it found no substantiated reports of well-organized satanic rings of people who sexually abuse children.


Teen-Agers on Camera And Also Supervising It
In its press kit, "The Ride" is promoted as "teen-driven TV: it's a trip." Anything teen-driven on television nowadays probably takes a cue or two from MTV, where the offices buzz with cool young demographic types hired to provide instant programming feedbacks.
And sure enough, the creator and executive producer of "The Ride," Shauna Garr, was formerly a segments producer for MTV's teen-age magazine, "Like We Care."
For "The Ride," Ms.
Garr has chosen, from more than 250 entries, a crew of six teen-age video producers who spent two months together getting to know other teen-agers on a journey that covered 9,000 miles and 8 states.
At times, the effect looks something like Jack Kerouac meeting MTV's "Real World." No one, be assured, is likely to mistake "The Ride" for "America's Funniest Videos."


Plagiarists Steal More Than Just Words
To the Editor:
Re "What Rhymes With, uh, Plagiarism?" (Arts pages, Oct. 25): The number of journals of every type in fields as diverse as poetry and science is an invitation to plagiarism on an unprecedented scale.
There is no effective institutional means of combating it.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; The Instant Replay Repeal Haunts the Giants
INSTANT replay has reared its invisible head between the Giants' general manager and the Giants' coach.
George Young would still vote against it.
Dan Reeves wishes it hadn't been repealed.
Two plays in yesterday's 28-25 overtime loss to the Detroit Lions begged for instant replay.


High Seas Delaying Recovery of Sunken Treasure
Forrest Gump has not had the only Gulf of Mexico trawler struck by impossible fortune.
Some real-life fishermen whose nets snagged on the bottom off the coast here last year discovered a treasure of 400,000 colonial Spanish pieces of eight more than 200 years old.
All silver, they are worth millions, perhaps tens of millions of dollars.
Scholars say the treasure was almost certainly borne on the Spanish brig of war El Cazador, dispatched by King Charles III of Spain in 1784 to shore up the paper currency and the economy of his Louisiana colony.


Corrections
A chart on Wednesday about the Nassau County charter revision misstated the number of votes allotted to one town under a weighted system for the Board of Supervisors, and omitted a second town.
North Hempstead has 15 votes, not 58.
Hempstead has 58.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; The Verdict on the Jets: Nothing but Mediocrity
IT wasn't so bad that the Jets lost a game as much as it was how and to whom.
They found another way to lose to the Colts, their divisional soul mates in everlasting mediocrity.
Let's see now.
Giants lose back in Jersey, slip to 3 and 5, Cowboys in Dallas up next.
Jets fall in Indy, 28-25, at .500 again, with Buffalo's surging Bills on tap.
Once upon a time, the Giants were 3-0 and the Jets were 2-0 and East Rutherford was the pro football capital of America.
Hate to be the tailgate party pooper, but yesterday's events just might about do it for the old Meadowlands football season, at least the substantial portion of our program.


At the Circus, a Day of Delight for a Serious Cause
Regina Mary Maggio, a 6-year-old cancer patient from Long Island, couldn't wait to see the elephants at the Big Apple Circus yesterday afternoon at Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center.
"I've ridden one, you know," she said, in a matter-of-fact tone.


In Battle for No. 1, Nebraska's Outlook Rosier Than Penn State's
The college football leviathans have risen to the top, and both are contemplating undefeated seasons -- and the possibility of laying claim to the mythical national championship.
Nebraska, coming off a convincing 24-7 victory over Colorado on Saturday, is ranked No. 1 by The Associated Press and No. 2 by The New York Times.
Penn State, which crushed Ohio State by 63-14, is No. 2, according to A.P., and No. 1 with The Times.
In the USA Today/CNN poll, Penn State remained No. 1, while Nebraska was No. 2, although the margin was extremely narrow.


Bledsoe? Marino? This Game Is All Legs
This was supposed to be a shootout between two fly boys -- Miami's Dan Marino and New England's Drew Bledsoe -- who like nothing better than filling the air with passes.
In the last game between the two teams, on opening day, the two quarterbacks combined for 894 yards and 9 touchdowns through the air and the Dolphins won, 39-35.
On a sunny afternoon, with a game-time temperature an unseasonably warm 75 degrees, the stage was set for another toss-fest between Marino and Bledsoe.
But it soon turned into a day for the foot soldiers, primarily the Miami kicker, Pete Stoyanovich, and running back Bernie Parmalee.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; A Connecticut newspaper waxes Dickensian by offering readers a quirky serialized novel.
A COMELY Connecticut woman is having a steamy affair with a handsome war hero who has been dead for 218 years, according to The Hartford Courant.
Now if that stretches your definition of newspaper fare, the editors of The Courant have accomplished their goal.
The deceased lucky fellow is Caleb Quine, a fictional Nathan Hale-type who may have been done in by the British during the American Revolution and who is currently starring in his own novel in the pages of The Courant.


Neighbors Play Critical Role in Shutting Down Illegal Mine
This corner of Westchester has been refashioning itself so swiftly from a rural backwater to a tidy suburb that newcomers were startled a half dozen years ago to discover there was an open-face mine operating at full blast in their midst.
Upset by the sudden window-rattling clamor caused by dynamiting and large dump trucks, the mine's neighbors went to the state's Department of Environmental Conservation for help.
An inspector concluded that the operator had a permit to run a small emery mine, but instead was operating a quarry for road-paving gravel, extracting at least 40 times more rock than the permit allowed.


A Smaller Pie for Youth, Apportioned in Mystery
IT is a measure of how profoundly the Giuliani administration has disrupted groups that provide services for the city's young people that even those quick to detect a conspiracy can see no convincing rationale for all the chaos.
"What we're trying to find out is, how was this done and who did it?" an exasperated Manhattan Councilwoman, C. Virginia Fields, asked at a recent hearing.


Defeated Serbs in Northwest Bosnia Retreat Into Croatia
Stung by their first serious military defeat to Bosnian Government forces, Bosnian Serb soldiers accompanied by more than 1,000 civilian refugees have retreated to this village in a Serbian-held part of Croatia.
Trond Sorensen, a United Nations police official, said today that 1,117 Bosnian Serb refugees, including several Bosnian Serb soldiers, had fled here from a Government offensive that had begun five days ago in the northwestern Bosnian town of Bihac and has been pushing southeast toward Kulen Vakuf.


Fourth-and-1 to Moore Does Not Hit the Spot
It was disbelief that he felt, more than anything else.
Rob Moore looked at his feet.
He knew where they had been planted.
He looked at the first-down marker.
And he was certain that he had been successful on this, the most crucial play of the game for the Jets.
Then the officials told him he was wrong.


GASOLINE
While gasoline sales have been rising in most of the country, they have declined in the New York metropolitan area.
Improvements in gas mileage have slowed the market's growth, industry experts say, but in the New York area a steady population and abundant mass transit have also kept gasoline consumption down.
Retail prices have fallen slightly in the past few years.
Disparities in gas prices in different areas are largely due to tax differences and the costs of doing business.
State gas taxes in the region vary; New York State also imposes a 4 percent sales tax on gasoline.
The Federal gasoline tax is 18.4 cents per gallon.


Sports Strikes Give Editors More Room to Play
For many sports fans, the last month has been a particularly trying time.
Labor shutdowns have wiped out the Major League Baseball playoffs and World Series and postponed the start of the National Hockey League season.
But for sports editors at many newspapers across the country, the disappearance of two leading sports has led to brainstorming that many feel has benefited readers.
"Sometimes sportswriting can fall into a rut, but the absence of certain sports has forced us to be more creative," Bob Sales, sports editor of The Boston Herald, said.
"I break sports readers into three categories: the gambler, the sports nut and the reader who is looking for a good story. I think we're serving the third-category readers better."


Pearl Primus Is Dead at 74; A Pioneer of Modern Dance
Pearl Primus, a pioneering dancer, choreographer and teacher whose anthropological work exposed Americans to the realities of black life in America and to the richness of African and Caribbean dance, died on Saturday at her home in New Rochelle, N.Y.
She was 74.
Miss Primus died after a brief illness, said Joyce Knight, a friend.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Union Pacific increased its bid for Santa Fe Pacific to $3.74 billion, well above the revised offer of $3.2 billion that Burlington Northern made on Thursday.
But whether Santa Fe's board will abandon its preferred merger partner is not clear.
Union Pacific also announced that its chairman and chief executive, Drew Lewis, a former Transportation Secretary, had taken a leave of absence to enter an alcohol treatment center.  [ Page D1. ]
As General Motors has increased volume and quality at its factory in Eisenach, in eastern Germany, it has found that workers there have embraced the company's emphasis on teamwork and constant improvement.  [ D1. ]


THEATER
Spying on the Neighbors And Then Confronting Them  Currican Theater
In the recently published novel "Winter Birds," Jim Grimsley created a disturbing, poetic portrait of a violent marriage in the rural South.
Written largely from a child's perspective, it portrayed an abusive father who made fearful vigilance the stuff of daily life for his young wife and five children.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
AER Energy Resources Inc., Smyrna, Ga., 2.5 million shares. Prudential Securities.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Bored to the gills with boutique beers? How does a scratch-and-sniff magazine campaign sound?
PEE-YEW!
Scent strips, those pinch-your-nostrils stink bombs that hawk bafflingly named perfumes in high-gloss magazines -- why would anyone want to use that cliche in their advertising?
"Well," said James Koch, chuckling, "we thought we could bring a new twist to it."


Limits on Welfare Won't Make Jobs Secure; Equal Work, Equal Pay
To the Editor:
Your article on the working patterns of women on welfare (front page, Oct. 24) overlooks some other pioneering work on welfare mothers as well as some possible employment policies to make work pay.


Creel Journal; Dying Babies Are Witness to Proud People's Crisis
As shadows gather, some babies cry.
Others lie in their cribs at St.
Theresa's clinic too weakened by hunger to do much more than blink so slowly it seems their eyes might not open again.
The state of Chihuahua, part desert, part inhospitable sierra, has always had less than its share of rain and more than its share of poverty.
But this year northern Mexico is suffering through its worst drought in 40 years and the state has been particularly hard hit.
State officials say rainfall dropped to less than 40 percent of normal, the state's main dams are only 16 percent full and about 100,000 head of cattle have died.


Rwandans Who Massacred Now Terrorize Camps
From former government officials and generals down to village mayors and militias, the men who planned and carried out the massacre of tens of thousands of Rwandans earlier this year are now terrorizing hundreds of thousands of refugees who fled the civil war and are living in squalid camps here, refugees and relief workers say.
Young toughs control the distribution of relief food, which they steal in bulk and then sell while the most needy -- pregnant women, children, the sick and the elderly -- are pushed aside.


World Economies


INSIDE
Upping the Stakes
Union Pacific increased its offer for Santa Fe Pacific to $3.8 billion and said its chairman, Drew Lewis, was taking a leave of absence.
Page D1.
Anticipation at Time Warner
Richard Parsons, the head of Dime Bancorp, is expected to be named president of the world's largest entertainment company.
Page D1.
Pick Your Poll
Depending on your poll preference, either Penn State or Nebraska is the No. 1 college football team in the nation.
SportsMonday, page C11.


The Gang's Just About All Here (Except for Holy Bull)
Lure flew into town from New York on Saturday afternoon with Cherokee Run, Dispute, Heavenly Prize, Prenup and Sierra Diablo.
The first wave of Europeans arrived this morning bearing Barathea and Only Royale.
The second wave, from France at 8 A.M. and from England at 6 P.M., are expected Monday.
The California contenders, Best Pal and Soul of the Matter, will arrive Tuesday.
And Concern, following a well-traveled script, will come by van from Maryland on Friday.
They are all taking the high road to the Breeders' Cup, with its seven races worth $10 million in purses and the implied assurance of votes to win the Eclipse Awards and the championships beyond.
The cup, the 11th in the series, will be run at Churchill Downs on Saturday with a record total of 126 horses entered, with 33 from Europe.


Parking Rules
Alternate-side street cleaning regulations will be suspended tomorrow for the religious holiday of All Saints' Day.


A New Home for Native Artifacts


Thomson Said to Have Deal To Buy Ziff's Data Base Unit
The Thomson Corporation, a Canadian company whose broad media empire includes The Globe and Mail in Toronto and American Banker, has agreed to acquire Ziff Communications' collection of business, legal and general information data bases for more than $450 million, people involved in the talks said yesterday.
The division, the Information Access Company, provides indexes, abstracts and full texts from periodicals like trade, legal, military and aerospace publications.


The Vampire Has His Hooks In; Books, Movies, Clubs Attest to an Anti-Hero's Popularity
Eight months and eight days ago, tonight's nuptial couple met at a party attended by professed vampires and vampire wannabees.
It was the usual good time: One woman cut herself and drank a shot of her own blood.
The groom, Perry Alexander Montauredes, a man of 19th-century sartorial tastes who hates sunlight, will not go so far as to say he is a vampire.
And he takes a dim view of those who drink blood in public.


McCumber Makes a Very Long Putt And Zoeller Winds Up in a Hole
It all made sense in the end, when Mark McCumber and Fuzzy Zoeller came to the first hole of sudden death at the Olympic Club today.
It made sense on so many levels.
Because of the history of playoffs at this storied layout in the hills south of the city, because it involved the two veterans, Zoeller, who will be 43 next month, and McCumber, who is 43, and because of the strange and quirky lore of a club that always tantalizes favorites only to, at the end of the day, break their hearts.


Youthful Son Of Diplomat Held in Theft
The 17-year-old son of a former Saudi Arabian diplomat was one of two young men arrested Saturday in Forest Hills, Queens, shortly after they stole a bicycle at gunpoint from two 12-year-old boys, the police said.
The diplomat's son was arrested by two police officers near his home in Forest Hills, several blocks from where the bicycle was reported stolen.
He was identified by the police as Faisal Jalajel, whose father was a vice consul for the Saudi Arabian Embassy in Washington and also served with the Saudi delegation to the United Nations in New York.
He died two years ago.


PRO FOOTBALL: Giants and Jets Hit the Same Numbers in a Losers' Lottery; Even With the Extra Time, 5th Straight Defeat for Giants
It has gotten to the point where the Giants almost expect things to go bad.
After their 28-25 demoralizing overtime loss to the Detroit Lions today, it was as if each and every player had been clubbed over the head.
They were seeing dots of confusion and expressing anger and frustration.
The Giants tried to remain upbeat, but their faces and body language betrayed them.
As they were saying things like it's not over and never let up, they hung their heads low and tried not to make eye contact.


Gloucester Journal; In New England Fish Country, the End of Fishing
At the St.
Peter's Club down by the harbor, where the fishermen drink and play cards and tell their tales of the sea, Giuseppe Noto was in a rage.
He pounded the pool table with his huge hands, hands creased and calloused from 30 years of pulling on ropes and chains, shoveling ice onto freshly caught fish and hauling nets out of the ocean at subzero temperatures for emergency repairs.
"The bank, they call me yesterday!" shouted Mr.
Noto, a 40-year-old Sicilian immigrant whose only school -- the only one he needed until now -- has been the sea.
"I lose my house, my boat, my family. All my life -- fishing. What else can I do? This is my life. The fish are my life."


Corrections
An article on Friday about State Senator George E. Pataki's campaign for governor missstated the position of a supporter, J. Daniel Mahoney.
Mr.
Mahoney is a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, not a United States District Court judge.


Ex-Jet Nearly Pulls Off a Surprise, But Cowboys Rally to Beat Bengal
Cowboys 23, Bengals 20
Jeff Blake, released by the Jets in the preseason, nearly turned his first National Football League start with the Cincinnati Bengals into one of the season's biggest upsets.


Vigilantes in Colombia Kill Hundreds in a 'Social Cleansing'
A week ago, a car drove up to a group of young men in the northern city of Medellin.
Its four occupants got out, displayed guns and told the men to hand over their documents.
"We are the law," the gunmen said, according to witnesses.
The young men were then made to lie down with their hands behind their heads, and 10 were shot and killed.


Israel-Jordan Peace Will Help Palestinians
To the Editor:
The peace agreement signed this week between Jordan and Israel, despite Yasir Arafat's negative view of it, has a potential positive impact on the West Bank.


Seeking Extremism Even in the Middle
But where are the Perotistas of yesteryear?
No, they have not melted away.
They seem to have taken seed amid America's grass roots and produced what tonight's hourlong tribute calls "The New Militant Center."
Traveling from Massachusetts to Washington State, from Maine to Missouri, from Maryland to New Mexico, Tony Snow, the program's tour guide, gives these political insurgents an opportunity to have their say.
In response to his unprovoking and unprobing questions, they tell him in spirited fashion they are anti-Establishment, anti-incumbent, anti-Washington, anti-Government.
Their immediate goals are term limits and balanced budgets.
If you think you've heard this before, you probably have.


Abroad at Home; Pie In the Sky
Mitt Romney, the Republican candidate challenging Senator Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts, was asked in one of their debates what his position was on health care.
"I want universal coverage," he replied.
And, he said, Americans should be able to move without losing their insurance and should not be excluded because of pre-existing medical conditions.


It's This Type of Season for Oilers: Crossbar Rejects a Tying Field Goal
Raiders 17, Oilers 14
A subpar performance didn't keep Jeff Hostetler from coming through when the Los Angeles Raiders needed him most yesterday.
An unyielding crossbar prevented Al Del Greco from doing the same for the Houston Oilers.


Patent Barred For Compton's
The United States Patent and Trademark Office has formally rejected a patent filed by Compton's New Media that had been sharply criticized by the computer industry for its sweeping claims, executives at the Interactive Multimedia Association said last week.
The Patent Office originally issued the patent to Compton's, which produces encyclopedia CD-ROM's, in August 1993.
The patent covered fundamental techniques for searching and retrieving information from multimedia data bases.
When the patent award was publicized, however, it drew a storm of protest in the computer industry.
Many said the patent was too broad and covered various elements of voice, data and video software long in use.


Black Women Graduates Outpace Male Counterparts
Among recent black college graduates, women now earn more than men, according to census figures, and some sociologists say that may be an economic disincentive to marriage.
In fact, black college-educated women have made such financial strides since 1980 that many now earn as much or more than white women with similar education and similar work experience.


New Chief In Ukraine To Toughen Austerity
Bolstered by a new international vote of confidence in his reform efforts, President Leonid D. Kuchma now pledges further painful austerity measures to turn around the depressed economy.
Steps to raise prices on food, energy and rent and to increase exports were rewarded last week with pledges of millions of dollars in Western aid at a conference in Canada of the Group of Seven leading industrial democracies.


